i
@
Biology
z Classes Nine-Ten
j= a3} J Z é By

| . /  e aN “es

| 9 S72 A oN «

> —= y <_ ™s
| NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a textbook for classes nine- ten from the academic year-2013
Biology
Classes Nine-Ten
Reviewed and Modified
for making the contents easy and accessible by
Dr. Shoumitra Chakraborti
Dr. Muhammad Jafar Iqbal
Dr. Mohammad Kaikubad
Written by
S. M. Haider
Dr. M. Niamul Naser
Gul Anar Ahmed
Mad. Idris Hawlader
Edited by
Dr. Syed Mohammad Humayun Kabir
Dr. M. Imdadul Hoque
Translated by
Rajat Kanti Shome
Gul Anar Ahmed
Qji Neamul Haque
Re-translated by
Professor Hosne Ara Ahmed
Badrun Nahar
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel commercial Area, Dhaka.
[All rights reserved by the Publisher]
First Publication : September, 2012
Revised Edition : November, 2014
Revised Edition : November, 2017
Cover : Mehedi Haque
Illustrations : Nasreen Sultana Mitu & Mehedi Haque
Photography : SUST SUPA & Colleted
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh
For free distribution by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Printed by :

Preface
The aim of secondary education is to make the learners fit for entry into higher
education by flourishing their latent talents and prospects with a view to building the
nation with the spirit of the Language Movement and the Liberation War. To make the
learners skilled and competent citizens of the country based on the economic, social,
cultural and environmental settings is also an important issue of secondary education.
The textbooks of secondary level have been written and compiled according to the
revised curriculum 2012 in accordance with the aims and objectives of National
Education Policy-2010.Contents and presentations of the textbooks have been
bselected according to the moral and humanistic values of Bengali tradition and
culture and the spirit of Liberation War 1971 ensuring equal dignity for all
irrespective of caste and creed of different religions and sex.
The present government is committed to ensure the successful implementation of
Vision 2021. Honorable Prime Minister, Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina expressed her firm determination to make the country free
from illiteracy and instructed the concerned authority to give free textbooks to every
student of the country. National Curriculum and Textbook Board started to distribute
textbooks free of cost since 2010 according to her instruction.
The main purpose of learning Biology is to acquire theoretical and practical
knowledge from life. Applied aspect along with scientific concept and theory has also
been emphasized to understand Biology. So by the study of Biology the learners will
be able to apply the acquired knowledge in real life situation and they will be skilled
contributing to personal, social and human welfare. Love and affection will grow for
organism among them and they will be aware of the conservation of organism. There
are various type of activities set in every chapter of this textbook. It is expected that
Biology will not only become easy going to the learners, at the same time creativity
and creative thinking will be developed in them.
Considering the challenges and commitments of 21S century and following the revised
curriculum the textbook has been written. The textbook has been revised and re-edited
by a prominent educationist to make it learner friendly in 2017.
I thank sincerely all for their intellectual labor who were involved in the process of
revision, writing, editing, art and design of the textbook.
Prof. Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

CONTENTS
Chapter Subject Page
One Lessons on Life 1-15
Two Cells and Tissues of Organisms 16-47
Three Cell Division 48-60
Four Bioenergetics 61-81
Five Food, Nutrition and Digestion 82-121
Six Transport in Organisms 122-156
Seven Exchange of Gases 157-174
Eight Excretory System 175-185
Nine Firmness and Locomotion 186-198
Ten Co-ordination 199-225
Eleven Reproduction in Organism 226-248
Twelve Heredity in organisms and evolution 249-273
Thirteen Environment of life 274-296
Fourteen Biotechnology 297-309

Chapter One
LJ

Lessons on Life
anh Or Setee\ |
RE Wy say, WEA _ — Fy tN \ a |
=e, BO i «fi _ eee

9 Sa

In flourishing human civilization the production of food, development of
medical science and the protection of existance of all living beings in adverse
conditions are the challenges of the present century. The role of biology is
indispensible in this regard. In this chapter, the definition of biology, names of its
branches and naming system of organisms are discussed.
Forma -01, Biology Class-9-10

2 Biology
® At the end of the chapter, we will be able to-
¢ Explain the general concept of biology.
¢ Describe the main branches of biology.
¢ Explain the classification of organisms.
¢ Evaluate the necessities of the classification of organisms.
* Describe the systems of classification of organisms.
¢ Explain the concept of Binomial Nomenclature of organisms and its
significance.
* Become conscious of the necessity of classification of organisms in practical
life.
x
R

Lessons on Life 3
1.1 Concept of Biology
In nature, we generally find two types of objects, non-living things and living
organisms. The characteristics of non-living things are usually discussed in
Physics and Chemistry. Biology is the branch of scientific knowledge
concerning life and characteristics of organisms. But it is really difficult to find
the very faint line of difference between living and non-living. In fact physics
and chemistry embody the principles of fundamentals of life, even the
non-living. So in order to understand living organisms, it is necessary to know
about the physical sciences i.e. physics and chemistry. But it is wrong to thinks
that it is not necessary to study biology if we have knowledge of physical
sciences. Rather, life may be considered a complex combination of many
non-living things in which some new characteristics occurr. For example, the
properties of water do not resemble that of hydrogen and oxygen, though it is
madeup of these two elements. So although living organisms are constituted of
a specific combination of non-living things, new properties originate in them
that do not always resemble that of their non-living components.
Biology is one of the fundamental branches of science. The term ‘biology’ is
derived from the Greek words, ‘bios' meaning life and ‘logos’ meaning
knowledge. As biology plays an important role in agriculture and medicine,
from the beginning of civilization it was _ practiced in different regions includ-
ing Greece, Egypt, Middle East, India and China. However this practice cannot
be considered as science in terms of modern science but it was necessary then to
flourish this branch of knowledge.
1.2 Branches of Biology
When we look around us, we see two types of living things- plants and animals.
Based on this, for a long time biology was divided into two branches - Botany
sc and Zoology. However, the field of biology has expanded so much that it is not
s enough to confine its study to these two branches only. There are many living

4 Biology

beings which are neither plants nor animals, such as bacteria, fungi. The

classification is not appropriate when analyzing common characteristics of

animals, plants, bacteria, fungi, viruses etc. So now also biology has been

classified into many branches. Considering its aspect, there are also two other

division of biology- Physical Biology and Applied Biology.

1.2.1 Physical Biology

In the field of Physical Biology, theoretical concepts are usually discussed. The

following subjects are the general fields of its concern.

1. Morphology: This deals with the form and structure of organisms. It is

usually divided into two branches - external and internal morphology. The

external description of the body is called external morphology and the internal

description of the body is called internal morphology.

2. Taxonomy: Classification of organisms and related principles.

3. Physiology: This branch of biology deals with the biochemical activities of

different organs of organisms, such as respiration, excreation, photosynthesis

etc. Detailed description of all the physiological process of organisms is found

in it.

4. Histology: The microscopic structure, arrangement and function of plant and

animal tissues are studied in this subject.

5. Embryology: The branch of biology that discusses the origin of gametes, the

origin of embryo of fertilized egg, the development of embryo, their structure,

growth and development.

6. Cytology: The structure, function and division of an individual cell in a body

of organisms is studied in this branch of biology.

7.Genetics: This branch of biology deals with genes and heredity.

8.Evolution: The gradual development of life and organisms over successive

generations on earth is studied in this subject.

9. Ecology: It is the science of the reciprocal relationship between organisms

and their environment.

10. Endocrinology: The field of science that deals with the study of endocrine

glands and hormones secreted by them. 29
>
N

Lessons on Life 5
11.Biogeography: The branch of biology that studies the geographical
distribution of organisms and their evolution.
1.2.2 Applied Biology :
Applied subjects related to life are included in this category, and some of them
are mentioned below:
1.Palaeontology: Science of the prehistoric life forms and fossils.
2. Biostatistics: Science of statistics of organisms.
3.Parasitology: Science related to parasitism, life process of parasitic
organisms and diseases caused by them.
4. Fisheries: Science dealing with fish, harvesting of fish, management and
conservation of fish assets.
5. Entomology: Science related to the study of life, merit, demerit, and control
of insects including the damages caused by them.
6.Microbiology: Science related to virus, bacteria, fungi and other microorganisms.
7. Agriculture: Science concerning agriculture.
8.Medical Science: Science related to human body diseases, treatment etc.
9.Genetic Engineering: Science associated with gene technology and its uses.
10. Biochemistry: Science connected to the biochemical process and diseases
of organisms.
11. Environmental Science: Science related to the environment.
12. Marine Biology : Science related to marine living beings.
13. Forestry: Science related to forest, management and conservation of its resources.
14.Biotechnology: Science associated with the technology of uses of organisms
for the benefit of mankind.
15. Pharmacy: Science dealing with the technology and industry of medicine.
16. Wildlife: Science related to wild animals.
17. Bioinformatics: Biological information based on computer technology, for
= example information on the analysis of cancer.
N

6 Biology
©) Individual Activity
Activity: Look at the pictures below, and classify them in a list under the
biological branch they belong to.
’ se” Ee | RST RR
EST
Figure : 1.01 Examples of different branches of Biology

@) Individual Activity

Activity : Collect news on biology from daily newspaper/magazine and make a

list on the branches of biology.

Essentials: Daily newspaper/magazine, scissor/cutter, glue, art paper, sign pen.

Procedure : Divide into small groups of 3-5 members.

Each group will look for news related to more than one branch of biology in

newspapers/magazines and make a list of physical and applied branches related

to biology. Then the group will present the poster with the paper cutting and the

list of branches written below it.
1.3 Classification of Living beings:
About four million different plant species and thirteen million of animal species
have been named and described todate. This number is not yet final, because the
more and more new species are being added to it almost every day. It is assumed.
that the number will reach a crore in future when the description of all the
organisms will be ended. A large number of organisms are needed to be grouped
systematically to know, understand and learn them in an easy manner. Many eo
years back natural scientists felt the necessity to classify living world §$

Lessons on Life a
living world following a natural system. From this necessity, a distinct branch of
biology, taxonomy, had emerged. The main aim of classification is to know the
vast and diverse living world accurately and classify them quickly and easily.
The contribution of Swedish botanist, physician and zoologist Carolus Linnaeus
(1707-1778) in the field of taxonomy is worth mentioning. In 1735 he received
his doctoral degree in medicine from the University of Uppsala , and in 1741 he
was appointed Professor of Anatomy in the same University. It was the main
field of his intense interest to classify organisms from his botanical and
zoological observations that he assembled from his many expeditions. He
classified living world into two kingdoms - Plant and Animal.
Aim of Classification
The aim of classification is to acquire knowledge of the groups and subgroups
of organisms, to maintain documentation of the accumulated information
systematically, to present the knowledge concisely, and to take steps to conserve
organisms or increase the number of species for the well-being of the living
world.
Living World
From the time of Carolus Linnaeus up to the middle of the twentieth century, all
living organisms were classified in one of the two kingdoms: Animals and Plants.
With the progress of science, on the basis of data
collected from time to time, for instance, the type sijeeaigionsl Kingdom-1
of DNA or RNA in a cell, features and number of muse
cell in a living body and mode of nutrition that a | tiving wou ingen
cell adopts, a five-kingdom classification was
proposed by R.H.Whittaker in 1969. Then oa Soe?
Margulis introduced a modified and expanded
form of Whittaker's classification in 1974. She “Pe
divided the whole living world into two ia
super-kingdoms and grouped the five kingdoms Animals
~ under these two super-kingdoms.
R

8 Biology
(a) Super kingdom-1: Prokaryotae
These are primitive prokaryotic (having no structured distinct nucleus) and
microscopic unicellular organisms.
Kingdom- I: Monera
Characteristics: These are mostly ;
unicellular, filamentous (Filament is J
constituted by vertically connected cells fi :
one after another) or colonial. Though \ boas) q
chromatin material is present, there is no yy. p) 2,
nuclear membrane or nucleolus in their Wi, \os
cells. No plastids, mitochondria, ~
endoplasmic reticuli are there, but |. a . b
ribosome is present. The cell divides Figure : 1.02 (a) Bacteria (b) Nostoc (Blue
through a process of binary fission. Their green algae)
chief mode of nutrition is absorption, though some of them produce food through
photosynthesis.
Examples: Bacteria, Blue green algae.
(b) Super kingdom-2: Eukaryota
These are eukaryotic (well structured nucleus) and unicellular or multicellular
and live individually or in a colonial form.
Kingdom-2 : Protista
Characteristics; They are unicellular or
multicellular, individual, colonial or
CE filamentous and the nuclei in their cells are well
Ss Yy A> structured. Their cells contain nuclear materials
(ow rs BZ covered by a nuclear membrane. In the
ie oss =) A chromatin material, there is DNA, RNA and
Oya eS “| protein. All types of cell organelles are present.
Go > oO = Their modes of nutrition are absorption,
Mey QW ingestion or photosynthesis. They accomplish
7 their asexual and sexual reproduction by the
a b process of mitosis and conjugation (Union of two
Figure: 1.03 (a) Amoeba (b) Diatom gametes which are structurally similar but
iDnleeBilar ales} biologically different) respectively. No embryo
is developed in them.
Examples: Amoeba, Paramecium and algae %
(diatom, Spyrogyra etc). ss

Lessons on Life 9
Kingdom-3 : Fungi
Characteristics: Most of them are
terrestrial, saprophytic or parasitic. ‘.
Their body is constituted of a single cell 7 eo Ly a gas
or mycelium (narrow tape-like part). wloly SS 4 é.
: : Wy a fy Sei
The Nucleus is well organised. The cell 4 Wr Ye e
wall is composed of chitin. Their mode ff WA we i =
of nutrition is absorption. The Is \ Bl ie
photosynthetic apparatus chloroplast is Qi i ht ee ie.
absent. They reproduce by haploid “ Pid Ff, ae
spores, and their cells divide through a b
mitotic cell division. Figure 1.04: (a) Penicillium (b) Mushroom
Examples: Yeast, Penicillium, Mushroom etc.
Kingdom-4; Plantae
Characteristics: They are photosynthetic ae ae AAW E
and eukaryotic. Advanced tissue systems ig a es Se
are found in them. They develop embryos Bis x4 ~ Bees 4 av Ea i
and diploid stage starts from it. They are M Pal j ¥ warty *Waghorzs
mostly terrestrial but there are also i , eo ee
many aquatic species in this kingdom. Sif eae
Their sexual reproduction is Ee i ¢ oS
anisogamous (The sexual [a an WU rx oye
reproduction which is happened by aN sae Hc aee ie
union of structurally and physically oe a ee
different gametes). Figure 1.05: Jackfruit Tree (Angiosperm)
They are archegoniates (plants with female reproductive organs) and flowering plants.
Examples: Advanced green plants.
Divisions of plantae are shown in a chart below :
plantae
+
Moss Fern Gymnosperms Angiosperms
Forma -02, Biology Class-9-10

10 Biology
Kingdom-5: Animalia
Characteristics: They are eukaryotic and multicellular animals. Their cells do
not have non-living cell walls, plastids or vacuoles in them. Because of there
are no plastids in their cells, they are Re ees ‘
heterotrophs, and so they depend on (San ate DAS fl
other organisms for their food. After Pog@ey, *.\5 Se ) j a
ingestion, they digest their food. They jp >a oN)
have advanced and complex tissue Be A eagay os hd Saat Y
systems. Sexual reproduction is their -RgaWaNs 3 ie eet Naat
usual way of reproduction. Haploid @ my oA
gametes are usually produced in the ay (je ¥ 5g
reproductive organs of mature and Smeg) 0 0) oy
diploid males and females. Embryonic ™=! il A ale oa
layers are developed at the time of their Figure: 1.06 Royal Bengal Tiger
embryonic development.
Examples: The entire invertebrate and vertebrate animals except protozoan.
Thomas Cavlier-Smith from Oxford University divided the kingdom Protista of
living world into two groups, protozoa and chromista and renamed the kingdom
Monera as the Kingdom of Bacteria in 2004. In this way, he grouped the living world
into six kingdoms. You will learn more about it at your higher level of education. You
will be introduced gradually in the consequent chapters to the characteristics of
the animals of different Kingdom mentioned here.
1.4 Different steps of Classification
In classifying the organisms, codified units or ranks are used in taxonomy,
which are called Taxa. The largest classification rank is kingdom, and the
smallest classification rank is species. Each rank of taxonomy adds new
characteristics those of the lower rank. The higher the rank, the lower the
number of characteristics, and the higher number of living organisms belonging
to this rank the lower the rank, the higher number of characteristics, and the
number of living beings belonging to this rank. There are seven main taxonomic
ranks according to International Code.
Kingdom
Phylum / Division
Class
Order
Family wo
Genus =
Species “

Lessons on Life 11

The topmost rank is a set whereas the lower ranks are subsets. The subset of

Kingdom is Phylum, the subset of Phylum is Class, the subset of Class is Order...

etc. This system of scientific classification is called ‘nested hierarchy’. In order

to avoid repetition, the common characteristics of the previous rank are often not

mentioned in the next rank. If we follow the above mentioned system, the

taxonomic rank of human being (homo sapience) is like this:

Kingdom: Animalia (cells with distinct nucleus, multicellular, heterotrophs and have

complex tissue system).

Phylum: Chordata (possess notochord in any one phase of life).

Class: Mammalia (feed their young on milk and their body is covered with hair).

Order: Primate (hands with five fingers suitable to grasp and vision more

developed than sense of smell).

Family: Hominidae (similarity with chimpanzee, gorilla, monkey).

Genus: Homo (brain is bigger compared to the body and can walk erectly on

two feet).

Species: Homo sapience (wide and high forehead, skull is thinner compared to

other species, more intelligent).

As a student of biology, one needs to know the reasons for including a species in

the respective taxonomic rank though in the traditional system, the reasons are

not written separately.

1.5 System of Binomial Nomenclature

The scientific name of an organism has two parts. The first part of the name

denotes the genus to which the species belongs; the second part identifies the

species within the genus. The scientific name of potato is Solanum tuberosum,

for example. Here, the words solanum and tuberosum denote the genus and

species names of potato respectively. This system of scientific naming of an

organism is termed binomial nomenclature. The aim of binomial nomenclature

is to unambiguously identify every organism. The scientific naming of an
S organism is accomplished in accordance with some rules and regulations

12 Biology

set internationally. The scientific name of a ACD

plant and an animal should be accorded with f G SW,

the declared principles of International f AN AY

Code of Botanical Nomenclature (CBN) & ee y

and International Code of Zoological cal we \

Nomenclature (ICZN) respectively. In fact, “ e A 4

the codes are documented in a printed form. ONS A, y

As the scientific naming of an organism is ( S Sp.

expressed in the language Latin, these wN ® X

names are accepted throughout the whole i @ h ‘

world. The Swedish naturalist Carolus —wi bd V

Linnaeus laid the foundations for the Figure 1.07 : Carolus Linnaeus

modern system of naming organisms and effectively began the task with his

book Species Plantarum. He defined the term species and genus, and used the

ranks of classification class, order, genus and species in his work. The

introduction of the formal system of naming organism by Carolus Linnaeus is

undoubtedly a striking step in the history of biology. Some of the notable

principles of binomial nomenclature are mentioned below:

1. The language of scientific naming of an organism would be Latin. (Young

zoologist Sazid Ali Haoladar recently discovered a frog which can be found

only in Dhaka. The scientific name given to the frog is Zakerana dhaka. The

name of the Genus is given as Zakerana to show respect to the founder of the

Zoology Department of Dhaka University, Kazi Zaker Hossain.

2. Every scientific name should have two parts, and the genus name always comes

first, followed by the species name. For example, Labeo rohita. This is the scientific

name of ruhit fish. Here Labeo is genus whereas rohita is the name of the species.

3. The scientific name of any organism should have to be unique because a same

legitimate name cannot be used for naming two distinct organisms.

4. The first alphabet of the first name would be in capital letter with the

remaining alphabets in small type, and the second part of the name totally would

be with small letters. For example, Onion- Allium cepa, Lion - Panthera leo.

5. At the time of printing of a scientific name, it should be written in italics.

Rice- Oryza sativa, Katla fish- Catla catla, for example. S
8

Lessons on Life B
6. When a scientific name is handwritten, its two parts should be separately
underlined. For example, Oryza sativa, Catla catla.
7. If the scientific name of an organism is named by several scientists, the earliest
legitimate name given by the first scientist will be accepted in accordance with
the rules of priority.
8. The scientist who gives the scientific name of an organism can have his/her
name be cited in abbreviated form at the end of the binomial name along with
the year of naming.
For example : Homo sapiens L.,1758, Oryza sativa L.,1753 (Here L is the short
form of Linnaeus).
Binomial names of some organisms
General name Scientific name
Rice Oryza sativa
Jute Corchorus capsularis
Mango Mangifera indica
Jackfruit Artocarpus heterophyllus
Water lily Nymphaea nouchali
China rose Hibiscus rosa-sinensis
Causal organisms of cholera Vibrio cholerae
Causal organisms of malaria Plasmodium vivax
Cockroach Periplaneta americana
Honey bee Apis indica
Tlish Tenualosa ilisha
Asian toad Duttaphrynus melanostictus (Bufo melanostictus)
Oriental Magpie-Robin Copsychus saularis
Tiger Panthera tigris
Human Homo sapiens
@) Individual Activity
Activity : Suppose in your locality you have discovered a new species of
grasshopper. What name will you give it? Show logic of the nomenclature.
g
AQ

14 Biology
@)Exercise
%© Short answer questions
<
1.What is the significance of learning biology ?
2.Write down the names of the physical branches of biology.
3.Write down the names of the applied branches of biology.
4.What is binomial nomenclature ?
5.What are the ranks of classification.
© Essay type questions
1. What is the necessity of classifying organisms?
% Multiple choice questions
ZL
1. In which branch of biology are insects discussed?
a. Entomology b. Ecology
c. Endocrinology d. Microbiology
2. The aim of classification is-
ito know about the sub-ranks of organism
li.to be able to name the units of organism
lii.to present the information in detail
Which one of the following is correct?
a. i & iii bisii
c. ti & iii d. i, ti & iii
Look at the stem and answer the questions 3 & 4.
3. What is the name of the organism shown in the picture above?
a. Amoeba b. Diatom
c. Paramecium d. Acterium
oD
5

Lessons on Life 15
4. The characteristics of the organism shown in the stem are-
i. They are able to move
ii. They are unable to produce food.
iii. Their nucleus is well-structured i =
Which one of the following is correct? Airy => ) &
a.i & ii b. ii & iii ~ &
c.i & iti d. i, ii & iii ~
Creative question
Pe Sas dd
les
Figure-1 Figure-2
a. What are the units of classification ?
b. Why is genetics part of the physical branch of biology ?
c. How will you maintain continuity in naming the plant in Figure-2?
d. Analyse with reasons which organism is more advanced between
the two shown in Figure-1 and figure-2.
fos}
=

Chapter Two
Cells and Tissues of Organisms
You have already learned the concept of biological cell in your previous classes.
Now, based on those ideas, you will learn more about it. Do the views of a cell
of an organism appear the same under both a light microscope and an electron
microscope? In this chapter, you will find the answers to these kinds of
questions.
2
8

Cells and Tissues of Organisms 17
® At the end of this chapter, we will be able to -
¢ Explain the functions of main organelles of plant and animal cells.
¢ Compare a plant cell and an animal cell.
¢ Explain the roles of different types of cell in performing the functions of
nerve muscles, blood, skin and bones.
¢ Evaluate the appropriateness of cell in the body of an organism.
¢ Explain plant tissues.
¢ Explain animal tissues.
Evaluate the functions of tissue on the basis of grouping the similar type of
cells and performing the same action.
¢ Explain the organisation of cells in tissue, organs and organ systems.
¢ Explain the functions of tissue system.
¢ Explain the concept and importance of organs and organ systems.
¢ Draw and label diagrams of plant and animal cell after observing them under
a microscope.
¢ Correctly use a microscope.
¢ Understand the roles of cells in different activities of organisms.
2.1 Living Cell
You learned in your previous classes that the cell is the structural unit of an
organism. What is a living cell? Some scientists describe a living cell as the unit
of structure and biological function of an organism. In 1969 Loey and Siekevitz
described a cell, surrounded by a selectively permeable membrane, as the unit of
living activity, which can exactly duplicate itself without any different living
medium.
Forma -03, Biology Class-9-10

18 Biology
Types of Cells
All living cells are not the same. Just as they have differences in structure, they
also have differences in size, shape and function.
On the basis of the organisation of the nucleus, cells can be divided into two
types - prokaryotic cell and eukaryotic cell.
a) Prokaryotic cell:
A prokaryotic cell does not contain a true nucleus. This is why it is called a cell
with a primitive type of nucleus. The term nucleotide fits nicely in this case.
Nuclear materials in a prokaryotic cell are not surrounded by a nuclear
membrane. They are dispersed in its cytoplasm. Though the cell organelles such
as mitochondria, plastids, endoplasmic reticulum etc. are not found in a
prokaryotic cell, ribosomes are present in it. The chromosomal structure of a
prokaryotic cell consists only of unwrapped DNA. Blue green algae and bacteria
are constituted of this type of cell.
b) Eukaryotic cell:
In this type of cell, the nucleus is well structured, meaning that nuclear materials
are well organised and surrounded by a nuclear membrane. Other cell organelles,
along with ribosome, are present. Chromosomes consist of DNA, histone,
protein and other components. Most living cells are of this type.
On the basis of function, there are two types of cells: somatic cell and gametic
cell.
i) Somatic cell: This type of cell takes part in the composition of the body of an
organism. Somatic cells divide through the process of binary fission and mitotic
division. Organisms grow in this way. Moreover, these cells take part in the
organisation of different organs and organ systems.
ii) Gametic cell: Gametic cells are produced in the organisms in which sexual
reproduction and alternation of generations occur. Primordial germ cells divide
through meiotic division and produce gametic cells. In a gametic cell, the
number of chromosomes becomes half that of its somatic type. A new living
body is commenced after the fusion of male and female gametes. Zygote is the
first cell produced after the union of male and female gametic cells. Zygote
undergoes repeated mitotic division to organise a body of an organism. ~
S
N

Cells and Tissues of Organiama 19
22 Functlous of the Main Organelles ef Plant and Animal Cells
All higher plants and animals ero eukaryotic. Bach cell consists of many
organelles. Although most of the organelles are found m both plants and enimals,
there are some organelles found only in plants or m enimals.
Plemnua mamhome
| wd —
z Gig dads
Chilareplast
igen
Figurs 2.21 : Different parts of a typical plart call
fl Morovill
4,
Endoglamnis mtiodinm groagh>
— Lynoenane
Vecunia
w Figure 2.62 ; Diffarest parts of = typicnl aebmal call
8

20 Biology
Cell wall: Cell wall is a unique feature of a plant cell. It is composed of inert
materials. The chemical composition of a cell wall is complex. Cellulose,
hemicelluloses, lignin, pectin, suberin are the chemical components of a plant
cell wall. A bacterial cell wall is composed of protein, lipid and poly saccharide.
A fungal cell wall is made up of chitin. The primary cell wall is single layered.
The Secondary cell wall gradually develops through the compilation of different
chemical substances secreted from protoplasm on the middle lamellum. At the
time of the development of the secondary cell wall, cavities are formed called
pits.
These pits give a cell its
rigidity. The Cell wall retains NS, sfiietanaiten i
the shape and size of a cell. (— \\ Primary Wall H
Plasmodesmata are formed in J KC
the cell wall to exchange : \Y SL
materials with adjacent cells. M6 i a bayered OL
The Cell wall controls the Inner layer |-Sevondary walt
movement of water cand (A) Transverse section (B) Longitudinal section
minerals. There is no cell wall Figure:2.03 Microscopic structure of cell wall
around an animal cell.
Protoplasm: The translucent, semi fluid, viscous substance that constitutes the
interior matter of a living cell is called protoplasm. Everything surrounded by the
cell wall is protoplasm. Even plasmalemma is a part of it. Protoplasm also
contains cytoplasmic organelles and nucleus.
2.2.1 Plasmalemma: The double layered
membrane around the protoplasm of a cell is aw; Nifsrovilll
called cell membrane or plasmalemma. The | | |
double layered membrane is very flexible. | 1a
The foldings of a cell membrane are called JU LAA
microvilli, which are mainly composed of | | e4
lipids and proteins. Because it is selectively * aaa ee
permeable, the membrane can control the tnesemat
movement of water and minerals through

i 20
Se fone tounge sepamaics a-ccil Figure:2.04 Cell membrane s

Cells and Tissues of Organisms 21
2.2.2 Cytoplasmic organelles: The semi fluid, jelly like substance of a cell that
is external to the nuclear membrane and internal to the cellular membrane is called
the cytoplasm. The Cytoplasm contains many organelles. Though they have
varying functions, they are also interdependent. Some of these organelles have
membranes whereas some don’t. These organelles are as follows:
Membrane-bound organelles--
1. Mitochondria: In 1998 Carl Benda first coined the term 'mitochondria'. This
organelle plays a very important role in cellular respiration. It is surrounded by a
double-layered membrane which is composed of phospholipid and protein.
Q are membrane
ae H epee Cristae
A B
Figure:2.05 (A) Mitochondria. (B) Longitudinal section
The inner membrane has infoldings called cristae. These foldings are studded
with small round bodies known as oxysomes. The oxysomes contain enzymes.
The space enclosed by the inner membrane is the matrix. The main function of
mitochondria is to help the organism in cellular respiration. You will later learn
that the process of respiration has four stages: glycolysis, Acetyl-CoA
formation, the Kreb's cycle and electron transport system. The reactions of the
first phase i.e glycolysis do not occur in mitochondria. But the reactions of the
second and most important Kreb’s cycle stages are performed in mitochondria,
as all the necessary enzymes are present. Maximum energy is produced in
Kreb’s cycle. This is why a mitochondrion is called 'the power house’ of a cell.
=
BS

pp) Biology
An organism uses this energy to perform different functions. With some
exceptions, mitochondria are found in all plant and animal cells. Mitochondria
are not present in Prokaryotic cells. Some Eukaryotic cells (for example,
protozoa like Trichomonus, Monocercomonoides etc.) do not contain
mitochondria. It can be assumed that in course of history of evolution,
mitochondria or its previous form somehow entered eukaryotic cells and then
became a permanent organelle of the cell. From the data collected so far, this
explanation seems to be acceptable.
2. Plastid: A plastid is an important organelle for a plant cell. The main
functions of a plastid are to produce and store food, and cause the appealing and
colourful appearance of flowers, fruits and leaves of a plant. Flowers with
appealing colours helps pollinate plants. There are three categories of plastids:
chloroplast, chromoplast and leucoplast.
a) Chloroplast: Green plastids are called chloroplasts. They are found in the
cells of leaves, young stems and other green parts of a plant. The grana of a
plastid capture solar energy and convert it into chemical energy. With the help
of enzymes in stroma this solar energy helps produce simple carbohydrates
from cellular water and carbon dioxide taken from air. This type of plastid looks
green because it has chlorophyll. Carotenoids are also present in them.
Outer Layer Matrix
Stroma Inner Layer / Outer Layer
ms eS Inner Layer
( a=. aa. _—_— Stroma lamellum

Thyllakoid ; eet ee =f — em ne

Middle of thylakoid i ea jematiumn

Figure : 2.06 A Plastid (Segment). Different Parts of
chloroplast (Under electron microscope and simplified)

b) Chromoplast: Chromoplasts are coloured, but are not green.
The photosynthetic pigments xanthophyll, carotene, phycoerythrin, 2
phycocyanin etc. are present in them, and so some of them are yellow, some &

Cells and Tissues of Organisms 23
are blue and others red. The flowers, leaves and other parts of a plant have their
attractive colourful appearance because of these pigments. Their main purpose
is to make flowers attractive for pollination. They also synthesize and store
different types of photosynthetic pigments.
c) Leucoplast: In contrast to other plastids, leucoplasts are non-pigmented.
They are usually found in the cells of the plant parts where sunlight does not
teach; for example, root, ovaries and embryo. Their main function is the
storage of food. Leucoplasts can be transformed into chromoplasts or
chloroplasts when they come in contact with sunlight.
@) Individual Activity

Activity: Draw diagrams of plastids.

Essentials: Poster paper, sign pen and a picture of different categories of

plastids. After drawing a diagram of different types of plastids, present it

to the students in the classroom.
3. Golgi body: Golgi body is found within Cisternae Large Vesicle
the cytoplasm of both plant and animal cells. Dem/
It is composed of stacks of membrane-bound ,@= AAT S
structures known as cisternae and vesicles. $@ Ze Lindh Wee
Hydrolysis of enzymes take place in its ®COE a> y se ~
membrane. It is involve in the secretion of => <
some hormones and other substances ina SG SS Z >
living cell. It also plays important roles in 4
many metabolic activities. Sometimes, the Small Vesicle
golgi body stores protein. Figure : 2.07 Golgi Body
4. Endoplasmic reticulum: Ribosomes are studded with the cytoplasmic side

« Ofrough endoplasmic reticulum, and so proteins are synthesized in these places.
S Membrane bound vesicles from the endoplasmic reticulum shuttle proteins

24 Biology
and other materials produced in a cell. Sometimes the endoplasmic reticulum
stretches up to the cytoplasmic membrane, and thus it is assumed that enzymes
for other cells and other substances produced inside the cell are transported by
the endoplasmic reticulum. They also play a significant role in the development
of mitochondria, vacuole etc. in a cell. Endoplasmic reticulum is found in both
the plant and animal cells.

5. Cell vacuole: Large vacuole is a prime feature of a plant cell. Its main
function is to contain cell sap. Different types of substances such as inorganic
salt, protein, carbohydrate, fat, organic acid, pigment, water etc. are found in a
cell vacuole. No vacuole is generally found in any animal cell. If present in any
animal cell, it usually is much smaller.

6. Lysosome : Lysosome protects cells from

germs. The lysosome enzyme kills germs. iF Qe
These enzymes are protected by a membrane WY \

so that other organelles do not get digested © ~ if \
when they come in contact with these bd q “© )’

: ap NO fe
enzymes. The organelles adjacent to SJ
lysosoms ane digested if the membrane of iguses 2.0 tysovene granules
lysosome is destroyed due to oxygen
deficiency. The cell may even be destroyed.

Non-membranous organelles-

1. Cytoskeleton: The cytoskeleton is a complex network of fibres that shapes the
cell and holds organelles in place. It is located just beneath the plasmalemma.
These fibres consist of a complex mesh of protein filaments. Actin, myosin and
tubulin are some of the proteins that are used to make the fibres. Microtubules,
actin filaments and intermediate filaments are some of the fibres in the
cytoskeleton.

2. Ribosome: Ribosomes are found in all living cells. They lack membrane
around them, and help in protein synthesis. The bondage in polypeptide chains

of proteins are carried out by ribosomes. They also provide enzymes needed for

the cell. Enzymes help to accelerate the speed of biochemical reactions.

3. Centrosome: These are found in most animal cells, but they are rarely found =
in cells of lower plants. The centrioles in a centrosome develop astral “™

Cells and Tissues of Organisms 25
rays, and play a significant role in
constructing spindle apparatus. A centriole is oe
re “i tae —~>—— Centrosphere
a hollow, cylindrical organelle inside the d
centrosome. The thick liquid surrounding the Cod \\ yN
: . y \\ = Centriole
centriole is called centrosphere. The \ fl
centriole and centrosphere make up the Oe J
centrosome together. s
. Figure : 2.09 Centrosome
2.2.3 Nucleus: The nucleus is a membrane
bound prominent organelle found in a
eukaryotic cells and carries chromosomes. , GS n os enti ne
It is roughly round or spherical in structure. 7 Care Nucleolus
Mature sieve cells and red blood cells lack { EOE ay Nucleoplasm
a nucleus. The chromosomes of the nucleus Cae!
carry the heredity information of the NI Chromatin reticulum
organism, and controls all the activities of a Lt
cell. A structured nucleus has the following Figure : 2.10 Nucleus
parts:
a) Nuclear membrane: The membrane that encloses the nucleus is called nu-
clear membrane. It is a double layered membrane, and is composed of lipids and
proteins. In this membrane, there are some pores called nucleopores. The nuclear
membrane controls the transport system from the nucleoplasm to the cytoplasm.
The membrane separates the contents of the nucleus from the cytoplasm.
abe ~ €S)—— Satellite
b) Nucleoplasm: The jelly-like fluid Secondary Conatictin
enveloped by the nuclear membrane is .
called the nucleoplasm. It is similar to the a
: . : Chromonemata

cytoplasm of a cell. It is a viscous fluid Centromere—
which contains nucleic acids, proteins,
enzymes and some other substances Mate

3 : 5 24. 18 \— Matri:
dissolved in and mixed with it. wm

Figure : 2.11 Chromosome

Forma -04, Biology Class-9-10

26 Biology
c) Nucleolus: In a nucleus the round structure attached to a chormosome is called
the nucleolus. This non-membrane-bound structure is composed of RNA and
proteins. Its main function is to store nucleic acid and synthesise protein.
d) Chromatin reticulum: During the resting period of a cell, when cell division
does not take place, a threadlike reticulate body is found in the nucleoplasm
which is called chromatin reticulum. Chromatin fibres become coiled during cell
division and become more condensed, and then they are called chromosomes.
Chromosomes carry the units of heredity, and pass from generation to
generation. The number of chromosomes in a specific species is fixed.
Chromosomes contain genes, and thus carry hereditary traits.
@) Individual Activity

Activity: Present the different organelles of a cell discussed above in a chart.
2.3 Roles of different cells in proper functioning of plants and animals
Tissue cell is the structural and functional unit of organisms. The functions of
unicellular and multicellular organisms are performed in different ways. The
unicellular organism performs all its activities such as digestion, growth,
reproduction in a single cell, while the multicellular organism has different
organs for different metabolic activities.
2.3.1 Plant tissue
An ensemble of similar or different types of cells with the same origin and
performing a specific function is called tissue. Plant tissues are of two types;
Meristematic tissue and Permanent tissue. The cells of meritematic tissue are
capable of cell division, but the cells of permanent tissue are not. Tissue can be
grouped into three types: simple tissue, complex tissue and excretory tissue. Here ~
we will discuss simple and complex tissues only. s

Cells and Tissues of Organisms 27
Simple tissue: The tissue which contains cells of the same shape, size and structure,
is called simple tissue. On the basis of the nature of cell, simple tissues are divided
into three types: 1) Parenchyma, 2) Collenchyma and 3) Sclerenchyma.
1) Parenchyma: Parenchyma cells are seen in almost every part of a plant. Cells
of this type are living, isodiametric, thin walled and turgid with protoplasm.
Intercellular space is found in parenchyma cells. The cells are thin walled, and
the walls are composed of cellulose. When chloroplasts are present in this type
of cells, they are called chlorenchyma. The parenchyma cells with air filled
spaces are called aerenchyma, and are usually found in aquatic plants. The main
functions of parenchyma cells are to organise the body or body parts of plants to
produce, transport and store food.
2) Collenchyma: Collenchyma tissues are a special type of cell. The walls of the
cells become thick with the compilation of cellulose and pectin. These walls are
irregularly thickened with thicker corners. The cells are elongated, filled with
protoplasm. Intercellular spaces may be present. The borders of the cells may be
triangular, slim or oblique. Their main functions are to produce food and provide
the plant with mechanicalsupport and rigidity. They are found in the veins and
petioles of leaves. This kind of tissue provides rigidity to the young and supple
stems, for example, the stems of Gourd (Cucurbita sp) and Leucas (Leucas
lavandulifolia). The ones that contain chloroplast, produce food.
F a Thin cell wall ;
KE cytoplasm {> Thick cell wall |\
A <f (oh iv A er Nucleus | he,
~ Com intercellular spce{\ @) e Cytoplasm St S
pr SO Le
A B Cc
Figure- 2.12: Different types of simple tissue, A- Parenchyma,
B-Collenchyma, C-Sclerenchyma
3) Sclerenchyma: Tissue composed of cells with the thickening of walls with
5 lignin for providing mechanical support is called sclerenchyma.

28 Biology
While in early stage of their development, sclerenchyma cells are alive, losing
the living protoplasm when they become mature. The main functions of
sclerenchyma tissue are to provide mechanical support and rigidity and to
conduct water and minerals. There are two types of sclerenchyma cells, fibres
and sclereids.
a) Fibers: They are elongated, slender, thick walled, and both their ends are
pointed or sometimes rounded. In their walls, they have pores called pits. Based
on their origin and structure, they are called by different names, such as, bast
fiber, surface fibre, xylem fiber or wood fiber.
b) Sclereids: Because of their hardness, these are called stone cells. Compared
with most fibers, these cells are shorter, isodiametric or sometimes long and star
shaped. Their secondary cell walls are durable, thick and lignified. Mature
sclereid cells are usually dead. The walls of the cells are pitted sclereids are
found. In the cortex, fruits and seed shells of gymnosperm and dicot plants. In
the petioles of leaves, they may be present in the cluster form associated with
the epidermis, xylem and phloem.
@) Individual Activity

Activity: Drawing three types of simple tissue.

Essentials: Poster papers, sign pens.

Draw the labeled diagrams of the three types of tissue, and present the

differences among them.
Complex tissue LOOK)
Tissue composed of more than one type of EAR,
cell is called complex tissue. Complex eae

. ‘ XS lw VG
tissue conducts water, minerals and tortie ies

repared food, and this is why they arealso S=SSS=Ee
ee 7 : vey WTO ye Metaxylem
called conducting tissue. They can be Oe akat
grouped into two types: xylem and Biteaeaey
phloem. Xylem and phloem together form Ree ae — Protoplasm

Coe

the conducting structure of the vascular CEES S
bundle. Figure : 2.13 A Vascular bundle s

Cells and Tissues of Organisms 29
Xylem: There are two types of xylem: primary and secondary. Xylem developed
during primary growth from the procambium is called primary xylem.
Secondary xylem is the xylem grown during secondary growth from the vascular
cambium. Primary xylem is of two types : protoxylem and metaxylem.
Metaxylem develops after the protoxylem, but before secondary growth.
Protoxylem is distinguished by narrower vessels developed from smaller cells.
Metaxylem cells are usually larger. Tracheids, vessels, xylem parenchyma and
xylem fibers are the constituents of xylem.
a) Tracheids: Tracheids are elongated cells with slender and sharp ends. After
lignification, their lumen may become narrower, and in that case transportation
of water occurs mainly through the lateral paired pits on their walls. Thickening
of walls is of different types, such as, elliptical, spiral, scalariform, reticulate and
pitted. Tracheids are found in ferns and gymnosperms, and are also present in the
primary and secondary xylem of angiosperms. Their main function is to provide
sap conduction-related organs with proper rigidity. Sometimes they also store
food.
b) Vessels: Vessels are short, tubular in structure, i i
and are connected from end to end. Vessel cells |\o #Oe: e
develop a long tube when their terminal walls are \\° aia :
dissolved. This is how a narrow continuous a 2 2 :
channel is developed for the upward movement of |/© EY o) ie
sap. In their early stage of development, the ° Eg 5
cells are filled with protoplasm by losing their \\ Cy t
living character. Eventually they die by losing
protoplasm with the progression of their growth. Temes sad Titierent ives,
Vessels walls also become differently thickened of xylem
like tracheids, such as scalariform, spiral, elliptical, pitted etc. A vessel is several
centimeters long. But they may be much longer in trees and creepers. They are
found in almost all the parts of angiosperms. Some advanced members of
gymnosperms such as Gnetum contain primary type of vessels. Their main function
S is to transport water and minerals and to provide the organs with proper rigidity.
NX

30 Biology
c) Xylem parenchyma: The parenchyma cells in the xylem are called xylem
parenchyma or wood parenchyma. Their walls may be thick or thin. The
parenchyma cells in the primary xylem have thin walls, but those in secondary
xylem are thick walled. Their main functions are storage of food and
transportation of water.
d) Xylem fiber: The sclerenchyma cells in the xylem are called xylem fibers or
wood fibers. The ends of this type of cells are tapereds. Mature cells do not
contain protoplasm, and so, become dead. These cells provide plants with
mechanical support. They are present in the xylem in dicots. Transportation of
water and minerals, storage of food and giving mechanical support and strength
to plants are their main functions.
Phloem: The phloem tissue organises the vascular bundle in association with the
xylem. The xylem transports water as raw materials of food, and the phloem
conducts food produced in leaves to the different parts of a plant. This type of
tissue is composed of sieve tube, companion cell, phloem parenchyma and
phloem fiber.
a) Sieve Cell: These are special types of cells. Sieve cells are arranged end to
end and make a tubular structure called the sieve tube. The cells are separated
from each other with a sieve like plate called the sieve plate. The protoplasm in
a sieve cell is closer to the wall, so that a hollow lumen is developed for the
conduction of food. Their walls are lignified. Mature sieve cells do not contains
nucleus. Companion cells and sieve tubes are present in the phloem of all the
angiosperms. Their main function is to conduct food produced in leaves to the
different parts of a plant.
yy Sieve Plate
Gh \d Sieve tube
lp Sieve pore
eet Companion Sieve plate
o / J cell Lela .
i 4 cS Sieve tube
j A\_ Phloem Sez 0xe)\.
LE Parenchyma KING
D i Companion cell
A-Longitudinal section B-Transverse section S
Figure: 2.15 Phloem tissue

Cells and Tissues of Organisms 31
b) Companion cell: A parenchyma cell is found. Along with each sieve cell, its
nucleus is much larger. It is assumed that the nucleus of a companion cell
controls some activities of its neighbouring sieve cell. A companion cell is turgid
with protoplasm and thin-walled. They are not found in the phloem of ferns and
angiosperms.
c) Phloem parenchyma: The parenchyma cells in phloem are called phloem
parenchyma. These types of cells are thin walled and have protoplasm like other
parenchyma cells. They help store and conduct food. They are found in ferns,
gymnosperms and angiosperms, but not in monocots.
d) Phloem fiber: Phloem fibers are sclerenchyma cells. These long cells are
arranged end to end with each other. They are also called bast fibers. The fibers
of jute are such bast fibers. These types of fibers are developed at the time of
secondary growth of plant parts. Pits are present on the walls of these cells.
Through the phloem tissue, food produced in leaves and stored in roots are
simultaneously conducted up and down.
2.3.2 Animal tissues
In multicellular animals, many cells together may be involved in a special function.
Arising from the embryonic cell layer, when one or more than one type of cells
remain in a particular part of the animals body and collectively perform a common
function, this is called Tissue. That is to say, cells of a particular tissue are similar as
to their origin, function and structure. The study of the different types of tissue is
called Histology. The differences between tissues and cells are specific. Cell is the
structural and functional unit of tissue. For example : red blood corpuscles, white
blood corpuscles, platelets are different types of cells. These are called connective
tissue. The liquid connective tissue take part in different physiological processes.
In the human body there are different types of cells, which are engaged in
different activities. For exemple, nerve cells spread within the human body and
form a network. These cells receive stimuli and send it to the brain and send off
impulses from the brain back to the specific organs. Nerve cells in the ear and eye
help in vision and hearing. Due to the lack of different kinds of nerve cells, most
« animals can not differentiate the exact colour of the objects like humans can.
S Many animals can see only at day time or at night.

32 Biology
Muscle cells are used in all kinds of activities : for example, writing, walking
and movement. Three kinds of blood cells are engaged in different activities.
Red blood corpuscles absorb oxygen from the lungs and transport oxygen from
the heart to different cells of the body through arteries and capillaries. White
blood corpuscles prevents disease.
Platelets are responsible for starting the process of blood clotting. As a result,
bleeding is stopped if there is a wound. Besides providing cover to the body,
integumentary cells perform different functions according to their location. Hair
grows from the integumentary cells of the head. Sweat is secreted from the sweat
glands. Bone cells constitutes bones with deposition of minerals or cartilage, which
makes structure and supports the body.
Types of Animal Tissues
On the basis of nature and number of cells, and the presence or absence of the
intercellular materials or matrix secreted by cells, tissue is divided into four main
categories. The functions of these tissues are described below.
1. Epithelial Tissue
This tissue functions as the lining of various organs. But the function of this
tissue is not only to provide cover to the organs. There are four more functions:
protection of underlying tissues; secretion of waste products, including protein;
absorption of water and nutrients; transcellular transport of specific materials.
The cells of the epithelial tissue lie closely or side by side on a base
membrane. Based on the size of the cell, the location in the animal body and the
nature of work, this tissue is of three types :
a) Squamous epithelial tissue: Cells of this tissue are flat like scales. The nucleus is
large.
Example : Wall of the Bowman's capsule of Kidney. Besides providing cover, it
is mainly active in filtration.
b) Cuboidal epithelial tissue : Cells of this tissue are cuboidal; i.e. the length,
and height of the cells are nearly equal.
Example: Collecting tubules of the kidney, Mainly active in transportation and covering.
c) Columnar epithelial tissue : Cells of this tissue are narrow and elongated
like a column. 2%
§

Cell and Tissue of Organism 33
Example : Found in the internal wall of intestine of vertebrates, mainly active in
secretion, protection and absorption.
Nucleus Go , Arr Cell
a ny | Nucleus
“ey Cae al
ZF [elelay |
|) fs)
Basement
Basement Nucleus membrane
membrane
Figure: 2.16 Squamous (Scales) _ Figure: 2.17 Cuboidal epithelial tissue. Figure: : 2.18 Columnar
epithelial tissue. epithelial tissue.
Based on the number of cell layers arranged on the base membrane, epithelial
tissue is of three types:
i. Simple epithelial tissue : On the base membrane cells are arranged in a single
layer.
Example : Bowman's capsule of kidney, kidney tubules, wall of intestine.
ii. Stratified epithelial tissue : Cells are arranged on the basement membrane in
more than one layer. There are some stratified epithelial tissues, the layers of
which can change in minutes. Three or four layers can turn into seven or eight
layers in a moment. That is why it is often called transitional epithelial tissue.
Example : Integument of vertebrate animals.
iii. Pseudo stratified epithelial tissue : Cells of this tissue are arranged in a
single layer on basement membrane. The cells are not all of the same height, So,
this tissue is stratified .
Example : Trachea.
«ae MN —
® .

Nucleus ——2 Son0gdot : i a Nucleus
odorant al?
Dacohodcay

Figure: 2.20 Pseudo stratified epithelial tissue.

Figure: 2.19: Stratified or complex epithelial tissue.

Forma -05, Biology Class-9-10

34 Biology
The cells of epithelial tissue are transformed for different functions, such as:
1. Ciliated epithelial tissue : In the wall of the trachea of vertebrate animals.
2. Flagellated epithelial tissue : Flagellated muscular epithelial cells in the
endoderm of Hydra.
3. Pseudopodial epithelial tissue : Pseudopodial cells in the endoderms of
Hydra and in the inter-membrane cells of vertebrate animals.
4. Reproductive tissue : These are specially transformed epithelial tissues
which produce sperm and ovum. Taking part in reproduction, they maintain the
continuation of species.
§. Glandular tissue : Epithelial tissue transformed into glandular tissue secrets
necessary fluid. This tissue to forms the external and internal covering of any
organ or tubule. When transformed, this tissue takes part in protection, secretion,
absorption, diffusion, transportation etc.
2. Connective tissue : Connective tissue, has more matrix compared to the
number of cells is comparatively less. Based on structure and function
connective tissue is mainly of three types :
a. Fibrous connective tissue: This type of connective tissue lies below the
body-integument and sparsely in muscles. In the matrix, different types of fibres are
visible.
b. Skeletal connective tissue: 3 ly @
The Intemal structural tissue of the (SY CA: | IG Mast cell
body is called the skeletal tissue. The TAS é ae, o

; (~~ 6]? Keiv : Collagen
Skeletal tissue forms the skeletal 2=- 7 — ee fiber
system or the internal structure of the (er ee. a
body, gives the body definite shape and | oe Zax Blastic fiber
firmness, helps in organ movement and © ve) QO;
locomotion, protects the soft and DL <f®
sensitive organs of the body (e.g, the Figure: : 2.21 Connective —
brain, spinal cord, lungs, heart etc.),
produces various types of blood corpuscles, and forms the surface for the
attachment of voluntary muscles. S

g

Cell and Tissue of Organism 35
Depending on the formation, skeletal tissue is of two types: Cartilage and Bone
Cartilage. Cartilage is a kind of flexible skeletal tissue. Its matrix is firm and
elastic, and the cells contain lacunae. The nose and pinna of the ear of human are
made of cartilage. Basides that, in the humerus, femur etc. cartilage covers the
two ends of the bone which protects the bone from rubbing. Bone is hard, fragile
and inflexible skeletal connetive tissue, but the deposition of calcium within the
matrix gives it strength .
c. Fluid connective tissue : The matrix of the fluid connective tissue is liquid
and mobile. Different kinds of organic colloids are soluble in the matrix. The
main function of the vascular tissue is to maintain circulation in the interior of
the body, and it plays a special role in protection from diseases and blood
clotting. Fluid connective tissue is of two types, blood and lymph.
Blood
Blood is a type of alkaline, slightly saline, red liquid connective tissue. Flowing
through the arteries, veins and capillaries, blood takes part in internal circulation.
In warm blooded animals it maintains body temperature balance. Blood is
formed of two components: (i) Plasma and (ii) Blood cells or Blood corpuscles.
Plasma is the liquid part of blood. It is yellowish in colour. It contains 91-92%
water and 8-9% organic and inorganic materials. The organic substances include
various types of blood protein and waste materials. Blood cells are of three
types: Red blood corpuscle or Erythrocyte, White blood corpuscle or Leucocyte,
and platelets or Thrombocyte. Red blood corpuscles contain an iron compound
called haemoglobin. The red colour of blood is due to the presence of
haemoglobin. Haemoglobin easily mixes with oxygen to form the
oxyhaemoglobin compound, which carries oxygen to the different parts of the
body. Leucocytes destroy harmful microorganisms and protects the body against
diseases. There are various kinds of white blood cells in the human body.
Thrombocytes take part in blood coagulation or blood clotting.
Lymph
A yellow coloured and slightly alkaline liquid stored within the intercellular
spaces of the human body is called lymph. This is collected by small ducts and
forms an independent system, called the lymphatic system. Lymph contains

2 lymphocyte cells, called lymphoid cell.

S

N

36 Biology
> (
ee 2@ °
Red blood cell White blood cell Platelets
Figure 2.22 : Different types of blood cell
3. Muscular Tissue
Growing from the mesoderm of the embryo, the particular type of tissue capable
of contracting and expanding to affect movement and tissue forming the muscles
of vertebrate animals is called Muscular tissue. Matrix is nearly absent in
muscular tissue. Muscle cells are delicate, elongated and fiber-like.
Myofibril with transverse striations are called striated muscles and those without
striations is smooth muscle. Through contraction and expansion, muscle cells
take part in organ movement and internal circulation.
Based on location, structure and functions, muscle tissue is of three types:
voluntary muscular tissue, involuntary muscular tissue and cardiac muscle.
a. Voluntary or Striated muscular tissue : This can be contracted or expanded at
the will of the animal. The cells of the voluntary muscle tissue are tubular,
unbranched, and have transverse striations. These generally have more than one
nucleus. This muscle can contract or expand quickly, and is also called marked or
skeletal muscle. For example, muscles of the hand and leg of human beings.
Sarcolemma
iii
Intercalated disk
i Nucleus Nucl
Nucleus } ueleus
yofibril \ Myofibril Sareolenmnay
Sarcolemma\ } \| Myofibril
Voluntary muscle Involuntary muscle Cardiac muscle i
=
Figure 2.23 Different types of muscles gS

Cell and Tissue of Organism 37
b. Involuntary or Smooth muscle : The contraction and expansion of this
muscle tissue does not depend on the will of the animal. This muscle tissue is
spindle shaped and faintly branched. Transverse striations are not present. That
is why this muscle is called unmarked smooth muscle. Involuntary muscles are
found on the walls of blood vessels, alimentary canal, etc. of vertebrate animals.
Involuntary muscles mainly take part in the internal circulation of body, such as
intestinal peristalsis in food digestion.
c. Cardiac muscle : The special type of involuntary muscle that forms the heart
of vertebrate animals is called the cardiac muscle. The cells of this muscle tissue
are tubular (very similar to those of voluntary muscle), branched, and have
transverse striations. Between the cells of this tissue, intercalated discs are
present. The contraction and relaxation of this tissue is not dependent on the will
of the animal. That is, the structure of heart muscles is like that of voluntary
muscles, and the function is like that of involuntary muscle. The cells of heart
muscles remain joined together by branches, so they all contract and relax
together. Through rhythmic contraction and relaxation, the cardiac muscle
control the circulation of blood within the body from a cetain stage of the
embryonic condition till the last moment of death.
4. Nerve tissue : The particular type of + Dendrite
tissue which forms the nervous system is
structure in chapter ten. It receives stimulus Nucleus
from the environment, such as : heat, touch,
pressure, etc. The nervous tissue can
transmit these stimuli within the body and Axon
according to that, can make the appropriate
response. The special type of cells which So Node of Ranvier
form nervous tissue are called nerve cells or
neuron. A typical neuron has three parts : —s
1) cell body, 2) dendrite and 3) axon. A Buttons 7

& Neuron cell body is polygonal and nucleated.

a Figure 2.24 : A Neuron

38 Biology
The cytoplasm of the cell contains mitochondria, ribosome, golgi body,
endoplasmic reticulum, etc. But there is no active centriole in the cytoplasm of
neuron, so the neuron cannot divide. From the cell body of the neuron a long
nerve fiber emerges, which is attached to the dendrite of neuron. This is
called an axon. A neuron has only one axon. Between adjoining neurons, a
bridge is formed by the union of the axon of one neuron with the dendrite of
another. This is called synapse. Through the synapse, nerve stimuli from one
neuron is transmitted to the next neurons. Nerve tissue receives stimulus and
transmits it to the brain, and the brain responds to it. In higher animals, nerve
tissues store memory and controls the work of the different organs of the body
and coordination among them.

There is a common belief that we use only 10% of our brain , but this is not true.
In fact in usual conditions, human beings or any other animal make 100% use of
the brain. It is true that not all the parts of brain remain equally active at the
same time. But we make use of all of the parts of the brain from time to time.
It is also not correct that at any one time no more than 10% of the brain can be
used. There is no limitation.According to evolution, there is no reason to impose
such a limit.

2.4 Organ and System

A part of the animal body formed by the combination of one or more than one
type of tissues performing a particular function is called an organ. That is to say,
in any organ there may be one or more than one type of tissues and that organ
performs a particular function. The branch of biology where organs are
discussed is called Morphology.

According to location, there are two types of organs in the human body. The
branch of Biology where the morphology of external organs like eye, ear, nose,
hand, etc. are discussed is called External Morphology. The branch of Biology
where the internal organs of the organism are discussed is called Internal
Morphology or Anatomy. Stomach, duodenum, ileum, rectum, heart, liver,
pancreas, spleen, lung, kidney, testis, ovary etc. are human internal organs.

To perform various physiological functions, such as digestion, respiration,
excretion, reproduction, etc. several organs together form the organ system. In
human and in other animals some of these systems are described below- S

Cell and Tissue of Organism 39
—— Hair
rn 9
ean ie es an Trachea cals
. | Oesophagus \ ~ ,
——— Liver |! Lung 2 Integument
a Stomach / NS Diaphragm / iV
Rectum ( \s | es
Digestive system Respriatory system Integumentary system
Brain =~
© Spinal cord —S7/
ei a Nerve {EN ‘i
Kidney Mi A\\ GA— Pituitory Gy
y) a | Thyroid i
Ureter is | yeu
Au Urinary bladder Z| (NV) \f) Parathyroi
Ww Urethra . : Adrenal =
i Ge anere aS
| i] ( 2 Pregnancy|
) ) | Testis df
Excretory system Nervous system Endocrine system
Figure : 2.25 Simplified structure of verious system of human body
1. Digestive system : This system is associated with the ingestion of food,
digestion, absorption and removal of undigested faecal materials.The digestive
system has two main parts:
Digestive canal : This canal is formed with mouth aperture, mouth cavity,
pharynx, oesophagus, stomach, duodenum, ileum, rectum and anus.
The Digestive glands : The salivary glands, liver and pancreas work as
digestive glands.
~ 2. The Respiratory system : In humans the respiratory system consists of the nasal
S aperture, pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchus, bronchioles, alveoli and a pair of lungs.

40 Biology
This system uses oxygen taken from the environment to produce energy, by the
oxidation of food present in the body cells. This energy helps in doing daily
work.

3. The Nervous system : The function of this system is to receive external and
internal stimuli of the body and to create appropriate sensations. The nervous
system is made up of the brain, the spinal cord and cranial nerves and spinal
nerves. The nervous system has also a part named the Autonomous nervous
system. This part of the nervous system controls the involuntary actions of the
body.

4. The Excretory system : Due to various physiological metabolic reactions
some waste materials are produced within the body as by-products. These
materials are generally toxic to the body and need to be removed. The process of
removing unnecessary and nitrogenous waste materials from the body is called
excretion. The system through which the excretion is performed is called the
excretory system. The excretory system of humans consists of a pair of kidneys,
a pair of urinary ducts, one urinary bladder, and one urethra.

5. The Reproductive system: Through this system, an animal produces one or
more offspring to maintain the continuation of species. This system consists of
gamete producing and embryo bearing organs. When mature, the child becomes
capable of reproducing. In humans, the males possess the male reproductive
system while the female possesses the female reproductive system.

6. Integumentary system: The membrane covering the body from outside is
called integument or skin. This system covers the body, and protects the body
from external injury or attack of harmful microbes. It also controls the
movement of various materials through the outside and inside of the body. It also
protects the liquid parts inside the body.

7. Endocrine system: There are a few ductless or endocrine glands within the
bodies of animals. These produce hormones and have no ducts for
transportation. Blood carries the hormones from one place to another. The
endocrine system is made up of endocrine glands such as Pituitary, Thyroid, iS
Parathyroid, Islets of Langerhans of Pancreas, Suprarenal etc. “

Cell and Tissue of Organism 41

2.5 Microscope

Just as a weapon is important to a fighter and a telescope is important to an

astronomer, the microscope is essential to every student of biology. Very small

objects, invisible to the naked eye, can be seen with a microscope. The

compound microscope you have in your school is able to observe very small

objects with the help of light. This type of microscope is called light microscope,

The microscope in which electron are used instead of light is called the electron

microscope. Light microscopes are of two types: simple and compound

microscope.

2.5.1 Simple Microscope

In this microscope a flat stage made of glass is set with a vertical pillar on its base.

Two clips are attached on the two upper sides of the stage to hold the slide with

the object to be observed. There

is a sub-staged two-sided mirror _—_- Handle

set with the vertical column Of Bye piece —

the microscope to reflect light — pyaw tube as be [

from an external source up Clip a

through the bottom of the stage. Stage SS ONS

A continuous tube from the base 1 —_——

holds a lens in its arm with a 4 S | KC
ijustment Screw.

ting. Setting the lens in the ring, Ele; ——

by adjusting the screw, an object — Mirror {Jp ||

put on the slide of the stage can _—_

be focused. If needed, the task of _ -—

observing an object can be -

started by focusing on it with the (

reflected light. The base, which Figure 2.26: A simple microscope

holds the whole thing, is called

the foot.

2.5.2 Different parts of Compound Microscope

It is useful to understand the different parts of a compound microscope before

using the instrument. Take a look at the picture of it.

Forma -06, Biology Class-9-10

42 Biology

Stand: This is a vertical pillar on the base.

Arm: The curved part above the stand is called the Arm.

Base: The part below the stand that looks like a platform is called the base.

Stage: This remains attached to the lower part arm.

Body Tube: It is the tubular part me — eye piece

at the upper side of the Body tube / | /— Diewiite

microscope. One end of it holds oX

the eye piece. The objective Nose piece — (@) <n

lenses are attached at the other AX // Fine adjustment

end. Objective ——— cm e knob

Nose piece and Objective: Piphrapes SCY Arm

Below the body tube, the Safina Wy Stage

revolving part or turret is called sn et sg CY ~

the nose piece. Three objectives — 7% incknation crew

(lens) are attached to it. These = ;

are Low Power objective (10x — ** tile

12x), High Power objective an ae

(40x — 45x) and Oil Immersion Figure 2.27: A compound microscope

objective(100x). Some machines may have another objective named Screening

objective(4x —5x).

Eye piece: One (monocular) or two (binocular) eye pieces (lenses) are attached

to the upper part of the body tube. Its projection power is usually 10x — 20x.

Fine Adjustment Knob: This is a small knob used for fine tuning. When it is

rotated, the stage goes up or down and as a result slides can be taken inside or

outside the focal length, causing fine tuning of the focus on the object. It is used

after using the coarse adjustment knob.

Coarse Adjustment knob: This is a big round knob used for focusing on the

object. By turning the knob, the object can be brought into approximate focus.

Sub stage Diaphragm and Condenser: The Sub stage is below the stage, and

it can be elevated or lowered. A condenser is attached to it. The condenser

contains a diaphragm that controls the intensity of light. 20
S
AQ

Cell and Tissue of Organism 43
Illuminator: A source of light located at the centre of the base from which light
enters the lens through the condenser.
Use of a compound microscope: To use the natural light for illumination of the
object,the microscope needs to be set in a sufficient lighted place. At first, the
mirror of the microscope is adjusted such that reflected light illuminates the
object to be observed on the slide, passing through the hole of the stage. If an
artificial illuminator is present in the microscope, it is enough to use that only.
The clips on the stage are placed on the slide to hold it properly.
Now, after moving the nosepiece, the objective of lowest power would be set
straight on the slide. Using first the coarse adjustment knob and then the fine
adjustment knob, the object is accurately brought in focus. Now the magnified
object can be viewed, keeping the eye on the eye piece lens. If required, the fine
adjustment knob can be used to make vision more clear. At the time of viewing
an object, both the eyes should be kept open. Though it is little hard, practice
will make it easier. The eyes get soon tired if one is used and the other is closed.
If the lens of higher power is required, moving the nosepiece, the expected lens
can be set to focus the object but in this case, students can seek the help of a
teacher.
Staining:
When a fine layer of cell or tissue is observed through microscope, it becomes
difficult to differentiate it from the liquid medium it is immersed in. One of the
techniques to solve this problem is to use dye to define and enhance contrast of
the cell or tissue. Staining can be done with such a degree of fineness that one
can preferentially stain only a particular cell, a cell component, an organelle or
a particular component of a tissue. This is called slide staining. Materials used
for dying or staining are called Stains.
2.5.3 Electron Microscope
The shorter the wavelength of the lighe used,the better the resolution.
Ordinarily, it is not possible to focus an objects smaller than half of the
wavelength in the microscope. The wavelength of photon is 400 —700 nm. So
even with a high quality optical microscope, an object less than 200 nm cannot
be well magnified even after combining a number of lenses. As a result, besides
« the plasmalemma, the nucleus and the cytoplasm of a cell, no other part is
S visible clearly in a optical microscope. Organelles in the cytoplasm cannot be

44, Biology
differentiated. In order to solve this

problem, electron waves are

used instead of photons as the (ge e-

wavelength of electrons is much

shorter than that of photons. In 7
place of or dinary lens, a powerful é
electromagnet is used as it can change ‘lls |
the course of electro waves just like me =
allowa organelles in a cell to become a

clearly visible. The microscope ex 4 '
microscope {not electronic). We carmot ea :
directly view the image magnified by | peers &
the electron wave. After being | “oe ee
processed, the image is seen in the |

monitor of a computer attached to the Figure 2.28 : A Electron Microscope
electron micrascape.

@) Individual Activity

Activity-1; Observation of a plant cell (onion cell) under a microscope.
Essentials: Onion, blade, slide, cover slip, watch glass, paint brush,
Procedure: Remove the dry scale outer leaves of the onion. Now, take a
wide, fleshy scale leaf. After removing a small outer layer from the surface
of the scale with the help of a blade, put it in water in a watch plaas. Now,
with a small paintbrush, place the scale piece on a clean glass slide after
taking it from the water of watch glass, Leave a drop of glycerine on the
apecimen object to observe and slowly place the cover slip on it.
Observation: Observe it under the objective with the Lowest power in a
compound microscope. You will be able to see rectangular and thin walled
cells, Now, observe them with an objective with higher power, In every cell,
you will find thin, granular protoplasm, vacuole and a sided nucleus. Draw
and Label what you have seen. s

Cell and Tissue of Organism 45
@) Individual Activity
Activity-2: Observation of an animal cell (Amoeba) under a microscope.
Essentials: Microscope, slide, cover slip, dropper, petridish, pipette, glass rod,
small bowl of glass, water and rotten leaves.
Procedure: At the beginning of the experiment, collect some branches with
rotten leaves from the bottom of a ditch or a pond. Cut them into small pieces
and put the pieces in the water of the glass bowl. Stir it steadily with a glass rod.
After stirring the water for a while, set the bowl at rest in a place. When the
things settle on the bottom of the bowl, draw some of the precipitation with a
pipette and put it on a petridish. Now, take a drop of the contents in the petridish
on a glass slide with a dropper and after placing cover slip on it, set it to observe
under a microscope.
Observation: After searching for a while by moving the slide on two horizontal
axes, you will find some transparent, jelly- like small organisms. These are
amoebas. Many pseudo pods and vacuoles will be found in it and there will be
a plasmalemma surrounding the cell. There will be no plastids like in a plant
cell. Are there other differences between a plant and an animal cell? Draw and
label what you have seen.
()Exercise
Short answer questions
1. What is a cell?
2. What are the functions of plastids?
3. What is the relation between tissue and organ?
4. What is the importance of endocrine glands?
oo 5. Which part of cell is called the ‘Power house’ of the cell?
& 6. What are the functions of blood?

46 Biology
Essay type questions
1. Describe the structure of a mitochondrion with a labeled diagram.
2. Compare the structures and functions of different types of simple tissue.
3. Discuss the structures and functions of animal tissue.
SS) Multiple choice questions
1. Which is the function of lysosome?
a. to produce food b. to produce energy
c. to engulf microorganisms d. to synthesize protein
2. Amobea is an animal cell, because it has-
i. well formed nucleus
ii. pigments
iii. cell membrane
Which one is correct?
a)i &ii b)i & iii
c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
Read the following stem and answer the questions 3 and 4.
On the way to his village house, Ruhit saw a man extracting fibers from a jute plant.
3. What kind of tissue is being collected ?
a. Parenchyma b. Collenchyma
c. Chlorenchyma d. Sclerenchyma
4. The characterstics of the tissue mentioned are :
i, cell wall is lignified
ii. cell wall is irregularly thickened
lii. protoplasm is absent in the cell
Which one of the following answers is correct?
ai &ii b. ii & iii
ci & iti d. i, ii & iii 8
N

Cell and Tissue of Organism 47

@ Creative questions

1.

a) What is plasmalemma?

b) Why are plastids called colour forming organs? M

c) Why is the organelle marked with N important for the living

world?

d) What types of problem will appear in living bodies if S <M

the part marked M is absent?

2

LOO
es _
Figure A Figure B

a) What is muscle tissue?

b) How does skeletal tissue protects the brain?

c) Explain the cause of the location of part marked Q ?

d) Between Figure A and B, Which one plays an important role in
physiological activities besides conduction? Explain your answer with
logic.

=
8

Chapter Three
Cell Division
Different types of cell division occur in all types of organisms from
unicellular to multi-cellular. One kind of cell division causes increases in body
size of the organism, and in the other type of cell division, reproductive cells
are developed, and in some other cases organism multiplies through binary
fission. In this chapter, you will learn how different types of cell division
occur.
=
&

Cell Division 49
® At the end of this chapter, we will be able to-

¢ Explain the concept of cell division.

* Describe the types of cell division.

¢ Explain mitosis.

* Describe the stages of mitosis.

¢ Analyse the significance of mitosis cell division in living bodies.

¢ Explain meiosis.

* Explain the role of meiosis in the development of reproductive cells.

* Understand the role of cell division in maintenance of the continuity of life.
Forma -07, Biology Class-9-10

50 Biology
3.1 Cell Division and it’s classification

Every living body is made up of a cell or cells. The life of every organism starts
with a single cell. In fact, every cell is originated from a pre-existing one. The
increase of cells in number through division is very natural and important .
The bodies of some organisms are composed of a single cell. They are called
unicellular organisms, such as, bacteria, Amoeba, Plasmodium etc. These
organisms multiply themselves from the division of a single cell. Other
organisms are composed of more than one cell. They are called multicellular
organisms. Humans, mango and banyan trees etc. are composed of crores of
cells. A giant banyan tree also initiates its structure after the formation of a
single cell (zygote by the union of two gametes). After the fertilization of an
egg, the structure of a human is achieved with crores of cells dividing through
the process of cell division. Again, male and female gametes are produced for
the emergence of new generations. Cells divide through the process of cell
division for the growth and reproduction of organisms.

Types of cell division:

Two important types of cell division that occur in living beings are: Mitosis
and Meiosis.

3.2 Mitosis

Through this process of division, an eukaryotic cell, divides into two identical
daughter cells. In this process, the nucleus and chromosomes are divided only
once, and two identical daughter cells are produced with the same type of
chromosomes in number, physical and structural features as their mother cell .
This is also known as equational division. Mitosis occurs in somatic cells of
eukaryotic organisms and through this division, as the number of cells
increases, plants and animals grow. The process usually takes place in the body
cells of animals and in the meristems of the plant parts growing, such as the tip
of stems and roots, plumule and radicle, developing leaves, buds etc. This kind
of cell division also occurs in lower plants and animals during asexual
reproduction.

3.2.1 Stages of Mitosis: Mitosis is a continuous process. During mitosis, ,
karyokinesis is usually followed by cytokinesis. Karyokinesis and cytokinesis 3

Cell Division 51
represent the division of nucleus and the division of cytoplasm respectively.
Before starting division, a cell has to prepare itself. This stage is called
interphase. For ease of description, mitosis can be divided into five stages. They
are:
(a) Prophase, (b) Prometaphase, (c) Metaphase, (d) Anaphase, (e) Telophase.
(a) Prophase: This is the first stage of mitosis. At the onset of the stage, the
nucleus becomes little larger and chromatin fibers start condensing into short,
thick and tightly coiled structures called chromosomes. At this stage,
chromosome can be seen with a compound microscope. Though every
chromosome then divides into two sister chromatids, at the centromere they
remain attached. As the chromosomes are still tangled, it is difficult to easily
count the number of chromosomes in a cell.
Plant cell
D Gua ely | | Nucleolus
mA ve) |p -Nusleolus 6, | | ; |
we AL 2 AN Chromatid |
IS “ } iS
( Cromatin \ Chromosome Centromere
ew N [= \
(Mother cell) (First stage) (Last stage)
Figure: 3.01 Prophase (Plant cell)
‘Animal cell
___—_ Centrosome! Centriole . Aster ray
Eo Ahtomatin |Z fe S |
a om | Nuelear e A Sot ee bs ANS) cane
OSE cytoplasm oe <2 £/\— chromatid
We Chromosome
(Mother cell) (First stage) (Last stage)
x
Rg Figure: 3.02 Prophase (Animal cell)

a2 Biology
ee
Ny Pole —
71S SST Spindle apparatus 7 a ip Centriole
Af és y I Chromosome
\ { ki ) oie 1 | A Chromosome
\ L/ Spindle fiber
\\ | LZ Disappearing pes: - er
nuclear membrane — Aster ray
Flantcell Figure: : 3.03 Pasnetaghae steel
(b) Prometaphase: Early in this stage, spindle apparatus with two poles is
developed in plant cells from fiber protein. The middle plane of the spindle
apparatus is called the equator. Some fibers of the spindle apparatus, made of
microtibules of cytoskeleton, are stretched from one pole to the other. These are
called Spindle fibers. At this stage, kinetochores in the centromeres of
chromosomes attach to some fibers of the spindle apparatus. Kinetochores are
protein structures assembled on centromeres, and they link the chromosomes
with mitotic spindles. These fibers are generally called traction fibers. They are
also sometimes called chromosomal fibers as chromosomes are attached with
them. Chromosomes then start assembling on the equatorial plane. The nuclear
membrane and nucleolus start to disintegrate and disappear. In animal cells, the
spindle apparatus is developed from centrioles, and the centrioles remain in the
two poles with astral rays spreading out from them.
Se Polar region .
=—N@ Spindle apparatus ~~~ —- v Spindle fiber
\ I Spindle fiber RY) Chromatid
| Equatorial region, 4
ae :
2 Chromosome . WZ Ceninonier
== ae “—_ Aster ray
Plant cell Animal cell
Figure: : : 3.04. Metaphase
(c) Metaphase: At the onset of the stage, all the chromosomes assemble at the
equator, from the two poles. The centromere of each chromosome remains on the
equator but the two arms take positions towards the poles. In this stage, the »
chromosomes look short and thick. Attraction between chromatids declines ©

Cell Division 53
and repulsion increases. At the end of this stage, the division of the centromere
starts. The Nuclear membrane and nucleolus disappear completely.
—————— ee
fy & “Sy _— Daughter chromosome
SI “Add
[7 )~ Disappearing Se : : :
iN L4 | spindle fiber SX y
ee BR
Plantcell Figure: 3.05: Anaphase “imal cell
(d) Anaphase: The sister chromatids become the two sister chromosomes and
they are pulled apart. The cleaved centromere moves to the pole, while the
chromatids trail behind. Each chromosome, splitting into two, moves to the
two poles, and so the number of chromosome remains unchanged. On the
centromere in the chromosome, the chromosomes look V, L, J or I shaped, and
these chromosomes are called metacentric, sub-metacentric, acrocentric and
telocentric respectively. At the end of the anaphase stage, the daughter
chromosomes are completely pulled apart to the two poles and start their
elongation.
(e) Telophase: This is the last stage of mitosis and a reversal of the prophase.
Chromosomes become decondensed and surrounded by new nuclei. They
elongate back into thin and long structures called chromatin fibers and form a
mesh called the Nuclear reticulum. The Nucleolus also reappears. The Nuclear
membrane reappears around the nuclear reticulum. So, ultimately, two new
nuclei are formed in the two poles. The spindle apparatus disintegrate and so,
the spindle fibers gradually disappear.
‘Nuclear membran:
peste orem (TT) )
& C Daughter nucleus
s “~~ ~Plant cell S~ Figure: 3.06 Telophase “™™' °°"

54 Biology
At the end of the telophase stage, some small parts from the endoplasmic
reticulum aggregate in the equatorial plane, and collectively form the structure of
the cell plate. Equal distribution of the cytoplasmic organelles is accomplished. As
a result, two identical daughter cells are developed. In the case of an animal cell,
a contractile ring on the plasma membrane at the equatorial plane pinches off the
two nuclei.
Group Activity
Activity: To prepare models of various chromosomes based on the position
of centromeres.
Essentials: Rope or thread, art paper, glue, scotch tape, cutter, sign pen.
Procedure: First, we will prepare the model of a chromosome during the
metaphase stage. Take two pieces of rope or thread of equal length. These
two pieces will be the models of the two sister chromatids of a chromosome.
Make a knot in the middle of the rope. This knot is the model of the
centromere. If the knot is made properly, we will get a model of the
metacentric chromosome, from whose centromere four arms seem to appear.
Two of these four arms belong to one chromatid while the other two belong
to the other chromatid. The length of all arms are equal.
» a
A
Figure 3.07 : Different types of the model of chromatid on the basis of the position of
centromere which is vissible in the phase of mataphase ( from left to right)
Similarly, take two more pieces of rope or thread of equal length and prepare
a model of a submetacentric chromosome by placing the knot a bit away
from the center. If knots are placed near the poles, a model of an acrocentric
chromosome will be made. And if the knot is placed right at the poles, then | .,
it will be a model of a telocentric chromosome. Now, use glue or scotch tape/ &

Cell Division 55
to stick these four kinds of models an art paper. Label the models with a sign
pen. Write Metaphase as the heading on the art paper.

Now, through the same process, prepare models of chromosomes seen in the
Anaphase stage. First make the four models of metacentric, submetacentric,
acrocentric and telocentric chromosomes of the metaphase stage. In the
anaphase stage, each chromosome is divided into two parts along the
centromere such that one chromatid with half of the centromere remains in
each part. So here we will cut the chromosome model of the metaphase stage
along the knot into two, so there is one chromatid in each part.

We will see that each of the two chromatids from the metacentric
chromosome looks like the letter “V’ as the position of the centromere is at
the middle of the chromatids. If the chromatid taken half from the
submetacentric choromosome with the centromere a bit away from the
center, it takes the appearance of English letter ‘L’. Similarly the chromatids
taken from the acrocentric and telocentric chromosomes will look like ‘J’
and ‘I’ respectively. Now stick the model of these four chromatid models on
art paper with glue or scotch tape. Label the model with the sign pen. Write
the word Anaphase as the heading on this art paper.

Now present both art papers in the classroom. Explain how the
chromosome or chromatid looks in metaphase or anaphase stage.

Significance of mitosis

The significance of mitosis in the living body of organisms is immense. The

balance between the nucleus and cytoplasm of a cell in terms of volume and

amount is maintained by mitosis. Through mitosis, the growth in the body of

multicellular organisms occurs. All multicellular organisms start their life from a

single cell zygote. The repeated division of this single cell produces innumerable

cells and thus an organism grows to completion. It may seem that if the cells

multiply one at a time it would take a long time to take the complete shape of a

living being (the human body has 30 trillion cells). But this is not true. All cells are

capable of mitosis when provided with necessary nutrients. If each cell division
takes one day to complete, the number of cells necessary for human beings can
x be created in 40 — 50 days.
>
aq

56 Biology
As the number and feature of chromosomes remain unchanged in cells produced
through mitosis, growth in organisms takes place systematically. Mitosis plays a
role in the maintenance of the size, shape and volume of cells. Unicellular
organisms reproduce through mitosis. Mitosis plays an important role in the
vegetative reproduction of organisms and increasing the number of reproductive
cells. It is essential to form new cells for growth and healing of injuries. The life
span of some cells is predetermined and they are, accordingly, replaced through
the process of mitosis. As identical cells are produced through mitosis,
qualitative features of the living world remain unchanged. Mitotic errors may
result in abnormal mass of cells called tumours, with or without cancer cells.
Tumour and cancer: All of us are familiar with the words ‘tumour’ and ‘cancer’.
These are the results of irregular cell divisions. In mitosis, a cell divides into two,
two cells divide into four and so on. The process remains controlled. If this
control is lost due to any reason, cell division occurs in an irregular way. This
results in the formation of a tumour.
The Formation of cancer cells is also the result of uncontrolled, irregular cell
division.Research has shown that various types of germs, chemicals or
radioactivity can be responsible for the development of cancer cells. Two genes,
E6 and E7 of the papilloma virus, produce a chemical substance that displaces
two protein molecules which control cell division. As a result, the controlling
factor of cell division is eliminated, and a tumour is formed. Sometimes these
two genes amalgamate with those of host cell and stop the functions of protein
molecules that control increase of cell. This leads to cancer cells or in other word
cancer.
Cancer is a dangerous disease. Cancer can develop in the liver, lungs, brain,
breasts, skin or uterus almost all organs of the body.
Group Activity

Activity: The teacher will group the students ask them to present the

different mitotic stages after drawing them on their. 3

N

Cell Division a7
3.3 Meiosis
In this process of cell division, four daughter cells are produced from an
eukaryotic cell. The Nucleus divides twice and the chromosomes divides once in
this process, and the number of chromosomes becomes half in the daughter cells
from that of the mother cell. As the number of chromosome decreases this process
of cell division is called reductional division.
The question is why meiosis occurs. In mitosis, the number of chromosomes in the
daughter cells remains the same as that of their mother cell. Mitosis is essential for
the growth and asexual reproduction of organisms. In sexual reproduction, the
union of male and female gametes is required. If the number of chromosomes in
the reproductive cells would be the same as the somatic cell, the zygote would
contain twice number of chromosomes than that of the somatic cell. Suppose the
number of chromosomes in a somatic reproductive cell of an organism is 4. In the
zygote the number of chromosomes would be 8, and so the new organisms will
have body cells with 8 chromosomes, that is, twice that of its mother organism.
If every life cycle of an organism continues that way, the number of chromosome
would be doubled again and again. In the second chapter, we learnt that
chromosomes have the genes controlling the features of organisms. If the number
of chromosome is increased life cycle after life cycle, the offspring will be
fundamentally different. In sexual reproduction, even through the union of
male and female gametes, the number of chromosomes remains the same
generation after generation as the number of chromosomes becomes half in the
reproductive cells than that of the mother cell. At the time of development of
reproductive cells and in any stage of
the life cycle of plants in lower prepare Second division
groups, meiosis occurs. The feature of
possessing half number of chromo- SO <i 5
some is called haploid. When the a Val 1 &
haploid(n) cells are fused, the state of a N ~ »)
cell having two sets of chromosome is (A) 5) ny
called a diploid(2n). 2g "
AS meiosis occurs, the features in the Prenat TD - wr o
species of living organisms stay the = (On) By J
same, generation after generation. raf ees rf
Figure: 3.08 concept of meiosis cell division
Forma -08, Biology Class-9-10

58 Biology
Meiosis mainly occurs in the primordial germinal cells during the development of
gametes meiosis occurs. In the anthers and ovules of flowering plants, and in the
testes and ovaries of animals . During the development of the haploid meiosis
occurs in the zygotes of pollen from diploid pollen mother cells in mosses and
ferns.
Two consecutive divisions occur in a cell in the process of meiosis, called
meiosis- I and meiosis-II respectively.
In the first division (meiosis-I), the oo isssithaligerrataal a
number of chromosomes in a a) Sa
daughter cell becomes half that of a
its mother cell. The second division Ms Meiosis
is simply mitosis.
: Omen

Because of meiosis, the chromosome Fertilization
number in organisms remains constant. ’ n) @- Diploid
Genetic diversity is also found in species <

— Haploid
of organisms as the exchange of Zygote © =

enes occurs during meiosis Figure: 3.09 Formation of zygote

8 8 ° due to meiosis cell division
In reality, sometimes a new species may come into being if suddenly the number
of chromosomes increases. For example, one species of frog Xenopus laevis was
created when the chromosome set of another species Xenopus tropicalis was
doubled. In somatic cells (not reproductive cells) of different members of the
Plant kingdom (such as vegetables like potato), this is a normal process.
Sometimes we select this species of plant intentionally, or even create them in
a planned way because their size is comparatively , :
bigger. Such species are helpful in meeting the
increasing demand of food. Besides creating ”
homologous chromosomes through genetic
recombination, meiosis also contributes in |
maintaining genetic diversity or genetic variation. —— 4
Through sexual reproduction, a population | .
maintains its genetic diversity and creates unique Figure 3.10 :A. Xenopus tropicalis.
individuals in each new generation. B. Xenopus laevis Ss

Cell Division 59
Genetic variation among the members of a species is what ensures that the species
is able to survive in a changing environment. Ecosystems are not static, and species
need genetic variation on which natural selection can operate so that they can
adjust with a new or changed environment. If all of the individuals of a species are
too genetically similar and have no genetic variation, then there is less
possibility of surviving in a new situation. A single disease or change in the
environment could drive the species to extinction. But if genetic variation exists in
any species, there is the possibility of survival in a new environment. At least some
members of the species will be able to escape danger that may befall on them.
Thus, meiosis increases the possibility of survival by creating genetic diversity.
Exercise

Short answer questions
1. What is cell division?
2. What is equational cell division?
Essay type questions
1. Describe the different stages of mitosis with labeled diagrams.
2. Discuss the significance of mitosis.
OS5) Multiple choice questions
1. In which stage does a nucleus become larger?

a. Prophase b. Metaphase

c. Anaphase d. Telophase
2. Through meiosis-

i. the number of chromosomes is changed.

ii. haploid gametes are developed.

iii. consistency of features in organisms is maintained.
Which one of the following is correct?

RS a. i &ii b. ii & iii
Sei Biii d. i, ii & iii

60 Biology
Answer the following questions 3 and 4 based on the Figure given below.
©
ot ace
CF
Figure-A (*)
Figure-B
3. In the cell division of Figure A-
i. the mother cell and the daughter cells bear same features.
ii. the number of chromosome becomes half in the newly developed cell.
iii. chromosomes divide once.
Which one of the following is correct?
a.i &ii b. ii & iii
c.i & iii d. i, ii & iii
4. The division in the Figure B is different from that of Figure A and so-
a. the number of chromosomes remains the same in the daughter cells.
b. the number of chromosomes increases.
c. abnormal cells are produced.
d. the normal growth of the body occurs.
Creative questions
ed
“Stage-A “~~Stage-B ~
a. Where does mitosis occur?
b. Write in detail why meiosis is called ‘reductional division’.
c. Instage B what changes occur? Explain.
d. Explain what problems may emerge if the process expressed in the figures above %
is not accomplished properly. §

Chapter Four
es e
Bioenergetics
Sag ANT od I EAN ary COR | hy 3d IR AL TY Be pds
PO Oak, DRS AOS TY AEN hen tat ey
>< G © > te o> Be: <” Dcdpy tet oe In Se
Ld IRN See he SIERO, He ERAS
. res re PEA ot oC RESP aes SEO LATA
ay a Sg COS Se Ry ore AE PLR AT TALES een Ay VO
4 2 ees ud BN ee?) es | Pm? Ha KR ARON So Ris At) 9
TN A ie et AA NCE NE Saas
Thousands of biochemical reactions are being continuously carried out in the
cells of organisms for the maintenance of life. For these reactions, energy is
somewhat required. The sun is the main source of energy. The green plants
transforming solar energy into chemical energy produce the food carbohydrates
through the process of photosynthesis. Animals and non-green organisms cannot
directly utilize solar energy. They have to depend somehow on green plants for
the energy they require for the maintenance of their life. The main objective of
bioenergetics is to discuss the energy flow through the living system. In this
chapter, these cellular processes are discussed.
oD
S
N

62 Biology
® At the end of this chapter, we will be able to-
¢ Explain the role of ATP as the main source of energy in a living cell.
¢ Explain the production of carbohydrates through the process of photosynthesis.
¢ Explain the role of chlorophyll and light in photosynthesis.
¢ Describe the role of factors in photosynthesis.
¢ Evaluate the dependence of organism on photosynthesis.
¢ Explain respiration.
¢ Explain the concept and significance of aerobic and anaerobic respiration.
¢ Draw comparisons between photosynthesis and respiration.
¢ Examine of the necessity of chlorophyll and light in the process of
photosynthesis.
¢ Perform the experiment to demonstrate the release of energy in the form of
heat during respiration.
* Understand the contribution of plants in preparing food for organisms and
learn conscious behaviors towards plants.
Be
&

Bioenergetics 63
4.1 Bioenergetics and the role of ATP
The basic mechanism of production and utilisation of energy in the body of a
living organism is its bio-energy. This is not very different from the definition of
energy given in Physics. The energy we get from making and breaking of
chemical bonds in the molecules found in biological organisms is called by this
name. Living organisms continuously collect energy from the environment,
transform them from one form into another, sometimes preserve them, and
release them again in the environment.
ATP
a ver wr’
from Food / 7
ADP P
Adenosine\ y Diphosphate
Figure 4.01: The amount of energy needed to be supplied from outer source to produce
Adenosine triphosphate( ATP) by combining Adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and
phosphate, the same amount of energy is released when ATP is broken down into ADP
and inorganic phosphate. These two chemical reactions continue in cyclic order in living
cells.
The sun is the main source of energy. Adenine is a fundamental component of
DNA and RNA. It is a nitrogen base. Adenosine is composed of one molecule of
adenine attached to a pentose ( with five carbons) ribose sugar molecule.
Adenosine can be linked to a chain of one, two, or three phosphate groups to form
Adenosine Monophosphate (AMP), Adenosine Diphosphate (ADP), or
Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP). Energy needs to be supplied from an outside
source for the process of adding phosphate and this is called phosphorylation. In
the reverse process, energy is released when a phosphate group is removed. This
chemical reaction in known as dephosphorylation. Note here that 7.3 kilocalorie
(approx. 30.55 kilojoules) is captured and remain stored in the phosphate group
eo ofeach mole of ATP.
S
N

64 Biology
Two organelles of a living cell collect energy from the environment and
transform them into a form usable for the host cell. These two organelles are the
mitochondria and the plastid. Both have a set of special complexes of
molecules whose function is to store nutrients (such as glucose) or any
transitional energy as the bonding force of phosphate group in ATP. All
physiological functions, from muscle contraction to sensitivity, swallowing to
digesting food, respiration to speaking, shouting to smiling and, physical growth
to reproduction, controlling body temperature to maintain natural cell volume:
everything is completed by energy released from the breaking down of the
chemical bond of ATP. The food we eat is oxidized, and the energy released from
this oxidization is used to create ATP through phosphorylation. It breaks down
when energy is needed, and combines taking energy from food. This is like a
rechargeable battery. ATP stores energy and supplies energy for other reactions
when necessary. ATP is therefore called Biological coin or energy coin.
4.2 Photosynthesis
An important feature of green plants is that they produce carbohydrates from
carbon dioxide and water in the presence of sunlight. In green plants, the process
of the formation of carbohydrates is called photosynthesis. In this process, light
energy is transformed into chemical energy. The food produced by the green plant
is used to accomplish the metabolic processes required for its survival, and
remaining food is stored in fruits, stems or leaves. The existence of mankind and
other living creatures depends on the food produced and stored in plants. The
essential components for photosynthesis are (1) chlorophyll (2) light (3) water and
(4) carbon dioxide. Photosynthesis is a biochemical reaction shown below:

6CO2 + 12,0 TE —> CeHy20g + 6H20 + 60
The mesophyll tissue of a leaf is the main site of photosynthesis. Terrestrial green
plants absorb water from the soil through their roots and send it to the chloroplasts
in the mesophyll tissue. CO, from atmosphere is absorbed through the stomata,
and is sent to the same chloroplasts. Aquatic plants absorb the CO, which is
dissolved in water. The presence of CO, in the atmosphere and water is 0.03% FS

8

Bioenergetics 65
and 0.3% respectively. So, the rate of photosynthesis is higher in aquatic plants
than that of land plants.
(A ——- ; Sz Mesophy]ll cell
= a Oye
, ” Orgaey AAZS |- Mesophyll tissue
We Ua og
= VessE=
iB
Chloroplast ; ae
i Stoma
disc ora Gezels
a 7 \s7@ 0.)
siroma (B= = 2 QB
Figure: 4.02 Photosynthesis
Oxygen and water are by-products of photosynthesis. So, it is anoxidation-
reduction process. In this process HO is oxidised and CO, is reduced.
4.2.1 The Process of Photosynthesis
Photosynthesis is a long and complex process. In 1905, British physiologist
Blackman divided the process into two phases. They are the (1) light dependent
phase and the (2) light independent phase.
(1) Light dependent phase: Light energy is essential in the light dependent phase
of photosynthesis. In this phase, solar energy is transformed into chemical energy.
Through this process ATP (Adenosine triphosphate) and NADPH+H™ (reduced
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate) are produced. This converted
energy is stored in ATP. Chlorophyll plays avery important role in the
Forma -09, Biology Class-9-10

66 Biology
A ~ @ |
BNO
ee y/) 1 1 _ Gaurd cel
— S i b L] Companion cell
—_- A
Figure : 4.03 A Stoma
production of ATP and NADPH+Ht. Chlorophyll molecules absorb photons
from light, and with the help of the energy obtained from the photon absorbed,
ATP is formed through the addition of an inorganic phosphate with ADP. The
process of the formation of ATP is called photophosphorylation.
. light

ADP + Pi chlorophyll ATP
Oxygen, hydrogen and electrons are released through the hydrolysis of water
with the help of sunlight and chlorophyll. The process is called the photolysis of
water.
ATP is produced through the process of photophosphorylation. The electrons
reduce NADP, and produce NADPH+H". This process of producing ATP and
NADPH+H is called assimilatory power.
(2) Light independent phase or dark phase: No light is directly required in the
light independent phase, although the process can be carried out in presence of
light. Atmospheric CO, enters the cells through the stomata of the leaves. In this
phase, carbohydrates are produced by the reduction of CO, with the help of ATP
and NADPH+H* that was produced in the light phase. In green plants, the
pathways of CO, reduction have been identified, and they are briefly discussed
here: (a) Calvin cycle (b) Hatch & Slack pathway and ( c) Crassulacean acid
metabolism (CAM). Of these, the first two cycles are briefly discussed below.
(a) Calvin cycle or C3 cycle: The pathway of fixing CO2 is named after its
discoverers Calvin-Benson-Bassham (CBB) cycle or simply the Calvin cycle.
Melvin Ellis Calvin was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1961 for this discovery. In S
most plants, carbohydrates are produced through this process. Because the first “

Bioenergetics 67
stable compound, formed by this process is the 3-carbon compound
phosphoglyceric acid, and they called C3 plants.
H,0 (co,
Light oe
Grannum disc fi ie e . .
or thylakoid Light dependent ( Calvin )
(ight reaction mm Ses 3 cycle
5 ATP
(ark ein conic) Oe —
Oo, Carbohydrate
Figure : 4.04 Light dependent phase and Calvin Cycle
(b) C4 cycle or Hatch and Slack pathway: In 1966, two Australian scientists,
M.D.Hatch and CR.Slack discovered the reduction pathway of CO>. The first
stable substance formed in this pathway is 4-carbon based Oxaloacetic acid. So
this pathway is also called C, pathway.
In C, plants, both the Hatch and Slack cycle and the Calvin cycle are carried out
simultaneously. The rate of photosynthesis in C, plants is higher than that of in
C; plants. Some examples of C, plants are maize, sugarcanes, other plants of
grass type, motha grass and amaranthus.
4.2.2 Role of Chlorophyll in Photosynthesis
There is a direct relationship between the rate of photosynthesis and the amount
of chlorophyll in the leaves, because only chlorophyll can capture solar energy.
We know the old chloroplasts are disintegrated, and then new chloroplasts are
synthesised. The rate of photosynthesis is dependent on the rate of regeneration
of chloroplasts or the components of chloroplasts. For the maintenance of
photosynthesis, different components of chlorophyll are required to be
regenerated speedily in large amounts. But, too much chlorophyll in the cell
results in the shortage of enzymes and the rate of photosynthesis slows down.
4.2.3 Role of Light in Photosynthesis
o The importance of light in photosynthesis is immense. For the production of
8 carbohydrates from HO and COQ, the source of required energy is light. Sunlight

68 Biology
also takes part in the development of chlorophyll. With sunlight and when
stomata are open, CO, can enter the leaves, and take part in the production of
food. But only a small proportion of the light falling on the leaf, falling on leaf,
is used in photosynthesis. Red, blue, orange and purple portions of the visible
spectrum function better than that of green and yellow in the process of
photosynthesis. The rate of photosynthesis increases with the increase of light
upto a definite limit. If the amount of light increases too much, enzymes
disintegrate and cause the production of chlorophyll to reduce. Consequently the
rate of photosynthesis also decreases. Photosynthesis, generally, is carried out
well with light of wavelength between 400nm-480nm and 680nm.
4.2.4 Factors affecting photosynthesis
Besides light and chlorophyll, photosynthesis is also affected by other factors.
Some of the factors are external and some are internal. These factors are
mentioned below.
(a) External factors
Light: It has already been discussed.
Carbon dioxide: Photosynthesis cannot be carried out without carbon dioxide.
Food produced by this process is formed from the reduction of carbon dioxide.
The concentration of carbon dioxide in atmosphere is 0.03% but , plants can use
carbon dioxide upto 1% concentration. So, the rate of photosynthesis increases
with the increase of carbon dioxide upto 1% in atmosphere. If the amount of
carbon dioxide is increased to a very high level, acidic condition in the cells of
mesophyll tissue increases and stomata get closed, so the rate of photosynthesis,
then decreases.
Temperature: Temperature as a factor plays a very important role in the process
of photosynthesis. At a very low temperature (around 0°C) and a very high
temperature (above 45°C), photosynthesis cannot be carried out. The optimum
temperature for photosynthesis is from 22°C to 30°C. If temperature remains
below 22°C or above 35°C, the rate of photosynthesis will decrease.
Water: In photosynthesis the H+ (Hydrogen ion) required for the reduction of
CO, for the production of earbohydrates comes from water. In scarcity of x
>
Q

Bioenergetics 69
water, the guard cells of stomata become flaccid, and so, the entry of CO, is
disrupted. In the excessive scarcity of water, photosynthesis may be completely
stopped as the enzymes become inactivated.
Oxygen: If the concentration of oxygen increases in the atmosphere, the rate of
photosynthesis decreases. Conversely, the rate of photosynthesis increases with
the decrease of oxygen in the atmosphere. However, Photosynthesis stops
completly in the absence of oxygen.
Mineral nutrient elements: Nitrogen and magnesium are two main
components of chlorophyll. A leaf cannot synthesize chlorophyll in absence of
iron, and consequently, the leaves become yellow. Thus, the rate of photosynthesis
decreases if there are low levels of minerals in the soil.
Chemical substances: The process of photosynthesis is inhibited or completly
stopped if the Chloroform, Hydrogen sulfide, Methane or any poisonous gases
are present in the air.
(b) Internal factors
Age and number of leaves: Leaves that are too young or too old contain very
little chlorophyll. This is why the rate of photosynthesis in them is very low.
With the aging of leaves, number of chloroplasts also increases. The rate of
photosynthesis in the middle-aged leaves is the highest. With the increase of the
number of leaves, the rate of photosynthesis is accelerated.
Amount of carbohydrates: During photosynthesis, if the conduction of
carbohydrates is low, carbohydrates become clogged in the leaves. In the
evening, the rate of photosynthesis is low because of the accumulation of
carbohydrates that were produced earlier.
Potassium: The rate of photosynthesis is found to become slow if there is a
shortage of potassium, since potassium likely plays a role as a catalyst in the
process.
Enzymes: Several enzymes are required for the process of photosynthesis.
4.2.5 Importance of photosynthesis in living world
Photosynthesis is the most important biochemical process in the world. Through
the process, a bridge is developed between living things and sunlight. The
= importance of photosynthesis can be understood from the discussion below.
8

70 Biology
Observing the vast impact of this process on earth, some scientists have named it
the Bio-Chemical factory.
The sun is the main source of all energy. Only green plants can transform solar
energy into chemical energy and store as food through photosynthesis.
No animal can produce its food itself. The foods we eat such as rice, bread, fruits,
vegetables, fish, meat, milk, egg etc., are directly or indirectly derived from green
plants. So, all animals are completely dependent on green plants for their food,
and the green plants produce food through the process of photosynthesis. It can
be said that the food for all plants and animals on earth is produced through the
physiological process of photosynthesis. Photosynthesis is very important for
maintaining the balance of different components in the atmosphere, especially
the ratio of CO, and O. The presence of O2 and CO, gases in the atmosphere is
20.95% and 0.033% respectively.
For normal growth and survival of plants and animals on earth, these two gases
must be present in atmosphere within a normal limit. If the amount of the gases
is different than normal, the atmospheric environment becomes hostile to living
world. We know that cellular respiration is taking place in all living organisms
(both plants or animals) all the time. In respiration, organisms use O, and release
CO). If only respiration would have occurred in nature, a shortage of O2 and a
surplus of CO, would definitely be found in the atmosphere. As green plants
absorb CO, and release O, through the process of photosynthesis, the correct
ratio of Oy and CO, in the atmosphere is maintained. Nowadays a dangerous
situation has occurred as the ratio between these two gases is changing due to the
excessive cutting of trees. So we should plant trees in large numbers.
The progress of human civilization is dependent on photosynthesis directly and
indirectly. Foods, clothes, industrial materials (such as nylon, rayon, paper,
cellulose, timber, rubber), medicine (such as quinine, morphine), and fuel coal,
petrol, gas are produced from plants. So, if photosynthesis does not occur,
human civilization would be ruined, and the living world would be destroyed.
This is why photosynthesis is the most important biochemical process in the
living world. _
BS

Bioenergetics 71
®) Individual Activity

Activity-1: Experiment to show the necessity of light in the process of

photosynthesis.

Essentials: A potted plant with green leaves, black paper, 95% ethyl alcohol,

1 % iodine solution, paper clips, water, petridish,test tube, beaker, bunsen

burner or spirit lamp, dropper, forcep.

Procedure: The potted plant should be kept in

a dark place for 48 hours so that the leaves

become starchless. A part of a leaf on the

potted plant kept in the dark needs to be

covered with a piece of black paper and

clipped in such a way that no sun light can

reach it. Then, the potted plant should be kept

in sunlight for 6-7 hours. After 6-7 hours the

leaf, plucked off and black tape removed, will

be boiled in water for several minutes. Then, <==

in order to make it chlorophyll free, the leaf

should be again boiled in 95% ethyle alcohol

until it becomes faded. Now the leafistobe || — .

washed in water and drained with iodine Figure: 4.05 nhieu

solution. In order to avoid any accident

while boiling in alcohol, the test tube containing alcohol and the leaf should

be heated inside water in a beaker, instead of giving it any direct heat.

Observation: When the leaf is picked up from iodine solution, we can see

that except the covered part, the remaining part of the leaf becomes blue,

deep purple or black.

Conclusion: Because of the chemical reaction between starch and iodine,

starch will turn blue, deep purple or black. As sunlight cannot reach the part

of the leaf covered with the black paper, starch cannot be formed there
3 through photosynthesis. As starch is not formed in that part of the leaf, it
R

72 Biology
cannot turn blue, deep purple or black after reaction with the iodine
solution. Since sunlight has fallen on the remaining parts of the leaf, starch
was produced there. It proves that light is essential for the formation of
starch during photosynthesis.

Precautions

(1) Before performing the experiment, the potted plant should be kept in dark
for sometime (about 48 hours).

(2) Black paper should be of such quality that no light can pass through it.

(3) Before the test, the potted plant should be kept in sunlight at least for 6- 7 hours.

(4) While boiling the leaf into alcohol, it is better not to use direct heat.

®) Individual Activity
Activity-2: Experiment to show the necessity of chlorophyll in the process of
photosynthesis.

Essentials: Manihot or variegated leaf, alcohol, iodine solution, water,

petridish, test tube, bunsen burner, dropper, beaker.

Procedure: A manihot or variegated leaf is to be picked at noon and its green

portion marked. After boiling the leaf for a few minutes in water, it is then be

boiled in alcohol until its colour has faded. Now, after washing the leaf in

water, dip it in iodine solution. In order to avoid accidents while boiling in

alcohol, the test tube containing the alcohol and the leaf, should be heated in

water in a beaker instead of applying direct heat.

Observation: Only the green portion of the leaf becomes blue, deep purple,

or black after the leaf from iodine solution.

Conclusion: Only the green portion of the leaf produced carbohydrate

through photosynthesis, because of the presence of chlorophyll. Since there is

no chlorophyll in the non-green (orange or yellow) portion, carbohydrate was

not produced. Because of the carbohydrate, the green portion becomes blue or

deep purple or black in the iodine solution.

Precaution : While boiling the leaf in alcohol, it is better not to use direct heat. &
S
N

Bioenergetics 73
4.3 Respiration
In previous classes you learned about respiration and how through respiration,
organisms accomplish growth and derive energy. In this chapter, a more detailed
discussion will be made on respiration. Energy is required to maintain the process
of life of organisms, for activities like locomotion, healing of injury, growth and
reproduction. The main source of energy is the sun. Through photosynthesis,
plants store solar energy in carbohydrates as potential energy. The stored energy in
the food cannot be directly used by the organisms for the maintenance of their life.
During respiration, this potential energy is converted into kinetic energy (ATP) in
the form of heat, which supplies the necessary energy for various physiological
activities. Carbohydrates, fats, proteins and organic acids can be processed and
consumed through this process. These complex compounds in the bodies of living
organisms, are broken down into simple compounds and later transformed into
ATP. At normal temperature, the process of respiration occurs in the living
organisms around the clock. But, in the growing parts of a plant, such as in floral
and lateral buds, germinating seeds, and the tip of stem and root, the rate of
transpiration is very high. Respiration takes place in the cytoplasm and
mitochondria of a living cell.
4.3.1 Types of respiration
Based on the availability of oxygen during respiration, the process is divided into
two types: (1) Aerobic respiration (2) Anaerobic respiration.
(1) Aerobie respiration: The respiration process, which requires oxygen and
produces CO,, H,O and a large amount of energy by oxidising the respiratory
materials (carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, different kinds of organic acids)
completely, is called aerobic respiration. Aerobic respiration is the typical
respiratory process of plants and animals. It can be expressed. with the following
equation:
CeHi2Og + 602 —Hifferentenzymes | 6CQ, + 6H2O +enetgy(686 k Cal / Mole)
glucose
Forma -10, Biology Class-9-10

74 Biology

Through aerobic respiration, one molecule of glucose when completely oxidised

produces 6 molecules of CO, 6 molecules of H,O and 38 molecules of ATP.

(2) Anaerobic respiration: Respiration, which occurs in absence of oxygen, is

called anaerobic respiration. That is, in anaerobic respiration, respiratory

substances are partially oxidised with the help of enzymes to produce different

types of organic compounds (ethyl alcohol, lactic acid etc.), CO and a small

amount of energy.

CeH1206 _ enzyme 2C,HsOH + 2CO. +energy(56 k Cal / Mole)
glucose ethyl alcohol

Anaerobic respiration onle occurs in some microorganisms such as in bacteria,

yeast etc. .

Short description of aerobic respiration

Aerobic respiration is generally divided into four distinct stages:

Stage 1: Glycolysis

When oxidized through chemical reactions, one molecule of glucose (CgH;0¢)

is broken down into two molecules of pyruvic acid (C3H,03). Four molecules of

ATP (two ATP being used in the process) and two molecules of NADH+H* are

produced in this stage. In this process, no oxygen is required. It is the initial

stage for both aerobic and anaerobic respiration. It takes place in the cytoplasm

of a cell.

Stage-2: Acetyl Co-A formation

This stage also takes place in the cytoplasm. Each molecule of pyruvic acid,

produced in glycolysis, is transformed intoa molecule of 2-carbon acetyl co-A,

a molecule of CO, and a molecule of NADH+H* (i.e. from two molecules of

pyruvic acid two molecules of acetyl Co-enzyme-A, two molecules of CO, and

two molecules of NADH+H? are produced).

Stage-3: Kreb's cycle

In Kreb's cycle, 2-carbon acetyl Co-A, are oxidized to produce two molecules of

CO . This cycle is named after the British biochemist Sir Hans Kreb who

discovered the cycle. In this stage, acetyl Co-A enters the mitochondriaand ,,
S
N

Bioenergetics 75
participates in Kreb' s cycle. All the reactions of this cycle occur in the
mitochondria. In this cycle, from one molecule of acetyl Co-A, two molecules of
carbon dioxide, three molecules of NADH+H", one molecule of FADH?2 and one
molecule of GTP(Guanosine triphosphate) are produced. So, from two
molecules of acetyl Co-A, four molecules of CO}, six molecules of NADH+H*,
two molecules of FADH), and two molecules of GTP are produced.
Stage-4: Electron transport system
In this stage, NADH+H*(reduced NAD), and FADH,(reduced FAD) produced in
the above three stages are oxidised. Consequently ATP, water, electrons and
protons are produced. The energy is released electrons containing high-energy
move through through the electron transport system. This energy is used in the
formation of ATP. The electron transport system takes place in the mitochondria.
ES
e)
cO2 | 02
NADH.
(Sine GTP
2CO2
ea CO? +water+38 ATP+Heat energy |
s Figure 4.06 Aerobic respiration process

76 Biology
In aerobic respiration, one molecule of glucose is completely oxidized to
produces six molecule of CO,, six molecules of water and 38 ATP. This is shown
in the chart below.
Substance produced
Glycolysis 2 molecules pyruvic acid
2 molecules NADH+H* ‘| 2 molecules ATP | 6 ATP
4 molecules ATP 2 ATP
Acetyl Co-A 2 molecules acetyl Co-A__| 2 molecules 2 molecules CO,
2 molecules CO2z pyruvic acid 6 ATP
2 molecules NADH+H"
Kreb’s Cycle 4 molecules CO2z 2 molecules 4 molecules CO,
6 molecules NADH+H* acetyl Co-A 18 ATP
2 molecules FADH) 4 ATP
2 molecules GTP 2 ATP
38 ATP (net total ATP)
+6 molecules CO2
1 molecule NADH+H* or NADH, = 3 molecules ATP
1 molecule FADH2 = 2 molecules ATP
1 molecule GTP = 1 molecule ATP
Stages of anaerobic respiration
Anaerobic respiration has two stages. The two stages are:
Stage -1: Incomplete oxidation of glucose
In this stage, from one molecule of glucose, two molecules of pyruvic acid, four
molecules of ATP(two of them already being used) and two molecules of
NADH+H? are produced. This process looks similar to glycolysis in aerobic
respiration. However, it is considered that the oxidation of glucose here is
incomplete because the pyruvic acid that is produced here is reduced in the next
stage.
Stage-2: Incomplete reduction of Pyruvic Acid
With the help of enzymes in the cytoplasm, pyruvic acid is reduced to CO, and
ethyl alcohol, or lactic acid. In this case NAD (NADH+H’), which is reduced in
glycolysis, releases electron, proton and energy after oxidization and these are
used to produce lactic acid and in some cases ethanol from pyruvic acid. On the
other hand, oxidative phosphorylation does not take place because of absence of
oxygen. So in anaerobic respiration, only two molecules of ATP are produced .
from the glycolysis of glucose. 8

Bioenergetics 77
4.3.2 Factors affecting respiration
The factors affecting respiration are both external and internal.
(a) External factors: External factors affecting respiration are mentioned below:
Temperature: The rate of respiration becomes low at temperatures below
20°Celsius and above 45° Celsius. The optimum temperature for respiration is
from 20° Celsius to 45°Celsius.
Oxygen: In aerobic respiration, pyruvic acid is oxidised into CO, and H,0. So,
aerobic respiration cannot be carried out without oxygen.
Water: The supply of optimum amount of water keeps in respiration its normal
state. If the supply of water is too little or too much, respiration is inhibited.
Light: Though light is not required for respiration, the rate of respiration is
higher in day light, because the exchange of CO, and O, through stomata is
easier since the stomata is opened.
Carbon dioxide: If the amount of CO, in the air is increased, the rate of
respiration becomes slower.
b) Internal factors: The internal factors are mentioned below:
Food materials: In respiration energy, water and CO, are produced by breaking
down food materials (respiratory substance), so the amount and types of food
control the rate of respiration.
Enzymes: Many types of enzymes actively take part in the process of
respiration. So, a deficiency of enzymes causes the rate of respiration to slow.
Age of cells: In young cells (especially, cells in the meristematic tissue) the
greater amount of protoplasm causes respiration at a higher speed than in old
cells.
Inorganic salts: Though some salts inhibit the process of respiration, some salts
in the cells are essential for the running of normal activities of the cell and to
drive the process of respiration.
Intracellular water: Water is necessary to dissolve different respiratory
substances and to increase the effect of enzymes.

S

78 Biology
4.3.3 Significance of respiration
An organism performs all activities with the energy produced through
respiration. CO, released during respiration is used in the process of
photosynthesis to produce carbohydrate, the main food of living beings. This
process helps plants to absorb mineral salts, which indirectly drive the growth
and other physiological activities in a plant. The energy required for cell division,
is produced through respiration. So, this process also controls the growth of
organisms. Different sub-alkaline or organic acids are also produced, through
respiration and they help other physiological activities of life. Some bacteria
cannot live in the presence of oxygen. Their main source of energy is anaerobic
respiration. Through the process, ethyl alcohol is produced. This process is also
used in industry. Through this process, lactic acid, through fermentation,
produces curd, cheese etc. It is also used in making bread. Yeast produces alcohol
and CO, gas through the process fermentation. CO, makes the bread rise.
@) Individual Activity

Activity : Experiment to demonstrate the release of energy in the form of

heat during respiration.

Essentials: Two thermoflasks, two thermometers, two rubber corks with holes,

some germinated chick-peas, 10% mercuric chloride.

Procedure:Label one of the

thermoflasks as A and the other as E E

B. Some germinatd chickpeas along es ,——Thermoflask—_ a]

with some water are placed in bh. Sel

thermoflask A. A thermometer should HY |) rbermometer 7 —H

be inserted through the hole of a cork on by | all Germinatng seed | i sos

the 'flask A' with its opening sealed well. ||Qcy.09 - ere, fore

The remaining chickpeas will be placed Nes simi O75

in flask B after soaking in 10% mercuric LS 2 chloride SY

chloride solution for 10 minutes. (A) ) oe

Figure 4.07: Tharmoflask s

Bioenergetics 79
A thermometer will also be inserted in thermoflask B. Now, after taking the
initial temperature of each thermometer 'A' and B', they should be kept at rest.
Observation: The temperature of the thermoflask, containing germinated
seeds, marked 'A' rises. There is no temperature change in the other flask.
Conclusion: The peas in the flask 'A' carried out respiration and released of
energy in the form of heat, so the temperature in the flask rises. But, in
thermoflask 'B', as the seeds are dead and sterilized because they were soaked
in mercuric chloride solution, the respiration process does not occur. So the
temperature remains unchanged.
Precautions
I. The seeds should be fresh and well germinated.
2. The tip of the thermometer should be positioned at the middle of the stacks
of seeds.
(?)Exercise
% Short answer questions
1. What is photosynthesis? Represent it by a chemical equation.
2. What are the raw materials for photosynthesis?
3. What is respiration? Represent it by a chemical equation.
4. State the differences between photosynthesis and respiration.
5. State the differences between aerobic and anaerobic respiration.
© Essay type questions
1. Explain the dependence of organisms on photosynthesis.
« 2: Discuss the significance of respiration.
3
AQ

80 Biology
OS) Multiple choice questions
1. Which one is evolved as a by-product in the process of photosynthesis?
a. Water b. Carbohydrates
c. Oxygen d. Carbon dioxide
2. What number of ATP is produced in the glycolysis stage of respiration?
a.4 b.6
c.8 d. 18
Look at the stem and answer the questions no. 3 and 4.
SC 2) hg
8 CK 5 iS
OW 3
Figure X Figure Y
3. The functions of both A and B are —
i. to intake O,
ii. torelease H,O
iii. to remove CO,
Which one of the following is correct?
a.i& ii b.i & iii
c. ti & iii d. i, ii & iii
4. The process accomplished in the figure X-
i. keeps the environment cold
ii. helps the process of photosynthesis
iii. inhibits the process of respiration
Which one of the following is correct?
ai &ii b.i & iii
c. ti & iii d. i, ii & iii
=
&

Bioenergetics 81

Creative questions

1,

v
Re ss ?
O,

a. What is the chemical formula of pyruvic acid?

b. What do you understand by anaerobic respiration?

c. Explain how the component A is being produced.

d. What is the effects on plants if the production of A is inhibited? Explain.

2. Bipasha, a student of class X, likes to eat carrots. As the carrots contains glucose, it
provides her with energy. Her younger sister asks her how a plant derives energy
for its growth. She replies that a plant also derives energy through the respiration.

a. What is photolysis of water?

b. What are C, plants?

c. Explain with a chart how much energy is produced in Kreb’s cycle from two

molecules of food eaten by Bipasha.

d. What is the effects on plants if the process mentioned above is inhibited?

Forma -11, Biology Class-9-10

Chapter Five
Food, Nutrition and Digestion
{ Se a |
all *
| — , > te
"
. / x = ~ is
_—- i a. of
. eS OW te — 2 :
ee ~ LY Woe CO ~ ~
Living organisms live on food. Food is essential to survive. But the process of
consuming food is different in plants and animals. Different elements are
necessary for the nutrition of living organisms. In this chapter, food, nutrition
and digestion in the human body and plant nutrition are discussed.
=
8

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 83
® At the end of this chapter, we will be able to-

¢ Explain the necessity of essential elements for plant nutrition.

¢ Analyse nutrition deficiency symptoms in plants.

* Describe the main components of animal foods and their sources.

¢ Explain the ideal food pyramid.

* Explain the principles of consuming foods.

¢ Explain the symptoms, remedies, and prevention of nutrition deficiency
diseases.

¢ Explain kilocalories and kilojoules.

¢ Explain the amount of energy in nutrients and their conversion in calorie and joule.

* Explain the importance of body mass index (BMI) and body mass ratio

(BMR).

¢ Determine BMI and BMR.

* Determine the relation between BMR and energy spent.

¢ Determine how BMI differs according to the age and sex.

¢ Explain the importance of exercise and rest for good health.

° Explain the necessity of using chemicals in preserving foods.

* Analyse the effect of using excessive chemicals and colours in food on the human
body.

¢ Describe the organs of the alimentary canal along with accessory glands.

¢ Draw a labeled diagram of alimentary canal.

* Make yourself and other family members aware about intestinal diseases for

healthy living.

¢ Explain the functions of the liver.

¢ Explain the functions of the pancreas.

¢ Evaluate the role of enzymes in digestion.

* Explain the different, symptoms, remedies and prevention of different

intestinal diseases.

* Make a list of food consumed in last seven days and compare with the balanced
food.

¢ Draw a poster to raise awareness among people regarding the contribution of
nutrition to healthy living.

2 * Make yourself and others a were about the contribution of nutrition to healthy
8 living.

84 Biology
5.1 Plant Mineral Nutrition:
Plants absorb certain elements from the soil, air and water for growth and
nutrition.Plants can not live without these elements. These elements are called
nutrients. As most nutrients are taken from the soil, they are called mineral
nutrition. About 60 inorganic nutritional elements have been identified in plants.
Only 16 nutrients out of 60 are essential for the normal growth of plants. These
16 nutrients are collectively called essential elements because they are required
for the normal growth, physiological activities and reproduction of all types of
plants. Deficiency of any of these elements results in deficiency symptoms in
plants, and causes diseases in them. One element cannot be substituted by
another element.
Of these 16 nutrients, some are consumed in large amounts and others in low
amounts by plants. Based on the amount of essential mineral nutrition consumed
by plants, nutrients are divided into two groups: macro-nutrient (or macro-
element) and micro-nutrient (or micro-element).
(a) Macronutrient or macro element: The nutrient elements, which are
consumed by plants in large quantities for growth are called macronutrients or
macro-elements. Plants use 10 macronutrients or macro elements: are nitrogen (N),
potassium (K), phosphorus (P), calcium (Ca), magnesium (Mg), carbon (C), hydrogen
(H), oxygen (0), sulfur (S) and Iron (Fe).
(b) Micronutrient or microelement: The elements which are consumed in very
small quantities required for the normal growth of plants, are called micronutrients
or microelements. Plants use 6 micronutrients: are zinc (Zn), manganese (Mn),
molybdenum (Mo), boron (B), copper (Cu) and chlorine (Cl).
5.1.1 Source and Role of Nutrients
Source of Nutrients: Plants absorb carbon and oxygen from the atmosphere and
hydrogen and oxygen from water.Other elements are absorbed from the soil
through roots. These elements are found in the soil in the form the of different
salts. Plants cannot absorb them as salts directly. They are absorbed in ionic
form, such as C,"", M,", NH’, NOs, K* etc. x
>
N

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 85
The Role of different mineral elements in plant nutrition: Mineral nutrients
play a very important role in the normal growth of plants.The role of some
macronutrients are mentioned below.
Nitrogen : Nitrogen is an essential element of nucleic acid, proteins and
chlorophyll. Nitrogen plays a very important role in general growth of plants and
increases the amount of water in plant tissues. The formation of chlorophyll is
hindered if there is a shortage of nitrogen. If the formation of chlorophyll is
hindered, the production of food affected. And if the production of food is
interrupted, the release of energy through respiration will be lessened.
Magnesium: Magnesium is an important component of chlorophyll and helps
the process of respiration. If there is a shortage of magnesium in a plant, the
formation of chlorophyll molecule and the production of food through
photosynthesis will be hampered.
Potassium : Potassium helps a plant absorb water. It also plays an important role
in opening and closing stomata. In addition, it helps the development and growth
of roots, flower and fruits. Potassium also controls the growth of plants through
cell division.
Phosphorous : Phosphorous is essential for the development of roots.
It is the structural component of DNA, RNA and ATP in living cells. So, without
phosphorous, nutrition of plants is not possible. Phosphorous is also an essential
element for the elongation of roots.
Iron : Iron is the structural component of cytochrome, and so it is required for
aerobic respiration. Iron also plays an important role in the formation of
chlorophyll.
Becouse of their role in nutrition, chemical fertilizers such as urea for nitrogen,
muriate of potash for potassium chloride, and triple super phosphate for
phosphorus are used in cultivating fields for high yields.
Micronutrients also plays an important role for the normal growth of plants. For
instance :
Manganese : Manganese is needed to construct and maintain chloroplasts.
Copper : Copper plays an important role in the respiration process.
Boron : Boron is required for the active growing regions of plants, and it also
plays a role in the tranportation of sugar.
= Molybdenum : Molybdenum is essential for the fixation of nitrogen by microorganisms.
“Chlorine : Chlorine is necessary for the growth of root and stem of sugar beet.

86 Biology
5.1.2 Symptoms of Nutrient Deficiencies: In case of deficiency of any
nutrients, symptoms are visible in plants. These symptoms are called deficiency
symptoms. By observing the symptoms, one can assess which nutrient the plant
lacks. Some deficiency symptoms associated with several nutrients are
mentioned below.

Nitrogen (N): The formation of chlorophyll is —_

inhibited if the deficiency of nitrogen occurs in a te

plant. Because of this, green leaves gradually turn

yellow. Without chlorophyll, other pigments also

appear yellow. The condition of leaves becoming .

yellow is called chlorosis. Deficiency of iron,

manganese or copper may also cause chlorosis as -N

they are also responsible for the production of aay i OS

chlorophyll in various ways. The growth and ath

division of cells is decreased and ultimately the yaw

total growth of a plant is reduced. The figures show y a _—~

leaves with nitrogen deficiency and healthy leaves. : %

Phosphorus (P): Leaves turn purple if a deficiency

of phosphorus occurs in them. Necrotic spots 2 Ee Py

develop in the leaves. Shedding of leaves, flowers | aah Wh ae

and fruits may occur, The plant becomes stunted. | |@ Se: in!

Plants usually display no obvious early symptoms of Li pS

phosphorus deficiency. By the time a visual >

deficiency is recognized, it may be too late to take ’

any action.

Potassium (K): In deficiency of potassium, the tip

and the blade of leaf turn yellow and necrotic spots , Nae

are developed. Interveinal chlorosis occurs. Leaves Na gl =

may wilt and look scorched along the leaf margin, é Zoe =

The Growth of the plant is reduced, and apical and | SGM od

lateral buds die. S

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 87
Calcium (Ca): The normal level of calcium in the
cytosol of the cell is related to the functioning of
mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum. If the level .
decreases, Oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria, as
well as the protein trafficking process in endoplasmic
reticulum, is hampered. Young leaves face chlorosis due
to deficiency of calcium, and the growing apical parts of a
plant die. At the time of flowering in plants, stems dry up
and the plants wilt.
Magnesium (Mg): Chlorophyil is not synthesized if there ) rs:
isa deficiency of magnesium, so the green colour gets paler é
and the rate of photosynthesis is reduced. Chlorosis occurs
deeply and rapidly in the middle places of the veins. .
Iron (Fe): If there is a deficiency of iron, young leaves ye
first turn pale. It also causes yellowing of young leaves,
starting between the leaf veins and resulting in chlorosis. Gok 3
Sometimes the whole leaf becomes pale. The stem gets (a7 Se
weak and short, G
Sulfur (S): Sulfur not only serves as a structural
component of protein, hormones and vitamins but also
maintains the balance of water in cell. Leaves show i
general chlorosis, and reddish and purple spots appear als
on them. Chlorosis happens more with young leaves *
and less in old ones. The tips of the stems die.  &
Inter-nodes of stems become short, and consequently ty
the plant becomes stunted.
Boron (B): Boron gives strength to a cell by being
inside the of cell wall, It also regulates various reactions | VG
in the metabolism process.Necrosis of meristematic | “AD 2
tissue in growing regions occurs when there is a
deficiency of boron. The Growth of young leaves is |e is
inhibited and the leaves lose their proper shape become |#=aaun WED
brittle, rupturing their surface. The initiation of floral bud

s is obstructed.

88 Biology
®) Individual Activity
Activity: The teacher will ask the students to prepare a chart stating the
different deficiency symptoms of different mineral nutrients.
5.2 Food and Nutrition of Animal:
You have uarned in Class six and eight that food is essential for life. In the same
way, a balanced diet is necessary for good health. When oxidized, foods produce
heat and energy in the body. In the previous chapter, you learned how heat and
energy are produced by chemical reactions in the respiration process. From the
beginning to the end of life, the influence of chemical reactions is endless. To
move, play or do other activities energy is necessary. We get this energy from
food. The substances which are digested and absorbed within the body and help
in repairing itself, staying healthy, supplies nourishment for vital activities,
protect from diseases and produce heat and energy, are called food.
5.2.1 Components of food and their sources: All the above mentioned tasks are
essential for our living. Different types of food are necessary to perform these
tasks properly. Foods are the chemical combination of many compounds. These
chemical substances are the ingredients of food. Nutrition exists within these
ingredients and are called nutrients. Most of the foods contain more than one
nutrient, but they are classified into the category of the nutrient that is present in
greater quantity compared to other nutrients in that food. Depending on the
principle of ingredients, foods are divided into three classes:
a. Protein : Helps in growth and repair.
b. Carbohydrate: Helps in producing energy.
c. Fat and oils: Produces heat and energy.
Besides these, three other components are essential for the body :
d. Vitamins: Increases immunity power and enhances chemical reactions.
e. Minerals: Takes part in various organic functions.
f. Water: Keeps the balance of water and temperature. Regulates cell activity and
contains organelles. S
N

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 89
There is also another component. Although it is not a nutrient, it is nevertheless an
important component of our diet.

g. Fiber or Roughage: Roughage absorbs water, increases the amount of stool, and
helps in bowel function.

(a) Proteins: Proteins are composed of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen.
Protein is 16% nitrogen. Sulpner, phosphorus and iron are also present in small
quantities. Due to the presence of nitrogen, sulpher, phosphorus and iron, the
importance of protein is different from carbohydrate and fat. Protein is the only
source of nitrogen. That's why it is considered an important component.

Sources of Protein : We have learned earlier that we get protein from fish, meat,
eggs, milk, pulse, dried fish, bean seed, nuts etc. Proteins are of two kinds:

1) Animal protein and 2) Plant protein.

Animal protein: Fish, meat, eggs, cheese,

posset, liver are sources of animal protein.

Amino acids, which are essential for the

body, can be found in these foods. Zé <<

Plant protein: Pulses ( dal), nuts, bean S ><
seeds etc. are the sources of plant proteins. a,
Ones it was thought that these are less <G >)
RII, because piatt pene does not Gy o@&g

contain all the essential amino acid. In fact, — i

Sometimes two or more plant proteins are

cooked together. But this does not have any

significant effect on the proportion of amino

acids.

Forma -12, Biology Class-9-10

90 Biology
(b) Carbohydrates: Carbohydrates are the main sources of energy. They are
composed of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. Carbohydrates are deposited in
roots, stems, flowers and seeds in different forms. Glucose in fruit juice, lactose
in milk, starch in wheat, potato, rice etc. are different forms of carbohydrates.
According to composition, carbohydrates are of three types.The formation and
composition of three types of carbohydrates are shown in the table below.
Table 10.2: Classification of carbohydrates. :
Carbohydrates Composition Example Sources
Mono-saccharide | One molecule of | Glucose Honey, fruit juice.
glucose
Di-saccharide | Two molecules of) Sucrose, lactose. | Sugar and milk.
glucose
Poly-saccharide | Many molecules of | Carbohydrate, Rice, ata, potato,
glucose glycogen. green vegetables
We mostly get carbohydrates from rice, wheat, and potato. In raw form
carbohydrates can not be easily digested. That is why we eat foods like potato,
rice, wheat etc. after cooking. aay
Carbohydrates are then digested and turned _— s
into glucose. Di-saccharides and poly ——S Canta \
saccharides turn into simple carbohydrates
(glucose) through digestion and become foe, > =~
ready for absorption. For human nutrition, P es. i.)
simple carbohydrates are very important. PRESSES bed
The Human body can only absorb glucose. Figure: 5.02 Carbohydrates
(c) Fats: Fat is an essential component of food. It is composed of carbon, hydrogen
and oxygen and its main function is to produce heat. It remains in the stomach for a
long time, so we do not feel hungry. Fat is stored beneath the skin. It is also stored
in various organs, such as, in the brain and muscles. These stored fats are used when
food is not available. It contains more than twice as many calories as carbohydrates
and proteins .
The calorie is the measuring unit of energy in food. Food, cooked with oil or ghee,
makes the food tasty. At the same time it also increases the nutritional value, such
as, fried potato instead of boiled potato, luchi or porota in stead of roti are not only
tasty but also contain more calories. Some fats contain vitamin 'A', some contain x
vitamin 'E'. Ss

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 91

According to the sources, fats are of two kinds. Such as - 1) Vegetable fat and

2) Animal fat.

1) Vegetable fat : Soyabean, mustard, nuts,

sunflower and corn oils are used as

vegetables oils. Soyabean oil is the best one.

2) Animal fats : Fats, ghee, dalda etc. are , oa Oo I

animal fats. Egg yolk contains fat but the

white part of the egg does not. Fats are ES

insoluble in water. Fat floats on water =e Ye”

because it is lighter than water. The daily .

requirement of a healthy adult person is Figure: 5.03 Fats

50-60 gm of fat.

(d) Vitamins: Very small amount of vitamins is needed for health; even so, its

importance is unlimited. To grow and to remain healthy vitamins are absolutely

necessary. A balanced diet contains different types of nutrients, so sufficient

vitamins can be obtained from a balanced diet. The absence of vitamins in

regular diet cause vitamin - deficiency diseases. It can even cause severe

harmful effects on the body, or even death. Vitamins are of two types, as : 1) Fat

soluble vitamins and 2) Water soluble vitamins. Vitamin 'A', 'D', 'E' and 'K' are

soluble in fat and vitamin B-complex and vitamin 'C' are soluble in water.

Fat soluble vitamins

Vitamin A: Vitamin A is obtained from milk, butter, fats, eggs, carrot, mango,

jack fruit, coloured vegetables, mola fish etc.

Vitamin D: Milk, eggs, liver, dairy products, fish oil, edible oil etc. are the

sources of vitamin D.

Vitamin E & K: Vitamin E and vitamin K can be obtained from all the above

mentioned foods.

Water soluble vitamins

Vitamin B: Yeast, husking rice, red ata, sprout gram, peas, cauliflower, pea nut,
o beans, liver, heart, milk, eggs, meat, green vegetables etc. are the sources of vitamin B.
3

92 Biology
Vitamin C: Vitamin C can be obtained from guava, pomelo, star fruit, orange,
cabbage, tomato, pineapple, green chili, fresh vegetables etc.

(e) Mineral salts or Minerals: Mineral salts are essential for body cells and
body fluids. The human body contains mineral salts, such as: calcium, iron,
sulphur, zinc, sodium, potassium, iodine etc. These ingredients do not exist as
stand-alone elements. These elements are in food and the body as a compound
with other elements, forming various organic and inorganic salts. Mineral salts
regulate body building and internal functions.

Mineral salts are the most essential elements in the formation of teeth, muscles, bones,
enzymes and hormones. They plays a particular role in nerve impulses, muscle
contraction, maintaining water balance in body cells, and keeping balance of acid and
base.

Milk, curd, cheese, small fishes (mola-dhela), pulses, green vegetables, red
leaves, arum leaves etc. are sources of calcium. Liver, green vegetables, meat,
egg yolk, arum leaves contain iron. Phosphorous is obtained from milk, fish,
meat, nuts, pulses. Table salt, chips, salty food, cheese, nuts, pickles etc. contain
sodium. Fish, meat, nuts, pulses, banana, potatoes, carrots, apples etc. contain
potassium. The sources of iodine are sea weeds, sea fish, meat and algae.

(f) Water: The other name of water is life. For the existence of life, of water is
just as important as oxygen. Water is an most essential component for nutrition.
Body building and internal functions are not possible without water. There are
three function of water :(1) Body formation (2) Control of internal functions
and (3) Elimination of waste products.

(1) Body formation: Body formation and maintenance can not be possible
without water. At least 50-65% of body weight of the human body is water.

(2) Control of internal functions: No chemical reaction can occur inside the
body without water. It acts as a solvent. Blood transport is possible only because
of water. Nutrients from digested food in blood and oxygen are carried to the cells
through water. Mineral salts remain dissolved in body fluid. Nutrients from
digested food, dissolved in to water, are absorbed in to blood through the small
intestine. 8

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 93
(3) Elimination of waste products: Water helps to remove waste products from
the body. A large amount of water leaves the body with urine, stools, sweat etc.
The demand of water for the body depends on the person’s age, labour, food habits
and environmental conditions. For example, a man whose daily calorie demand
is 2000 Kilocalorie(kcal), he needs two liters of water daily.
(g) Fiber or Roughage: Dietary fiber or roughage is found in the outer covering
of cereals, vegetables, skin of fruits, stem of plants, roots, leaves, etc. These are
the cellulose and lignin of cell walls. Similar to how bones make up the structure
of the body, cellulose and roughage make up the structure of plants. These are
complex carbohydrates. Human beings can not digest cellulose as cows, goats
and buffalo can. Roughage absorbs water, increases the amount of feces and
helps to eliminate stools. Roughage enriched food also absorbs harmful products
from the intestine. It is assumed that roughage reduces the risk of cancer to some
extent. Roughage plays a role in reducing obesity, the tendency of fat deposition,
and hunger.
5.2.2 An Ideal Food Pyramid
A balanced diet includes carbohydrates, vegetables, fruits, protein, fats or oils. If
we observe a balanced food chart of a teenage boy or girl, or an adult male or
female, we may find the presence of carbohydrates is the most in the list. Placing
carbohydrates at the bottom and considering the quantities of vegetables, fruits,
proteins, fats and oils successively, if we arrange these substances in
successive tiers, it looks like a pyramid. This is called the ideal food pyramid.
This diagram shows carbohydrates at the base and fats and oils at the apex.
The necessary foods that we eat daily, are shown in the form of pyramid
(Fig: 5.04). You may notice the highest quantity is at the base and the lowest
quantity is at the apex. We should eat carbohydrates in a large quantity as the
largest level at the base indicates rice, potato, bread etc. Vegetables, fruits are
placed in the next tier. These substances should be eaten in less than
carbohydrates.

=

8

94 Biology
Fish, meat, eggs, milk, pulses, cheese, posset, curds should be eaten in lesser
quantities than fruits and vegetables. Sweets, fat and oil should be eaten the least.
We have to choose what we eat according to the food pyramid, and then we will
be able to eat a balanced diet. Generally we eat tasty foods the most. This habit is
not good for health. So we should make a habit of eating food in moderation.
ry
Fats group >
|__|
C= and Mineral . a ) f / ;
group od
Be Protein group
a (
S 3 fi :
te : oo (set) | Carbohydrates group
Figure-5.04: Ideal food pyramid

5.2.3 Principles of Food Habit
Selection of food or a balanced diet is a precondition for healthy living. Every
body should know the rules of healthy eating because then it becomes simpler to
fulfill the demands of family members taking into account food selection, food
calories, family income etc. 29

S

N

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 95
Characteristics of balanced diet
1. People should have the ability to produce adequate energy through metabolism.
2. Protein, fats and carbohydrates should be eaten proportionately.
3. Include fresh fruits and vegetables in the diet for the supply of necessary
vitamins, roughage or cellulose.

4. There must be sufficient water and minerals.
5. The diet must be easily digestible.
There is no alternative to a balanced diet for a healthy life. For a well developed
body it is important to make a food chart or menu by including foods that contain
six ingredients. A realistic menu can be prepared if the demands of the body,
availability of food and family income are taken into consideration while selecting
items or planning the menu. A menu can be made or chalked out by selecting the
low cost food that contains the equal or same food value. Selecting low cost food,
that contains equal food value (instead of costly food) is a good practice.
Preparing a balanced food chart
In order to prepare a balanced food chart, some issues should be taken into
consideration. For instance-
1. Person's sex, age, occupation and health condition.
2. Knowledge about food value.
3. Presence of adequate protein supply for repairing and body building.
4. Presence of adequate amount of vitamins, minerals and water.
5. Knowledge regarding climate, weather and food habit.
6. Economic condition of the family and number of family members.
Observe the table mentioned below. You will learn about amount of food needed for
male and female persons of different age.
Table (A) Food chart for adult male and female
In order to get the required amount of calories per day, adult males or females should
consume food mentioned in the following chart. Pregnant and nursing mothers need
extra food. Young children may eat less food according to their age.

x

&

96 Biology
grains work working | working work working | working
(gm) (gm) (gm) (gm) (gm) (gm)
bean
elt ete leit
vegetables
come | “| PP Pete | |
vegetables
ew | PPO eee
[Mik | 150 | 200 | 250 | 100 | 150 | 200 |
Table B: General food value/nutritional value of some food in Bangladesh
This table has been prepared on the basis of food value or nutritional value of
food grains in Bangladesh. This is published and accepted by the Institute of
Nutrition and Food Science (INFS, 1975). Calories have been determined for
every 100 gms edible part of food.
Name of Energy
x
| Pumpkin | s

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 97
food grains kilocalorie
[Ben | OH
| Prawn | 8
ce
| Cookingoil | 900
®) Individual Activity
Activity: Prepare a food list of carbohydrates, proteins and fats from the list above.
Additional matters that should be of special consideration-
> Maintain cleanliness, while preparing food, serving, and eating food.
> Drink sufficient water daily. Water must be boiled before drinking.
> Make a habit of eating seasonal fruits, fresh vegetables. These must be included
in daily food chart. A void canned and frozen vegetables.
@) Individual Activity
Activity: Students will make a food chart and compare it with the balanced diet
and place it in the class room.
Forma -13, Biology Class-9-10

98 Biology
5.3 Vitamin deficiency diseases

(a) Goiter : Goiter indicates any kind of ) - Se
swelling of the thyroid gland, although not all L a .
swellings of the thyroid gland are goiters. The ; % i \\
thyroid can be enlarged abnormally due to / — ‘
tumours, cancer or other inflammation but /, |. = |

these are not goiters. Again, goiter does not "J j / x J
indicate any particular disease of the thyroid; y I - i
rather it is a general symptom for different [J , \ y ,
diseases related to thyroid. Goiter can be caused * .

for various reasons. A deficiency of iodine in ‘ Ws

food is one of the main reasons of goiter. / Figure: 5.05 Goiter patient
There is less iodine in the soil of the regions that are away from the sea, such as
North Bengal and hilly areas. So people of these regions tend to suffer more
from this disease.

(b) Night blindness: The disease Xerophthalmia occurs due to the deficiency of
vitamin A. If the deficiency is not treated, the level and intensity of the disease
increases. There are seven to eight levels of xerophthalmia and night blindness
is the lowest level. Generally, 2-5 year old children suffer from this disease.
The sensory rod cells of the eyes get damaged. The patient can not see in dim
light. Everything seems to be hazy. If the disease worsens, the cornea turns
cloudy. These are the symptoms of night blindness. Starting from night
blindness, the fourth to fifth level of xerophthalmia can be cured by applying
vitamin A supplements and medicines. If the disease becomes acute, there is no
other alternative but surgical intervention or corneal transplant. Vitamin ‘A'
enriched food, such as, fish liver oil, liver, green vegetables, yellow and orange
fruits and vegetables (ripe mango, banana, sweet pumpkin, carrot etc.) mola and
dhela fish,or if necessary vitamin A capsule should be taken to prevent the
disease.

(c) Rickets: This is not a viral or bacterial disease. Deficiency of vitamin 'D' is
the cause of this disease. This vitamin is essential for the absorption of calcium
and phosphorous in the intestine, formation of teeth and bones. Milk, butter,
eggs, cod liver oil are the sources of vitamin 'D'. Cholesterol stored in human s

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 99
skin can also produce vitamin D with the help of ultra violet ray of the sun, but in
that case, the last stage of producing vitamin D occurs in the kidneys. The
symptoms of this disease are weakening of the bones, swelling of the joints, and
bending of the bones, especially the leg bones. This structure of the body can not
be a maintained, as bones become brittle and the thorax turns narrow. It is
necessary to feed children vitamin 'D' enriched food. It is wise to keep new born
babies in sunlight, keeping the eyes and reproductive organs covered. A
deficiency of vitamin D may occur if whole body remains covered with dark or
black clothes regularly or if one stay indoors for a long period of time.
(d) Anemia: Anemia is a general disease often occurring in children and females
in our country. Anemia occurs when the density of haemoglobin is less than
normal with respect to age and gender. This disease occurs due to the deficiency
of the essential elements of food like iron, folic acid, or vitamin B-12. There are
many causes of anemia and it may occur even without the deficiency of any
nutrients. The deficiency of iron based protein is the general cause of anemia in
Bangladesh. Children, women of reproductive age group (15 —45 years) and
pregnant mothers often suffer from this disease. There may be various causes of
having iron deficiency anemia, such as - excessive blood loss, worms, shortage
of iron in food in growing children and pregnant mothers, obstruction in
absorption of iron based food, or infection in intestine. Symptoms of this disease
are: feeling weak, headache, depression, insomnia, loss of appetite, palpitation,
vision suddenly goes dark.
To prevent this disease, eating iron enriched food, Such as : kidney bean, liver,
meat, eggs, peanut, vegetables, molasses etc. is necessary. If anemia is due to the
infection of worms in the intestine, the patient needs to take worm destroying
drugs. If necessary, this disease can be prevented by taking iron supplements
under doctors’ advice. Giving treatment of anemia without doctors’ advice may
be dangerous because there are some cases of anemia (like thalassemia) where
taking a normal dose of iron supplements or food may worsen the condition of
the patient. So it is necessary to diagnose the disease properly before treating the
anemia.

%

8

100 Biology
(@)) Individual Activity

Activity: Draw a poster regarding the contribution of nutrition to healthy living.
5.4 Energy in food ingredients
We know that food gives us nutrition and energy. But do we know what amount
of food gives us what amount of energy? Is the energy yielded by different
nutrients the same? Among the six nutrients, only proteins, carbohydrates and
fats can produce energy. The other three ingredients can not.
Energy consumption depends on muscle contraction and relaxation. The more the
muscles will contract or expand, the more energy will be spent,. Muscles of our
body help in movement and locomotion. We can do any work because of our
muscles, such as : moving, walking, running, sitting ete. How much energy is
spent to do these activities?
The consumption of energy depends on work. So, is energy required if we do not
walk or move? If we do not perform any work, only pass our time idly, we still
need food. We feel hungry. Energy is also spent when resting. How does it
happen? When taking rest our external organs, like-hand, legs do not work. But
during respiration, our heart continues to work. So all the muscles, involved in
these functions, contract and relax to perform work as a whole, so
consumption of energy still goes on. This energy is called basic metabolic energy.
How much energy is required for a person depends on three factors. (1) Basic
metabolic rate (2) Type of daily physical labour and (3) Influence of food. The
demand for calories also depends on body growth, physical condition and
climate.

5

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 101
5.4.1 Standard unit to Calculate Food Energy
You know that there are various forms of energy. The energy released from food
is heat energy. The unit to measure heat energy is the calorie. According to
Physics, 1000 calorie or 1 kilocalorie is required to increase the temperature of 1
kilogram (1000 gram) by 1 degree centigrade. Nutritionists also use the word
calorie to indicate food energy, but food calorie, in fact, is kilocalorie. To avoid
anyconfusion, the word food calorie or kilocalorie has been used in this book.
According to International standards ‘kilojoule’ should be used instead of
kilocalorie. In this case 1 food calorie=1kilocalorie = 4.2 kilojoule (approx).
5.4.2 Determining food energy in food nutrients
Every day we consume different types of nutrients. We eat everything starting
from rice, khichuri, polao, meat to fruits, vegetables, drinks etc. So, to measure
the amount of energy of the nutrients we have to know about the nature of the
foods.
Nature of the nutrients in mixed food and pure foods
Nature of food means whether it is mixed or single food. Mixed food like milk, egg,
khichuri, and guava contains more than one nutrient. On the other hand, single food
like sugar, glucose contains only one nutrient (only carbohydrate).
Nutrients and determining of its amount
After knowing the nature of the food, we should know which food contains
what nutrients in what amounts. The nutritional constituents, their amounts and
food value can be known from food value chart.
Determining calorie
After knowing about the ingredients of the food and their amounts, we have to
calculate the calories of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats. In this case we
calculate it considering the calorie value of vitamins, mineral salts and water as
zero. The following table shows the amount of calories per gram of element.
Ingredients/ gm Calorie
Carbohydrate 4
Protein 4
= Fat 9
oe

102 Biology

@) Example:

Question: If 20 gm chira contains 15.4 gm carbohydrate (77%), 1.32 gm protein

(6.6%) and 0.24 gm fat, what is the calorie of 1 kg chira?

Answer: Let us determine the calorie of 20 gms of chira. According to the table

the same amount of chira contains -

15.4 gm carbon (77%)

1.32 gm protein (6.6%)

0.24 gm fats (1.2%)

Then, according to formula :

From 15.4 gm carbon 15.4 x 4 = 61.60 calorie.

From 1.32 gm protein 1.32 x 4 = 5.28 food calorie.

From 0.24 gm fat 0.24 x 9 = 2.16 food calorie.

Therefore, the net calorie = 69.04 food calorie or 69.04 kilocalorie

So, calorie value of lkg of chira = eo

= 3452 calorie.

Since 1 kilocalorie = 4.2 kilojoule.

Therefore, 3452 kilocalorie = 14,490 kilojoule (approx).

An adult person usually needs 2000 to 2500 calorie but this can be more or less

depending on gender or nature of activities. If calorie intake is more than

necessary, it is stored in the body as fat.

@) Individual Activity

Activity: Suppose your daily need is 2000 calories. Considering balanced
diet, prepare a menu for a day for yourself with the food of your liking.

2S
S
N

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 103
5.5 Basal Metabolic Rate(BMR) and Body Mass Index(BMI):
The Basal Metabolic Rate indicates the energy used by human beings at resting
stage. The Body Mass Index indicates the structure of the body and the presence
of fats. So, Body mass index indicates the relation between the height and
deposition of fat of a person of particular age for healthy living and maintaining
good health. To determine a person's sound health and obesity these two scales
are very important.
5.5.1 Determining BMR value
To calculate BMR value is a bit difficult, its equations are with respect to sex and
age. To get an idea about BMR, Harris Benedict's popular formula is used.
BMR (female) = 655 + (9.6 x weight. kg)+ (1.8 x height. cm)- (4.7 x age. year)
BMR (male) = 66+(13.7 x weight. Kg)+ (5 x height. cm)- (6.8 x age. year)
Suppose a woman is 33 years old, height 165 cm and weight is 94 kg.
So, her BMR = 655 + (9.6 x 94) + (1.8 x 165)- (4.7 x 33)
= 655 + 902.4 + 297 - 155.1
= 1699 .3 calorie.
Calorie demand per day can be measured by using the table below.
Physical condition Calorie

Not working BMR value x 1.2

Light working, playing 2-3 days in a week. BMR value x 1.375

Working, sufficient playing 2-3 days in a week. BMR value x 1.55

Working, playing everyday in a week. BMR value x 1.725

Hard working, sufficient jumping, running and playing. BMR value x 1.9
Example: If the above mentioned woman is hard working , plays every day, and if her
BMR is 1699.3, then her calorie demand will be ( 1699.3 X 1.725)=2931.29. That means
if the woman consumes around 3000 kilocalorie, she can maintain her weight.
Relation between BMR and energy spent
The value of BMR depends on sex, age, body structure and food habit. BMR has controls
the production of 60-75 percent energy in our body. Our body gets 10%-12% of energy
from taking in food and gets 20%-30% of energy through physical activities. The BMR
value declines with increasing age. Some people diet to keep the body slim, so the BMR
value declines more. As a result there is no more scope of getting slim by dieting. BMR

vo can be raised or increased by adequate physical work. Health can be kept sound by
8 following certain rules.

104 Biology
5.5.2 Determining BMI value
BMI = Body weight (kg)/ height of the body. (meter)
As for example: A man, having 125 cm (1.25 meter) height and 50 kg weight, has 32 BMI.
BMI scales:
Below18.5 Under weight; weight to be increased by taking
adequate food.
18.5-24.9 Ideal scale for good health.
25-29.9 Over weight. Necessary to decrease body
, weight by physical exercise.
30-34.9 First stage of obesity. Taking selective food and
, exercise is necessary.
Second stage of obesity. Taking moderate
35-39.9 a
amount of food and exercise is necessary.
Above 40 Extreme obesity. Possibility of death risk,
doctor’s advice necessary.
According to BMI scale, body weight of the above person should be 38 kg. Body
weight can be controlled by consuming accurate nutrition and exercise.
) SES Body Mass Index
fl Male fi L Female a
ee no
<18.5 18.5-24.9 25-29,9 >30 <18,5 18.5-24.9 25-29.9 >30 %
Figure 5.06: Body Mass Index R

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 105
@) Individual Activity
Activity: Calculate your BMR and how many kilocalories you need every
day.
®) Individual Activity
Activity: Calculate your BMR and see if your intake of food and life style
is correct.
Group activity
Activity: Find out average BMR and BMI of your class and write a report
on it.
5.6 Exercise and Rest
Everybody should do adequate physical activity to keep the body healthy.
Nowadays obesity is increasing as our physical movement have become
restricted due to the scarcity of play ground, nature of work, academic pressure,
and less physical activity. We are becoming uninterested in physical activity. So,
the body doesn’t remain strong and healthy. By doing adequate physical activity,
we can maintain efficiency of our body. A long and healthy living is possible
by practicing an hour moderate work daily and taking in adequate food.
Excessive body weight can be decreased by physical exercise. We can prevent
diabetes, heart diseases and some kinds of cancer through physical exercise.
There are different types of physical exercise, such as, athletics, or exercises that
makes bones and muscles strong. Walking swiftly, jogging, running, swimming,
playing, cycling etc. are examples of physical exercise.
Rest is very important for health. Rest is essential after physical and mental
Forma -14, Biology Class-9-10

106 Biology
work. Lying down and sleeping is a part of rest. After rest different parts of the
body regains energy and stores it. You will be astonished to know that almost all
animals in the living world take rest. This rest is related to the day and night cycle.
Many animals are active in sunlight. Other animals take rest by day and remain
active during the night, when they come out in search of food. These are called
nocturnal animals.

5.7 Use of Chemicals in Food Preservation

Food preservation is process by which rotting of food can be resisted. As a
result, the properties, acceptability, food value remain intact. Food preservation
prevent the rotting of food by bacteria, fungal infection, or the oxidation of fats.
Fish drying, salted Hilsha, pickle, cooling by ice, fish sidol, prawn nappi etc. are
customary means of food preservation. Modern methods of canning and
smoking processes are also used for preserving. Healthy, approved chemical
substances are used to preserve food so that decomposing bacteria and fungal
infection do not happen. Generally sodium nitrate, sodium chloride or table salt,
calcium apernate, sulphur di-oxide, sodium-bisulphate, sodium benzoit, sorbet
(Na, K, Ca) are used. These are approved chemicals. Harmful formalin, and
various kinds of coloured substances should not be used, because it can be
dangerous.

Adulterant in food and use of colours

Just as a clean environment is necessary to live in this beautiful world, similarly,
eating safe food is essential. Nowadays various harmful and unhealthy chemical
substances and colours are used as adulterants. As a result, public health is now
threatened. If this health risk continues, Bangladeshis will face a great disaster in
course of time just like the Romans. The Romans used water containers made of
lead. As a result, people who drank that water got affected by poisonous lead and
gave birth to a crippled generation. In Bangladesh, various kinds of adulterants
are mixed with the food. Commercial colours, antibiotics, chemical substances,
insecticides, pesticides, formalin, heavy metals are mentionable. The cattle,
fishes, poultry animals etc. which are fed the unapproved adulterant food, are
threatening to human life and health. S

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 107
Some harmful effects of health risk : Commercial colours used in textile or
for colouring, are sometimes used in ice-cream, blended ice cream, candies,
beguni, chop etc.These types of foods gradually affect liver function and cause
various diseases. Bacteria that help in decomposition cannot grow in fish, fruits
and other food stuffs submerged in formalin. So, it looks fresh. Research has
found that formalin forms a compound within cell of the fishes. Even after
frequent washing it remains within the fish body. It enters the human body with
the cooked food. These poisonous compounds are the cause of complex disease
symptoms and may even cause some types of cancer.
Insecticides are used in the storage of food and vegetables. If these are sold
before the effect of the insecticides expires, the poisonous effect on food creates
great health risk. Infants are more affected. Poisonous insecticides have an
adverse effect on their growing cells. So, infants suffer from various types of
illnesses and their mental development is hampered. The list of chemical
substances and adulterants, used in food, are shown in chart the below-
ee Probable source Remedy
| 1. Antibiotics Used in fish and cattle food, | Only drugs approved by registered
stores in animals body. physicians should be used.

2. Heavy metals | Inedible components used in fish| Avoid using inedible
and cattle food (such as-waste of | components, such as : waste
tanneries) stores in animal body. | products of tannery, coal, soil,

_ ___| faeces of animals.
2. Comme aaa acy | Avoid wing, inedible
colours blended ice-cream, aunficial juice, | Components, such as : waste
coloured dirinks, producing sweet, products of tannery coal, soil

chop etc. faeces of animals.

4. Formalin Mainly used to preserve dead| Avoid using formalin.
bodies in the morgue,unapproved
use for the preservation of fish,
fruits, milk etc.

5. Insecticides Used as pesticide in vegetables| After expiry of the effects of
production, but its poisonous| poisonous chemials, vegetables
effect exists in many cases,| should be sold. Not to use

29 unapproved use of D.D.T in dry| D.D.T. in dry fish.
= fish.

108 Biology
6. Chemical Excessive and unapproved use of Allow the fruit to ripe
substances chemical substances to ripen| naturally. Discourage the use
fruits and tomato. Exessive use| of carbide. Use of suitable
of sorbet in soft drinks and) amount of sorbet.
| energy drinks.
7. Microbes At the time of production and} Be ensured of bio-security.
preparation of food, microbes
can get mixed with the food. | |
Group Work
Activity: Teacher will make several groups of students and tell them to make a list
of harmful effects of eating adulterated food for presentation in the classroom.
5.8 Digestion:
The human body is composed of innumerable cells. To keep it alive and
functioning, it requires food. But most of the time foods are eaten as complex
and organic compounds. The body cells are unable to absorb these directly. So,
to make it absorptionable food is broken down into simple, easy and soluble
form.
Digestive system: There is a particular system for the digestion of food called
the digestive system. This is the system, by which food substances are broken
down into absorptionable substance for the body and absorbed. The digestive
system consists of the alimentary canal and the digestive glands. Alimentary
canal starts from the mouth to anus. Food substances turn absorptionable in two
ways. As :
(1) Mechanical process and (2) Chemical process.
(1) Mechanical process: Teeth help in chewing or masticating food.
First the food substances break into small pieces. Within the stomach and
intestine these particles turn into pulp.
(2) Chemical process: Chemical process is the second step of digestion. Secretion of
digestive enzymes helps to enhance chemical reaction. So the compounds break into
simple soluble components. Intra cellular reaction also depends on enzymes. S

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 109
5.8.1 Alimentary System or Alimentary Canal: This is a canal running from
the mouth to the anus. Some parts of this canal are broad, while some are
narrow. The main parts of the canal are:
Mouth : The mouth is the starting point of the alimentary canal. It is a
transverse opening below the nostrils and bounded by the lips.
Buccal cavity: The buccal cavity contains
teeth and salivary glands. Teeth help to cut, . —
; ; . Nasal cavity _@&> 9)

grind and chew food into small pieces. The Mouth cavity——\7)
functions of the tongue are to move food SS Oesophagus
around the mouth for mastication and to taste. at
Saliva is the secretion of the salivary glands. |... Y Diaphragm
These glands are located below the ear, at side Bile duc [ Py of | Stomach
of the jaws and below the tongue. Salivary peodenum —4 ‘anoreas
juice secreted from the salivary glands contains iniestine eZ Coles
mucin, which makes the food slippery and Anpenil "G A Rectatn
helps in swallowing. The secretion containing \ Ams
the enzymes named ptyalin and moltes takes Figure: 5.07: Digestive system
part in digestion. of human
Tooth: Teeth are the hardest part of the body. An adult human possesses up to
32 teeth, 16 in each half of the jaws. Milk teeth appear first in childhood and are
replaced by the permanent teeth up to the age of 18 years.
Permanent teeth are of four types, such as :
(a) Incisor _ : Incisors are used in cutting and biting food.
(b) Canine: Canines are used for tearing and grasping.
(c) Premolar: These teeth are specialized for crushing and grinding.
(d) Molar _ : These teeth are used in crushing, grinding. The last two teeth of
the gums are called wisdom teeth.
Every adult preson has 8 incisor, 4 canine, 8 premolar
and 4 wisdom teeth.
Structure of a tooth: The tooth typically consists of three parts. As :

S (1) Crown: The part above the gum.

110 Biology
Incissor
= Canine —"
G CE ey S Premolars Nay ra
Or «) 32) rh YO
: 4 oy, Molars i XS
og 5 (i i Wisdom [AT Lower teeth\)
Y * (tooth 12) (e)
<q Upper a ie es
Figure: 5.08: Various types of teeth
(2) Root: The inner part below the gum. iStnod
01
(3) Neck: The tooth between the crown jpepillatics
and the root. Each tooth is composed of — Crown (7 7 Dentine
the following components: weak fa, eg n/n
(a) Dentine: The main part of the tooth [ss y \ ge
ad /y \\ Vos
consists of hard substances. Z La\ &
Root : e4——_Nerve cord
(b) Enamel: The crown is covered with s J) FA Cement
enamel. Enamel is the hardest component BS Y) if ea Jaw bone
of a tooth. Both Dentine and Enamel are “aie? [sées7
composed of calcium phosphate, calcium _ Figure: 5.09: Longitudinal section of teeth
carbonate and fluoride.
(c) Pulp: Dentine surrounds a pulp cavity with blood vessels (artery and vein),
soft cells and nerves running through it. The blood supply nourishes dentine with
nutrients and oxygen.
(d) Cement: The main part of the tooth Dentine is covered with a thin covering,
the cement. The tooth remains attached with the gums by means of this cement.
Pharynx : The next part of the buccal cavity is the pharynx. Food passes to
oesophagus through the pharynx.
Oesophagus : The tube, stretching from the pharynx to the stomach, is
the oesophagus. Food passes to the stomach through the oesophagus.
Stomach: The stomach is a bag like organ located in between the oesophagus and.
the small intestine. Its wall is thick and muscular. The inner surface of the $

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 111
stomach has numerous gastric glands. Continuous contraction and relaxation of
the muscular wall of the stomach. Turns food material into pulp or semi fluid mass,
called chyme. The juice, secreted from the gastric glands, helps in food digestion.
Intestine: The coiled duct, extended from behind the stomach, is the intestine.
Intestine is divided into two parts :
(a) Small intestine: The coiled, long duct which extends from the stomach up to
the large intestine, is called the small intestine. It is divided into three parts:
duodenum, jejunum and ileum. Bile duct from the gall bladder and pancreatic
duct of the pancreas joins just before it, and opens into the duodenum. Bile from
the liver and pancreatic juice from the pancreas and enters the first part of
duodenum. The inner wall of the intestine bears finger like projections called villi.
There are intestinal glands in the inside of the small intestine. The villi absorb the
vast majority of small soluble food molecules produced by digestion.
(b) Large intestine: The region from the end of the ileum to the anus is the large
intestine. It is the wider part of the alimentary canal. The large intestine is divided
into three parts: caecum, colon, and rectum. A small finger-like projection is
connected to the caecum.This is the appendix. The large intestine absorbs water.
It forms and deposits undigested parts of food, bowel.
Anus : There is an aperture at the end of the alimentary canal. This aperture is the
anus.
5.8.2 Digestive Glands: The glands,
whose secretion takes part in the :
digestion of food, are called digestive Occuphagus
glands. The digestive glands in humans
are as follows : _ “= Stomach
(a) Salivary glands : There are three Gall Bladder
pairs of salivary glands. A pair of Bile oe
parotid glands, located in front of and ? Senereacsiaes
below each ear, a pair of sub maxillary L <2 Pancreas
glands below the jaw and a pair of sub = —__ Duodenum
lingual glands below the tongue open . + gs

~ sae re Suse, savior e ried i Figure: 5.10: Digestive gland

S various ducts. Secretion from the

112 Biology
salivary glands is known as saliva. Salivary juice contains water and an enzyme
named ptyalin.

(b) Liver: The liver is situated just below the diaphragm on the right side of the
stomach. It is the largest gland of the body and is deep brown in colour. The right
lobe of the liver is larger than the left lobe. The liver consists of four incomplete
lobes. Each lobe consists of lobules. Each lobule contains numerous cells. These
cells produce bile. Bile is alkaline in nature.

Different types of biochemical reactions take place in the liver. So, it is also
called the organic laboratory. Beneath the liver the gall bladder is attached. It
stores bile. Bile is deep green in colour and of bitter taste. The Gall bladder is
connected with the bile duct, pancreas are connected with the pancreatic duct.
These two ducts together from a common duct that opens into the duodenum. It
enters into the duodenum through the pancreatic duct.

®) Individual Activity:

Activity: Draw a labelled diagram of the alimentary canal and present it to the class.
Functions of liver: The liver produces bile. The ingredients of bile are mainly
water, bile salt, bile, cholesterol, and mineral salts. It is stored in the gall bladder.
When necessary, the bile passes to the duodenum and takes part indirectly in
digestion. There are no enzymes in the bile. The liver stores excessive glucose
as glycogen. The bile neutralizes the acidic chyme and creates an alkaline
medium. This is favourable digestion because food is not digested in acidic
medium. The bile breaks fat or oil into minute droplets. So, it becomes easier for
lipase to digest the fats easily. Excessive amino acids are taken to the liver. After
various chemical reactions urea, uric acid, ammonia, nitrogen products are
produced, and these help in the absorption of fats. When blood sugar falls below
the normal level, the glycogen stored in the liver is reconverted into glucose and
transmits to the blood stream. Thus the level of blood glucose remains under
control.

(c) Pancreas: The pancreas is an important mixed gland located obliquely atthe .
back of the stomach. The pancreas secretes digestive juices as well as hormones Ss

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 113
that control the level of glucose. So, the pancreas acts as both an exocrine and
an endocrine gland. The pancreatic juice passes into the duodenum through the
pancreatic duct which joins the common bile duct (hepato pancreatic duct).
The pancreas secretes pancreatic juice. It contains the enzymes trypsin, lipase
and amylase. These enzymes helps in the digestion of carbohydrates, proteins
and fats. It maintains an acid-base balance, water balance and controls body
temperature. The pancreas also acts as an endocrine gland and secretes
essential hormones, such as, insulin and glucagon. These two hormones have an
important role in keeping glucose under control and in other physiological
processes.

(d) Gastric glands: The glands in the stomach wall are called gastric glands. The
juice secreted from these glands (trypsin, lipase, amylase) is known as gastric juice.
(e) Intestinal glands: Villi, located in the wall of small intestine, contain
intestinal glands. The secretion of these glands is known as intestinal juice.
5.8.3 Digestion of food

The bio-chemical process, by which larger complex, insoluble, unabsorbable
food substances break into absorbable and soluble simple elements in the
presence of enzymes and hormones is called digestion. First, food substances
break into a simple soluble form, and then it diffuses through the cell membrane
and enters the cell easily. Lastly, blood transports the digested simple
ingredients to different parts of the body.

(a) Digestion in Mouth: In the buccal cavity the tongue and teeth work together
to move, cut, grind and chew food into smaller pieces inside the mouth. Saliva
from the salivary glands mixes with the food. This helps in the digestion and
swallowing of the food. The saliva contains the salivary enzymes ptyalin or
salivary amylase. The salivary amylase begins to break carbohydrate into
maltose. Proteins and fats have no change in the buccal cavity. The food from
buccal cavity enters the stomach through the oesophagus by peristalsis. The
muscular wall of the alimentary canal contracts and relaxes simultaneously,
causing forward movement of the food. No digestion of food occurs in the
oesophagus.

(b) Digestion in stomach: When the food reaches the stomach, gastric juice is
secreted from the inner wall.This juice contains the following main components
Forma -15, Biology Class-9-10

114 Biology
Hydrochloric acid: Hydrochloric acid destroys the germs coming with the food
substances, converts inactive pepsinogen into active pepsin and creates an acidic
medium to help its proper functioning.

. . HCL

Inactive Pepsinogen —____» Active Pepsin
Pepsin: Pepsin is an enzyme which breaks protein into a compound named
polypeptide which consists two or more amino acids.
. Pepsine
Protein —______+» Polypeptide
Digestion of carbohydrates and fats do not occur in the stomach, because gastric juice
does not contain any particular enzyme for the digestion of carbohydrates and fats.
As soon as the food enters the stomach, the above mentioned juices are released.
The muscles of the stomach contract and relax continuously. The chemical
reactions that occur converts food into a semi liquid. This is chyme. It is more
or less like a soup and enters the small intestine through valves.
(c) Digestion in the small intestine: When the chyme enters the duodenum, two
secretions, pancreatic juice from the pancreas and bile from the liver, are
released through the bile duct. Both of these secretions are alkaline in nature.
Pancreatic juice neutralizes the acidity of the
chyme. The enzymes of the pancreatic juice villi
continue the digestion process of proteins and
carbohydrate (maltose) and starts fat /
digestion. Bile neutralizes the acidity of the Y = gl Blood
food and creates an alkaline medium. Bile > on
salt, one of the constituents of bile, emulsifies | HME
fats, meaning it helps fat droplets to mix with it | i \ (
water. It then becomes easier for the enzyme | Y i)
lipase to digest fats. The Lipase converts the ay Cait
fat droplets into fatty acid and glycerol. ————
Figure: 5.11 Absorption of soluble food
and fats in ileum
2
g

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 115
Fats ee Fatty acid + glycerol
Pancreatic juice contains trypsin, lipase and amylase. On the other hand,
intestinal juice contains the enzymes, maltase, lactose, and sucrose. Trypsin,
converts partly digested protein into amino acid and simple peptide.
Polypeptide —bypen_ Amino acid + simple peptide
Amylase converts starch into simple glucose.
starch __amylase glucose
Absorption of digested food: Most of the foods are fully digested in the small
intestine in the presence of enzymes and are converted into simple absrbable
ingredients. The inner surface of the intestine (ileum) is covered in finger-like
projections called villi, which contain capillary net works. Each villus (singular of
villi) also contains a lymphatic vessel in the middle which is called the lacteal. The
lacteal is surrounded by blood capillaries. As villi are folded, it increases the surface
area of the ileum. Here absorption of the food ingredients takes place.
These blood vessels (capillaries) join together to form a large blood vessel called
the hepatic portal vein which carries blood to the liver. Fat droplets are absorbed
into the lacteal of the villi. First it is carried by lymph, then mixes with the blood
stream. After reaching into the cell, bile salt becomes separate from fatty acid.
At the time of flowing blood, a kind of substance comes out of the capillaries. This
watery fluid is lymph. Lymph supplies nutrients to the cell and collects the waste
products and returns to the blood stream. After absorption the rest of the chyme
reaches the colon.
(d) Digestion in large intestine: No chemical reaction or digestion takes place in
the large intestine. But the water that remains within undigested products is
absorbed here. There also remains a small portion of protein, lipid, salt and excess
enzymes. Water and salt are reabsorbed from these products and are transferred to
the blood. Then undigested products concentrate here and turn into faeces or stool.
~ Faeces are stored in the rectum and pass out through the anus.
S
N

116 Biology
Assimilation: The process of converting digested food substances into the
constituents of protoplasm is called assimilation. It is an anabolic process.
Through the action of enzymes, simple nutrients are converted into complex
ingredients, such as : amino acid, glucose, fatty acid and glycerol. These
ingredients spread all over the body through blood. Digested food substances are
converted into protein, carbohydrates and lipids due to the action of enzymes
secreted from protoplasm. This results in repair of worn out tissues and helps in
growth.

5.9 Diseases caused by Intestinal Disorder

(a) Dyspepsia: Indigestion is dyspepsia. There are many causes of indigestion
or disturbance in digestion, such as - infection in stomach, depression, disease of
pancreas, thyroid problems, enzyme deficiency, diabetes etc. Pain in the upper
abdomen, abdominal flatulence, feeling a full stomach, burning sensation in the
chest, nausea or vomiting, chest pain, sour belch etc. are the symptoms of
dyspepsia. Digestion problem may also occur because of stomach or intestinal
ulcers .

To prevent dyspepsia, we need to avoid over eating, chew food slowly and
properly, avoid smoking and if necessary, consult a physician to find out the
cause and take medicine.

(b) Dysentery : Dysentery is caused by infection of a protozoa named
Entamoeba histolytica or by a bacteria named shigella.

Frequent bowel elimination, abdominal pain, mucous and blood in the stool, and
inability to digest dairy products are the symptoms of dysentery. If necessary,
one needs to follow treatment of dysentery prescribed by physicians; otherwise
it may turn out to be fatal.

The things we need to do to prevent dysentery are as follows - to drink pure
water, wash fruits and vegetables carefully, wash hands with soap or ash after
passing stool, use sanitary latrines, and wash hands and utensils carefully.

(c) Constipation: When stools become hard, or stool does not pass for two or
more days, this condition is called constipation. There are various causes of ,,
constipation, such as : withholding bowel pressure, excessive water absorption S

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 117
from the undigested part of food in the colon, slow movement of the undigested
part of the food through the alimentary canal, leading a lazy life, intestinal
disorder, slowing down of the contraction of colonic muscles, and not eating
food containing roughage increase the probability of constipation.
Due to constipation the passing stool becomes difficult. This results in an uneasy
feeling in the abdomen, abdominal pain and various accompanying disorders.
Long term constipation may cause hernias or other complexities. Constipation
may also occur due to tumours of alimentary canal or other diseases. So it is
wise to consult a doctor if constipation occurs.
To prevent this disease the things to do are - eat fibrous food, drink enough
water, regularly eat vegetables, fruits, apples, bananas, coconut, dates, oranges,
papaya, pine apple, tea etc. One should make a habit of regular walking and
passing of stool.
(d) Gastric and Peptic Ulcer : An ulcer is the inflammation and sores of the
stomach or the intestine. A peptic ulcer indicates open sores or ulcers of the
digestive tract. If it occurs in the stomach, it is called a gastric Ulcer. If it occurs
in the duodenum, it is called Duodenal Ulcer. Irregularities in eating, cause the
over secretion of acid. If this continues for a long time, sores in stomach and
intestine occur.
Research of physician Robin Warren(1951 — till today) and Barry Marshall
(1937- till today) has shown that though irregularities in taking food, taking
spicy food or stress may cause peptic ulcers, the main reason is a bacteria named
Helicobacter pylori (in short H. pylori). For this discovery, they received the
Nobel prize in Medicine. Previously, it was thought that no bacteria could ever
survive in the strong hydrochloric acid (pH 1.5 —3.5) inside the stomach. In order
to prove his discovery, Barry Marshall drank a cocktail consisting of a beaker
full of H. pylori bacteria and became seriously ill from a peptic ulcer. (It is
important to note that this bacterium not only causes ulcer but can also cause
stomach cancer. Marshall took a great risk to his life which should not be
followed.) Feeling continuous dull pain in the mid part of the abdomen is caused
by this disease. Pain increases in an empty stomach or after taking excessive
S fatty foods. It may cause vomiting. Sometimes blood may come out with stool
“and vomit. The disease can be ascertained by endoscope or barium x-rays.

118 Biology
Things that should be followed to prevent this disease are: eat easily
digestible food regularly, avoid spicy and oily food. Drinking boiled milk,
cheese, or bananas gives some relief. Eating regularly, avoiding stimulating
substances, such as- coffee, cigarette etc, following treatment and consulting the
physician may help in preventing this disease. However, we have learnt from the
discovery of Marshall and Warren that if anybody gets infected by H. pylori,
then his disease may not be cured even after following the above mentioned
health rules. For his full recovery, antibiotics should be taken as prescribed by a
physician along with eating on time.
(e) Appendicitis : In the right side of the lower part of the abdomen a finger like
pouch that joins with the caecum of the large intestine is the appendix. Infection
in the appendix is the cause of appendicitis. Pain starts around the navel, after
sometime that moves downward on the right side. Loss of appetite, vomiting,
and constipation are the symptoms of appendicitis. In this situation, a physician
should be consulted. If the situation demands, patient should be taken to the
hospital and the appendix should be removed by surgery. If the infection of
appendix is severe, it can burst and may be fatal.
(f) Worm related diseases: Worms live in the body as parasites. The Human
body is a host for different kinds of worms. Round worms, thread worms, and
tape worms live in the human intestine as parasites. Abdominal pain, weakness,
indigestion, feeling of uneasiness in the abdomen, nausea, insomnia, loss of
appetite, pale face, anemia, swelling of hand and legs, and enlarged abdomen,
are the symptoms of worm related diseases. When an infant suffers from fever,
worms may come out not only with the stool but also from the nose or mouth.
Through pathological examination of stool, the presence of worms can be
ascertained. After being ensured about the presence of eggs of the worms,
treatment should be followed according to the advice of the physician.
Food substances become infected by flies which can lead to people being affected by
worm. Worms spread out from infected food. Preventive measures are as follows -
eating raw fruits only after proper washing, washing hands properly before eating,
using sanitary latrines, not walking bare footed, not eating semi-cooked food. ~
S
N

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 119
(g) Diarrhoea : If any one is suffering from loose motion at least three times in
a day, this is of diarrhoea. Though people of all ages suffer from diarrhoea, the
condition of infants deteriorates more quickly. Water and salt leave the patient's
body. As water decrecases, the patient becomes weak. So, shortage of salt and
water is noticed. At that time if the proper treatment is not ensured, then the
patient may even die.
Frequent loose motion and vomiting, feeling of thirst, dried up mouth and
tongue, shrinking of skin, sunken eyes etc. are the symptoms of diarrhoea. In this
situation the patient may not want any food drink. When the child cries, the
crown of the skull goes down. The child slowly becomes weak.
This disease spreads more quickly in cases such as : drinking impure water,
eating of stale and dirty foods , using unclean utensils, intake of food with dirty
hands.
Ifthe symptoms of diarrhoea are noticed, then patient should be given oral saline as
early as possible. Nowadays, oral saline, prepared by Institute of Diarrhoea
Research Centre, is available in the market. The instruction of making oral saline is
written on the packet. Oral saline can also be prepared in the house. You have
already learnt how to prepare oral saline at home. Rice saline is the one of the recent
invention. Rice saline is prepared by mixing 50 gm of rice powder and one pinch of
salt with 1 litre of water. Remember the following instructions at the time of using
oral saline, such as : continue to drink oral saline till diarrhoea stops, do not stop
taking saline even if the patient vomits, allow breast feeding for infants. Patients
should be given normal food regularly. After recovery the patient should be
supplied extra diet for at least a week.
Diarrhoea may be caused by germs like virus, bacteria or protozoa. Rota virus is one of
the main causes of diarrhoea. 82% of death due to rota virus occurs in deprived poor
countries. The percentage of death is high in poor countries. The severity of this disease
has also been found in developed countries, but death rate is comparatively less.
Group Activity:

~ Activity: Prepare oral saline in a group. Prepare a poster on writing the

S necessity of taking oral saline and present it before the class.

120 Biology
(?) Exercise
Short answer questions
1. What are the mineral nutrients of plants?
2. How many essential mineral nutrients do plants use?
3. What is a food pyramid?
4. Why does Anemia occur?
5. Why does night blindness occur?
Essay type questions
1. Describe the structure of a tooth with diagram.
2. What are the characteristics of a balanced diet?
OSs) Multiple choice questions
1. Which of the following nutrients serve in a plant as a macronutrient?
a. Zinc b. Chlorine
c. Boron d. Potassium
2. Chlorosis is caused by—
i. nitrogen deficiency
ii. sulfur deficiency
lii. iron deficiency
Which one of the following is correct?
a. i&ii b.i & iii
c. ii & iti d.i, ii & iii
Read the stem and answer the questions number 3 and 4.
Five years old Sanjana can see all the writings in herbook. But at night she
can not see the writing clearly.
3. Which vitamin deficiency does Sanjana have?
a) vitamin ‘A’ b) vitamin ‘B’
ee
c) vitamin ‘C’ d) vitamin ‘D’ s

Food, Nutrition and Digestion 121
4. To prevent this disease which food should Sanjana eat ?

i) liver

ii) carrot

iii) Mola fish

Which one is correct?
ai&ii b)i & iii
c) ii & iti b) i, it & iii

Creative questions

1. Dr. Raihan spends most of the time in the laboratory. So, his body weight is
increasing. On the other hand, his younger brother Jahir is a regular player of the
National Football Team. For that he has to play and take exercise daily.

a) What type of food is the source of nitrogen?

b) What do you mean by high protein? Explain it.

c) Which food should be in much quantity in Jahir’s food chart? Explain.

d) Which type of food is not applicable for Dr. Raihan that is included in Jahir’s
food chart? Explain.

2. Irfan Ali observed that the leaves of the grass in his garden were becoming yellow,
and the leaves, flowers and buds of flowering plants were falling off plants. To solve these
problems, he asked forhelp from a horticulturist, and the horticulturist suggested
that Irfan Ali apply some essential nutrient elements in his garden.

a. What is a micronutrient?
b. What are the essential elements for plants? Explain.
c. Explain the causes of the problems found with the grass in Irfan’s garden.
d. Evaluate the suggestions given by the horticulturist.
Forma -16, Biology Class-9-10

Chapter Six
Transport in Organisms
, q By an ifn

r, “i ¢ % = -- =

ae of ah er
_—_ a a Wie >
y A moors a* se 3

A :) > 9 | Pe
A ; ‘er 4 % oes %

e WY
Re
Transport is an essential system, functioning all the time in all the living
organisms. In plants, the conduction of water and minerals is as important as the
translocation of food in them. Translocation of water and minerals absorbed
from the soil and taken to the leaves is as essential as the translocation of food
produced in the leaves to the different parts of the plant body. Transportation of
substances in a human body is not the same as in a plant body, but both follow
the same rules of Physics. Transport systems in both plant and human bodies are
discussed in this chapter.
S
8

Transport in Organisms 123

® At the end of the chapter, we will be able to-

¢ Explain the concepts and necessity of transport in plants.

¢ Explain the plant and water relationship.

¢ Explain the absorbing system of water and mineral substances and their
necessity in plants.

¢ Explain the translocation of substances produced through the process
of photosynthesis.

¢ Explain the conduction system of water and mineral substances and their
necessity in plants.

* Explain the concept and significance of the process transpiration.

* analyze the role of factors in controlling the rate of transpiration.

¢ Evaluate that transpiration is a necessary evil.

¢ Perform an experiment to demonstrate transpiration in the plants.

¢ Explain the concept of transportation in the human body.

¢ Explain the components of blood.

¢ Explain the characteristics of different blood groups.

* Choose blood depending upon the blood group characteristics.

¢ Describe the rules of blood donation and social commitment.

¢ Describe the process of blood transportation in the human body.

* Describe how the structure of the heart is adapted to its functions.

* Analyse the adaptation of the heart's structure and its activity.

¢ Analysis the role of blood pressure in blood circulation.

¢ Explain the ideal blood pressure.

¢ Describe types of cholesterol, its range, usefulness and its risks for health.

¢ Analyse the role of cholesterol in blood circulation.

¢ Describe the causes and effects of irregularities in blood.

¢ Analyse the symptoms, causes, remedy and prevention of diseases relating to the
heart.

¢ Analyse how to keep the heart healthy.

¢ Measure the pulse rate and blood pressure at rest and after exercise and
analyses them in these two situations.

¢ Measure blood pressure and pulse rate accurately.

x * Know how to keep the heart healthy and create awareness to prevent heart
& diseases.

124 Biology
6.1 Plant and Water Relationship
Another name of water is life. Life cannot subsist without water. We know that
protoplasm is the physical basis of life. 90% of this protoplasm is water. This is
why water is called the fluid of life. If protoplasm is devoid of water, All the
metabolic reactions that usually occur in a plant will be ceased in deficiency of
water. The important uses of water in a plant body are :
1. There is no substitute for water in maintaining the living nature of protoplasm.
In order to keep a cell with constricted protoplasm, water supply must be
ensured.
2. It is necessary to ascertain the supply of water in necessary amount for keeping
transpiration and photosynthesis running. This is why irrigation is to be
maintained for large plants in the dry season.
3. Water is an important solvent. The significance of water in many metabolic
reactions is immense.
4. Water plays important roles in the cellular growth of plant and in their movement.
Now, the question arises, from where and how the plants do obtain water for the
maintenance of life? Plants mainly absorb water through their roots from the
soil. Absorption is accomplished with the coordination of three processes,
imbibition, diffusion and osmosis.
1) Imbibition: If a piece of dry wood is placed in water, it will absorb some
water in it. We know that dry or half-dry colloidal substances absorb liquid. This
is why the piece of wood has absorbed the water. This process is called
imbibition. The substances such as cellulose, starch, gelatin etc. are hydrophilic.
When they come in contact with water, they absorb it, and conversely, they
become constricted when they face deficiency of the liquid. As the cell wall and
protoplasm are colloidal in nature, absorbing water they become swelled up.
This is a unique process for absorbing water.
2) Diffusion: If some incense is poured in a corner of a room, its fragrance is
immediately spread throughout the whole room. The small particles of the
incense are spread in the air. If some sugar is added toa glass of water, x
>
Q

Transport in Organisms 125
the water of the glass tastes sweet. This process is called diffusion. It is a
physical process. The process through which the molecules of any substance are
spread from a region of higher concentration to a region of lower concentration
is called diffusion. At a constant temperature and atmospheric pressure, the
potential energy of a substance to diffuse from a solution of higher
concentration to a solution of lower concentration is called its diffusion
pressure. Under the same atmospheric pressure, the difference between the
diffusion pressure of a solution and that of a solvent is called the diffusion
pressure deficit. Because of the diffusion pressure deficit in the mesophyll tissue
of a leaf, a cell in deficiency of water absorbs it from its adjacent cell. The
significance of diffusion in the absorption of water in plants is immense.
@)) Individual Activity

Activity: Experiment on the demonstration of diffusion.

Essentials: a small bowl, attar or any incense.

Explain the diffusion process by pouring incense into a bowl.
3) Osmosis: Do you know what osmosis is? Have you ever observed when your
mother places some raisins in water, the constricted raisins swell up, being
turgid. Have you ever thought of how this happens? If you then place the turgid
raisins in concentrated sugar solution, they again turn constricted. How does this
happen? This is an essential phenomenon. Through the phenomenon, plants
absorb water from the soil. This process can be accomplished in the laboratory
without the involvement of any living cell. If the two solutions of different
concentrations having the same solvent and solute are separated by a selectively
permeable membrane, the concentration of both the solutions will soon be equal.
When two solutions of different concentrations with the same solute and solvent
are separated with a selectively permeable membrane, the solvent flows from its
solution of lower concentration to the solution of higher concentration.
Movement of the solvent through a selectively permeable membrane from a
solution of lower concentration to a solution of higher concentration is called

co osmosis.
&

126 Biology
(@)) Individual Activity

Activity: Experiment to demonstrate osmosis from cell to cell.

Essentials: piece of potato, petridish, water, and sugar.

Prepare a potato osmoscope, and by pouring in the sugar beverage,

demonstrate osmosis.
6.2 Absorption of water and mineral salts
In plants, the absorption of water and mineral salts occurs through different
processes. For the convenience of our discussion, we will learn about water
absorption first.
(a) Absorption of water: Plants generally, absorb capillary water from the soil
through their roots. The diffusion pressure deficit in a cell of a leaf is developed
because of transpiration, and then water from the adjacent cell moves towards
the cell. In the same way diffusion pressure deficit is developed in the second
cell and water moves to it from the adjacent cell. This way, a continuous diffusion
pressure deficit is extended up to root hair and a suction force is developed. Because
of this suction force, capillary water continues to enter the cell root hair. Water
enters the root hair cell through the process of osmosis and diffusion. This way,
water is taken up into the root hairs moves through the cortex tissue.

ye <i
Root hair Vessel
Cortex (xylem)
(DOS ppibiema 7 ae
aa a
Epidermis Endodermis 0
Figure : 6.01 Absorption and conduction of water BS

Transport in Organisms 127
This water movement is called cell to cell osmosis. Then, water moves from the
cortex tissue to the endodermis, the pericycle, and finally into the vascular
bundles. Water, having entered into the vascular bundles, is taken up and flow
laterally through the xylem tissue. The water flowing through different branches
and branchlets of the plant, ultimately, reaches the leaves and this is
accomplished by the active involvement of osmosis and transpiration.
(b) Absorption of mineral salts: Most plants absorb some mineral salts with
water along. Though some salts are absorbed through the root hair, the
meristematic region of the tip of root functions as the main region of absorbing
mineral salts. Mineral salts are absorbed in the form of ions. Absorption of salts
is done in two ways, passive absorption and active absorption.
1) Passive absorption: Salt absorption in this way is accomplished through the
root hairs of plants with the process of imbibition and osmosis, and no metabolic
energy is required for it.
2) Active absorption: Active absorption is the absorption of ions with the help
of metabolic energy produced in the cells.
6.2.1 Translocation in plants: Translocation in plants represents the movement
or flow of water and mineral salts and of the food produced in the leaves.
We know that water and mineral salts are taken up the stem through the vessels
of the xylem tissue. Scientists think that the force produced by transpiration,
capillary action and root pressure causes the cell sap to reach the leaves of
plants. In this way water reaches the leaves, and food is produced there. Then
the phloem tissue takes active part in the translocation of food produced by
photosynthesis. The food is translocated through the sieve tubes of the phloem
tissue. Different organic compounds in plants move through phloem tissue at the
same time in opposite directions. The compounds in the lower region flow
downwards and compounds synthesized in the upper region flow upwards and
the substances synthesized in the middle region flow in both directions.

x

8

128 Biology
Necessity of translocation in plants
Movement or transportation of water and mineral salts in plants is called
translocation in plants. All scientists agree with the necessity of translocation of
water and mineral substances in plants. Now, the matter of consideration is that
the water and mineral substances, that are to be used, must be taken to the places
where the reactions will occur. This is why translocation of water and mineral
salts is very important. Water and mineral salts being absorbed through the root
hair go through the vessels of the xylem tissue, cross the cortex region, and
gradually reach the leaves with the flow of transpiration. Food is produced in
the leaves. The food produced in the leaf reaches the different regions of a plant
through sieve tubes of the phloem tissue. If the flow in the xylem vessels or
phloem sieve tubes is blocked, for any reason, the plant would die.
Translocation of water and minerals: We have already acquired some ideas
about osmosis and diffusion. Plants absorb water from the soil through process
osmosis. This is accomplished mainly though the root hairs. Plants also absorb
mineral nutrients from the soil, though the process of absorbing water and the
process of absorbing mineral salts are quite different. You will learn more about
it at a higher level of education. Water and mineral salts are collectively learn as
cell sap. Now, we will learn how the cell sap from the root reaches the top most
branches and leaves of a plant.
Ascent of sap: Roots absorb water and mineral salts. The cell sap ascends
slowly upwards. Simultaneously, the lateral translocation of cell sap also occurs.
Translocation of cell sap is categorized into two steps: 1) the arrival of soil water
and mineral salts from root hairs to the vascular tissue of the root and
2) translocation from vascular bundle of the root to leaves. At first
osmosis, diffusion and suction from transpiration. play an important role in the
absorption and translocation of water and mineral salts. The water and the
mineral substances absorbed by root hairs move to the adjacent cells by the
process of osmosis. From there they move again to the next cell. In this way,
x
Sy

Transport in Organisms 129
water and mineral substances reach the vascular bundle of the root, and
ultimately, reach the mesophyll tissue of leaves through the vascular bundle of
the stem.
@) Individual Activity

Activity: Experiment to demonstrate the AC

ascent of sap in a plant. P< aS

Essentials: Peporomia plant, bottle of Da <S

glass, water and safranin or red ink. f ACE

Procedure: Take some water in a

glass bottle. Add some drops of Cotton

safranin or red ink to it. Place a living I,

Peporomia plant in the bottle in such a

way that its roots are submerged into Coloured

water. Now place the bottle somewhere ANS Wate

for a few hours and observe the result. —

Figure: 6.02 : Ascent of Sap in
a plant

6.2.3 Translocation of the substances produced in photosynthesis: You have
learned earlier that plants absorb water through osmosis. The water is
conducted to the leaves even to the top most regions of a very tall plant. These
leaves utilize water for photosynthesis. In the presence of light and chlorophyll,
water taken from the soil reacts with CO, taken from the air and produces
Carbohydrate. The food produced in this way is conducted to different parts of a
plant. Every cell of a plant derives its energy to perform metabolic activities by
using food through respiration. After the completion of deriving energy through
respiration, the remaining food is stored in the plant.The food is usually stored
in potatoes (stem), sweet potatoes (root), aloes (leaf) and in different fruits and
seeds. Now, we will study how the food produced in photosynthesis is conducted
to different regions of a plant body.
Forma -17, Biology Class-9-10

130 Biology
Phloem translocation: As the leaves and the roots grow away from each other,
there must be a rapid and effective transport system in between them for the
conduction of food. This is done by sieve tubes of phloem. Phloem is an
important bundles of vascular bundle. We know that there are xylem bundles and
phloem bundles in a vascular bundle. In the phloem bundle, there are sieve
tubes, companion cells, phloem parenchyma and bast fibers. A sieve tube is a
kind of thin walled living cell without a nucleus. Being positioned longitudinally
side by side, they form a net-like structure. The septa in between them, missing
in some places, develop sieve shaped forms. This is why food substances can
easily move from cell to cell. In winter, these openings are blocked because of
the deposition of the chemical substance callose, and thus the movement of food
is inhibited. At the advent of summer, the callose is degraded and the movement
of food resumes.

6.2.4 Transpiration

Life cannot be imagined without water. Plants mostly absorb water they require
through their roots. They use a very little part of the absorbed water for their
metabolic activities. The remaining part of the water is released to the
atmosphere in the form of vapour. The physiological process by which water is
carried through plants and then released to the atmosphere in the form of vapour
through aerial parts, is called transpiration. On the basis of aerial parts through
which this process occurs, transpiration is categorized into three divisions:
stomatal transpiration, cuticular transpiration and lenticular transpiration.

1) Stomatal transpiration: There are special y

types of openings with two guard cells in the 2 & =

leaves, young stems, sepals, and petals of | . -§ , |
flowers. These openings are called stomata. =. ~. '
95% of the total transpiration in a plant on ~~,
occurs through the stomata. : f i

2) Cuticular transpiration: There is alayer = | S =~
of cutin on the epidermal layers of a plant, | = $
especially on the upper and lower surface of Figure 6.03 : A open and a close stomata
every leaf. This layer is called the cuticle. Some water, when evaporated, is
teleased through the cuticle. The process is called cuticular transpiration. S

Transport in Organisms 131
3) Lenticular transpiration: After the occurrence of secondary growth in
plants, the airy aggregation of cells that functions as a pore (called lenticel)
develop on the rapture bark of some plants. The cells aggregated around a
lenticel are loosely fitted and water from the inside can be released through it.
This is called lenticular transpiration.
eo me SBR ERS Lenticel
ee a wae SIA Os BN Complementary cell
| Bees a | A), CET \ . P < a
vk ae Ickes EY SORE SOI IS
ee i ee YD
oe ae | FEO Se Cork cambium
a ae Ses ee ET et
Figure: 6.04 A Lenticel
Through transpiration, as excess water is escapes through evaporated, a suction
force develops causing the root to absorb water. This process depends on many
factors. They are roughly grouped into two: a) external factors and b) internal
factors.
(a) External factors: The factors which affect transpiration from outside of the
plant body are called external factors. They include:
(1) Temperature: The rate of transpiration fluctuates with the changes of
temperature. Water can easily be vapourized at high temperature and thus
transpiration is accelerated. The water-holding capacity of air increases if the
temperature goes up. As a result, transpiration proceeds faster. If the
temperature goes down, the rate of transpiration declines.
(2) Relative humidity: The ratio of the amount of water vapour in the air of the
atmosphere and the amount of water vapour that the air can hold at a given
temperature is its relative humidity. For instance, the air may be dry in spite of
having high water vapour because the air may have a high water vapour holding
capacity. Conversely, in spite of the presence of low amount of water vapour in
atmosphere, the atmosphere may be humid if there is low water vapour holding
ns
ion
S
XN

132 Biology
capacity in the air. When relative humidity is low, the air remains
unsaturated, and can retain more water vapour. If the relative humidity is high,
the air loses its water vapour holding capacity. When the relative humidity is
low, the rate of transpiration increases and when high, the rate of transpiration
declines.
3) Light: In presence of light, stomata open, and so, the rate of transpiration
increases. In the dark, the process is ceased because the stomata are closed. Light
also affects transpiration by increasing the temperature of the plant.
4) Wind: Because of transpiration, the air around the plant becomes moist, and
causes the rate of transpiration to slow. When wind removes the saturated air, the
rate of transpiration increases. With the wind, the leaves are swung and a kind of
pressure is exerted on the stomata and so, water vapour comes out through them
at a high rate. This is why with the change of wind velocity, the rate of
transpiration also changes. If the atmospheric pressure rises, evaporation declines
and the rate of transpiration also decreases. Again, at low atmospheric pressure,
evaporation increases, and so, the rate of transpiration increases.
b) Internal factors
1) Stomata: The rate of transpiration varies with the number, volume,
structure and arrangement of the stomata.
2) Number of leaf: The rate of transpiration varies with the number, volume,
structure and arrangement of the leaves.
3) Surface area of mesophyll: If the volume of leaves is high, the rate of
transpiration will also be high. The same way, if the volume of leaf is low, rate of
transpiration will be low.
4) Volume of the aerial parts of the plant: If the total volume with all the aerial
the atmosphere may be humid if there is low water vapour holdingparts of a
plant is increased, the rate of transpiration will be higher.
The presence of cuticle, area of spongy parenchyma etc. also change the rate of
transpiration.
26
s
Q

Transport in Organisms 133

@) Individual Activity
Activity: Prove with an experiment that water is released as water vapour
from a plant through transpiration.
Essentials: A fresh potted plant, a glass bell jar or a cellophane bag,
thread or clip and water.
Procedure: First, the plant with the Oo
pot should be placed on a table and WV ‘( GZ
water should be poured in the pot. \ Q \
Now, a branch of the plant (with ~X iy
some leaves covered with ; =
acellophane bag) should be clipped
or tied with thread or covered with
a bell jar. The precaution should be
taken that vapour cannot come out, {=
or air cannot get in. The pot in this
stage should be kept for an hour.
Observation: After an hour, it will
be found that there are water drops Figure: 6.05 Test of transpiration
on the inner surface of the
cellophane bag and the whole bag
would become damp. How has
the happened?
Conclusion: As there is no scope for water to get in to the cellophane bag,
it is clear that the water drops are escaping from the leaves. So, we see that a
plant releases water in vapour form through its aerial parts.
Precautions:
1)The plant on the pot should be fresh and living.
2)The opening of the cellophane bag should be tightly tied so that no air can
get in or come out.

=<
&

134 Biology
Transpiration is a necessary evil

Scientists have agreed on the significance of transpiration. The metabolic activities
of a living plant cell are dependent on this process. Because of transpiration a
suction force is developed in the xylem channel, called the transpiration suction.
With this suction force, a plant absorbs water and mineral salts through its root
hairs and the absorbed water and mineral salts are conducted to the leaves. If the
force decreases, the absorption of water will be decreased and the metabolic
activities along with the production of food will be slow. In the mesophyll of the
leaf, a diffusion pressure deficit is developed because of transpiration and helps
the absorption of water. A plant keeps the temperature in the cells of leaves
within a certain range by continuously reducing the thermal energy absorbed by
the mesophyll.

On the contrary, though transpiration contributes many uses to a plant, it also
plays some harmful roles. For instance, if the rate of loss of water is greater than
the rate of its absorption, this will cause deficiency of water and minerals in the
plant. As a result, the plant may die. If water is deficient in the soil, absorption
will be very little, though transpiration will continue as before. To deal with this,
nature causes many plants to shed leaves in winter. Because of the lacking of
transpiration, the required diffusion pressure deficit will not develop and as a
result the rate of osmosis will be slow.

So, it can be said that transpiration is an essential activity for a plant though it
causes some harms to it. For the contrary character, the scientist Curtis
designated the process transpiration as a ‘necessary evil’. But as a whole,
transpiration has continued in spite of having some negative effects, because it
enables plants to survive.

6.3 Blood circulation in Human Body

Blood is the source of vitality. Blood circulates throughout the whole body
through blood vessels and distributes oxygen and nutrients. So, the cells remain
active and alive. The system, through which the blood transports to organs and
the different parts of the body, is calledthe blood circulatory system. The
distribution of nutrients and oxygen throughout the body and the removal of ,
body wastes is performed by this system. s

Transport in Organisms 135
The flow of blood is limited to the inside of the blood vessels, it never comes
outside. This type of circulatory system is called a closed circulatory system.
Transporting blood throughout the whole body requires only one minute or less.
The advantages of this circulatory system are (1) Blood reaches different organs
directly, (2) can control the flow of blood to a particular organ by changing its
diameter, and the distribution can be adjusted depending on demand, (3) blood
goes around the whole body and returns to the heart quickly.
There are two types of circulatory systems. Such as (1) Blood circulatory
system. It consists of the heart, arteries, veins and capillaries. (2) lymphatic
system. It consists of lymph, lymphatic ducts,and lacteals.
6.3.1 Blood : Blood is a viscous, slightly alkaline and salty fluid. Blood
circulates through the heart, arteries, arterioles, veins, venioles and capillaries.
Due to the presence of hemoglobin in red blood cells, blood appears red. Blood
originates from bone marrow.
Components of Blood : Blood is a type of liquid connective tissue. It has
mainly two components, Plasma and Blood cells.
(a) Plasma : The colourless fluid part of plasma constitutes about 55% volume
of whole blood. The main component of plasma is water.A small amount of
protein, organic substances and a small portion of inorganic salts are dissolved
in it. The substances which are present are as follows -
(1) Protein, such as, albumin, globulin, “© a el “oO o”, ta
fibrinogen (2) glucose (3) small 9,0 i) ie) © oO oe :
droplets of fats (4) mineral salts (5) leYe) - ele) Ce) of (a)
vitamins (6) hormones (7) antibodies o,0°8 000° 20 C
(8) waste products such as carbon ) a) 0°00. OG @ |
dioxide, urea, uric acid etc. It also K) © “ rs) re) @ ¢
contains a small amount of sodium > oe oO © ©e8 Ce
chloride, sodium bicarbonate and “© © oO. — o eae
Figure : 6.06: Blood componant (microscopic view).
amino acids. The food substances Red blood corpuscles, White blood corpuscles and
« which we eat are digested and absorbed blood platelets are indicated by red, blue and black
BS coloured arrows.
N

136 Biology

by the intestinal wall and mixed with blood, then transported all over the body.

The cells absorb the nutrients, repair the worn out tissues and help in growth.

(b) Blood corpuscles : Blood is made

of three types of cells (a) Red =

blood corpuscles or erythrocytes A Ne é@- : )

(b) White blood corpuscles or eG a peo

leucocytes and ( c) Platelets or . Se f , oe White blood

thrombocytes. Ao we ) ana

(®) Red blood corpuscles or erythrocytes: \ Ox {6laodl

Among the three blood cells the red corpuscles

blood corpuscles are huge in number Figure : 6.07 : Various types of blood
corpuscles

and play an important role for the transportation of oxygen required for

respiration. Red blood cells are a formed in bone marrow. The average viability

of a red blood cell is 120 days. The Red blood corpuscle is non nucleated,and

appears mostly like circles and biconcave discs.There are approximately 5

million red blood corpuscle present per

cubic milliliter of an adult male. This is

500 times more than that of white blood a

corpuscles. The amount of red blood

corpuscles is comparatively less in

females. Red blood corpuscles in

infants are comparatively high in

number. Red blood corpuscles are (@)

destroyed at every moment and equal

amount of cells are produced again. _ Figure : 6.08 : Red blood corpuscles

Haemoglobin in red blood corpuscles transports oxygen as oxyheamoglobin and

also carbon dioxide.

Haemoglobin : Haemoglobin is a type of coloured pigment. Blood appears red

because of its presence in red blood cells. If the number of red blood corpuscles

isnot adequate then the symptoms of anemia are noticed. In Bangladesh almost

two thirds of the population suffers from this disease. To get rid of this disease it

is necessary to take balanced diet. 8

Transport in Organisms 137
(ii) White blood corpuscles : White blood cells are irregular in shape and fewer
in number than red blood corpuscles. There are 4-10 thousand white blood
corpuscles per cubic milliliter of blood. White blood corpuscles are produced in
red bone marrow and lymphatic glands. Their average viability is 1-15 days.

Germ

o oy White blood corpuscle

o.
Figure 6.09 : Destruction of germ by white blood corpuscles
in the process of fagocytosis
They are colourless but contain a nucleus. White blood cells contain DNA.
White blood corpuscles can change shape and can move from one place to
another.
Types: according to structure and presence of granules in the cytoplasm, white
blood cells can be divided in two types: agranulocyte and granulocyte.
1. Agranulocyte: the cytoplasm of
white blood cells are without granules
and transparent. Again agranulocyte @)
white blood cells are of two types - temeh a
jocoyte onocoyte

Lymphocyte and Monocytes. They are ympnocoys ”
produced in the lymphnodes, tonsil, (SSE SES re
spleen etc. Lymphocytes are small cells
with large nuclei. Monocytes are large ee ey Seer,
cells with small oval or kidney-shaped see Z lo vanet rane hil
nuclei. Lymphocytes kill the germs that — Blew berieels oo
enter the body by creating antibodies and thus increasing immunity power. On
the other hand, monocytes kill germs in the phagocytosis process.
Forma -18, Biology Class-9-10

138 Biology
2. Granulocyte: Granulocytes have cytoplasm with slightly stained granules.
According to the size of the nucleus, granulocyte white blood cells are
categorized into three types; Neutrophils, Eosinophils and Basophils.
Neutrophils kill germs in the phagocytosis process. Eosinophils and basophils
prevent allergy in the body by secreting a chemical named histamine. Basophil
secretes heparin and inhibits blood clot formation inside blood vessels.
White blood corpuscles engulf the germs by spreading pseudopodia. This
process is named phagocytosis. The dead white blood corpuscles turn into pus.
If white blood corpuscles in the blood increases excessively, leukemia or blood
cancer occurs. White blood corpuscles acts as a guard, destroying germs by the
process of phagocytosis and produceing antibodies.
(iii) Platelets or Thrombocytes: Platelets are small in size, colourless and
spindle shaped. They remain in clusters. Platelets have stained non-nucleated
cytoplasm that contains cell organelles like golgi body, and mitochondria. It is
thought to be formed by fragments of larger cells from the bone marrow. There
are approximately 2.5 million platelets per cubic milliliter of blood. They help
in coagulation or blood clotting. They
originate in the bone marrow. Their
average viability is 5-10 days. When the _ a
endothelial surface of a blood vessel is Ea. by
injured, the platelets there take irregular ye
shapes and release a chemical substance Bee
called thromboplastine. This transforms
prothrombine, the protein in blood, into Figure 6.11 Platelet and changes of its shape
thrombin. Thrombin then acts to transform fibrinogen, also present in plasma,
into fibrin which helps to clot blood. Fibrin is a kind of insoluble protein that can
create thread like strands very quickly. It coagulates blood in the injured place
and stops bleeding. However, coagulation is a complex process where various
chemical substances as well as vitamin K and calcium ions remain involved.
If blood does not contain the right amount of platelets, blood does not clot easily.
This may lead the patient to a life threatening situation. ES
N

Transport in Organisms 139
@) Individual Activity
Activity: Draw this table in your notebook and fill it in groups. Note the
differences between Red blood corpuscles and White blood corpuscles

Characteristics Red Blood Corpuscles | White Blood Corpuscles

(a) Nucleus

(b) Shape

(c) Haemoglobin

(d) Number

(e) Functions
Functions of blood
Blood performs many different functions,
1) Oxygen transport: Red blood corpuscles transports oxygen as
oxyhaemoglobin to the cells.
2)Removal of carbon dioxide: Due to the chemical reaction in the tissue,
carbon dioxide is produced. Carbon dioxide is transported in the form of sodium
bicarbonate dissolved in the plasma. It carries carbon dioxide from the tissue to
the lungs which is then expelled during expiration.
3) Transportation of digested food: It provides plasma, glucose, amino acid,
and fat granules to the cell.
4) Balancing of temperature condition: Heat is produced in the body tissues,
especially in the muscles and liver. As a result, the temperature varies in
different organs but blood helps maintaining uniform body temperature by
distributing it throughout the body.
5) Elimination of waste products: Blood carries all the waste products and
eliminates (urea, uric acid and carbon dioxide).
6) Hormone transport: Hormone is a bio-chemical substance which is
produced in ductless glands. It mixes with the blood directly and is circulated to
the different organs of the body. It helps in different important biological

co Processes.
&

140 Biology
7) Prevention of Diseases: Some types of white blood cells attack and engulf
germs by the process of phagocytosis, thus preventing the body from the attack
of germs. It increases the resistance power against diseases by producing
antibodies and antigens.
8) Blood clotting: If there is a wound at any part of the body the clotting of
blood heals the wound, preventing excess loss of blood.
6.3.2 Blood group
You hear that blood is necessary for a critical or dying patient. His or her blood
group is B. You frequently see this type of advertisement on television. But what
is a blood group? Why is it necessary to know about the blood group? Red blood
corpuscles contain A and B antigens and plasma has a and b antibodies. Blood
can be classified into different groups depending upon the presence of these
antigens and antibodies. This is called the blood group. The Scientist Karl
Landsteiner, in 1901, first classified and named human blood and placed it into
four groups: A, B, AB and O. The blood group of a person remains the same and
unchanged throughout the whole life. The different kinds of antigens antigens
and antibodies in different blood groups is shown in the table below-

Blood group _§ Antigen (in red blood corpuscles or cells) | Antibodies (in plasma)

A A b

B B a

AB A,B No antibodies

Oo Neither a,b
We have observed the presence of different antigens and antibodies with in the
blood. On this basis we can explain blood group in this way. Example -
1.Group A : Blood possesses antigen A and antibody b.
2.Group B : Blood possesses antigen B and antibody a.
3.Group AB : Blood possesses antigen A, Band both antibodies are absent.
4.Group O : Both antigens are absent and possesses antibody a, b.
If the antigen present in the surface of the red blood cell of a donor comes in
contact with an antibody present in the plasma of the receiver, that can react
with the antigen, causing a potentially fatal situation for the receiver or
patient. x

g

Transport in Organisms 141
So every individual receiver should be given blood that is compatible. For
example, if your blood group is A ( i.e. surface of the red blood cell contains
antigen A) and your friend’s blood group is B( i.e. plasma contains antibody a),
you cannot donate blood to your friend. If did give him, antigen A in your blood
will react with antibody a in your friend’s blood and this can be life-threatening
for him. So compatible blood group should be ensured so that the antibody in the
teceiver’s blood does not react with the antigen of the donor’s blood. Based on
this principle, a table can be made showing the compatible blood groups.
Donor
melo lols [lal s [ma
SOOO IOI I
=/6| |6| |@
i elole) | (Oo) |
tle l@) | | (@) | |
(OOOO FC |
Steet
Figure 6.12: Blood group compatibility table
Table : On the basis of the blood group the donor's and recipient's list.
Blood Group | Groups to which blood can be donated | Groups from which blood can be received |
A |A, AB A,O
B B,AB B,O
| AB | AB |A, B, AB, O
fe) A,B,AB,O fe)
From this table you can see that people with O are universal donors. People with
% blood group AB can receive the blood from all groups. So, people with blood
S$ group AB are called universal recipients.

142 Biology
The concepts of universal donor or universal recipients is not very acceptable in
modern medical science. It is because although the ABO blood group system is
considered to be the most important factor for the classification of blood group
based on antigens, there may be numerous other antigens which can cause
problems in many cases. For example. Rhesus factor is one kind of antigen. A
person is said to be rh positive if this factor is present in his blood and if not, is
called rh negative. In case of blood transfusion, if the rh factor does not match,
the recipient or the patient’s condition may deteriorate. So the rhesus factor must
be checked along with ABO blood group compatibility. Thus if the rhesus factor
is taken into consideration, the blood groups are A+, A-, B+ , B- , AB+, AB-, O+
and O-. As the negative blood group does not contain rhesus factor antigen, it
can be given to people with positive blood group but positive blood group
cannot be given to the negative ones.

Donation of blood and social responsibilities: Excessive bleeding due to
serious injury, accident, Surgery, natural calamities or for any other reasons may
lead to the amount of blood decreasing abruptly. Emergency transfusion of
blood is the only way to recover from this. At present blood donation is a
common practice. Emergency can be met by blood transfusion from one person
to another directly, or by using a blood bank. The procedure, in which blood is
given to a person through an intravenous line from an outer source to replace lost
blood, is called blood transfusion. It is an effective measure and can saves the
life of a patient. Without examining the blood group and its nature, blood should
not be transfused under any circumstances. Violations may cause different
complexities in a patient and increase the possibility of death. For example -
coagulation of red blood corpuscles, decomposition, jaundice and elimination of
red blood corpuscles (haemoglobin) with urine.

On emergency basis blood is required for people wounded in accidents. Blood
has no substitute, and in this situation a lot of blood may be necessary. By
collecting blood from others, this emergency crisis can be met. For this the
cooperation of the general public is necessary. We must keep in mind that it is
our social responsibility. To donate blood to others is a noble task. It causes no &
harm to the donor. A healthy person can donate 450 milliliter of blood. S

Transport in Organisms 143
20 million of red blood corpuscles are produced in every second in his body. A
healthy person can donate blood every 4 months. This amount of blood loss will
not create any harm to the donor.
Nowadays to inspire blood donation different programmes are arranged. For
example, blood donation on a particular day or occasion. Fear and false
conception regarding blood donation is decreasing day by day. Now people are
more conscious and eager to donate blood or to receive blood in emergencies.
6.4 Structure and function of Heart
6.4.1 Structure of Heart
The heart is a triangular shaped, hollow, muscular pumping organ. It is situated
in the left side between the two lungs. The heart consists of special involuntary
muscles. It is surrounded by a thin membrane named the pericardium. The heart
of the wall consists of three layers: (1) Epicardium (2) Myocardium and
(3) Endocardium.
(1) Epicardium: This consists of Sie VERRAN
connective tissue. This layer is J ly Aorta
covered with epithelial tissue. Fat 3) =a — Pulmonary
bodies are scattered on it. Right - f Ss Zo ad
(2) Myocardium: This lage is in er Pulmonary
between the epicardium and s\\ fi ~
endocardium. It consists of strong aa Xs Tett atau,
involuntary muscles. i yy }
(3) Endocardium : This is the inner IN ‘ .

\ Left ventricle
most layer. The chambers of the — jpferior vena cave 4
heart are surrounded by the Right ventricle
endocardium. This layer also covers Figure : 6.13 Human Heart
the valves. The inner part of the heart is hollow and four-chambered. The upper
chambers are the right and left auricle or atrium and the lower chambers are the
right and left ventricles. The atria are comparatively thin walled and the
venticle walls are muscular and thick. The two atria and ventricles are separated

S by inter auricular and the interventricular septum respectively.

144 Biology
The aperture between the two atria (singular-atrium) and ventricles are guarded
by valves. The right auriculoventricular aperture guarded by a tricuspid valve is
made up of three flaps. Similarly the left atrium and ventricle is guarded by a
bicuspid valve made up of two flaps. The opening of the aorta and the
pulmonary artery is guarded by valves called semilunar valves, which allow the
transport of blood in one direction and prevents the back flow of blood.
6.4.2 Circulation of blood through the heart
We have learned earlier that the heart acts like a pump. The Heart works by
contraction and relaxation. The continuous contraction and relaxation transports
blood throughout the whole body.
JY, Ms
% 4
~~ Relaxation of atrium
) =p =—» Contraction of atrium
AY) ( {—> Relaxation of ventricle
t (a) Diastole of atrium (b) Sistole of atrium J
Or
=
/ a Contraction of ventricle
[ ventricle
(d) Diastole of ventricle (c) Systole of ventricle
Figure : 6.14 Internal structure of heart and blood circulation

The contraction of heart is the called systole, and the relaxation of heart is called
the diastole. A complete contraction (systole) and relaxation (diastole) of the
heart constitutes a heart beat.
Due to the relaxation of atria (auricles) the blood enters the heart from different
parts of the body. Such as - deoxygenated blood from the superior vena cava
enters the right atrium. At the same time, the oxygenated blood enters to the left .,
atrium through the pulmonary veins from the lungs. R

Transport in Organisms 145
The walls of the two atrium contract and then the muscles of the ventricle relax.
As a result the tricuspid valve situated between the right sino auricular
ventricular apertures opens. So, the deoxygenated blood from the right auricle
enters into the right ventricle. At the same time, the left sino auricular ventricular
aperture, guarded by the bicuspid valve, opens. Then oxygenated blood enters
the left ventricle from the left auricle. During this period the left and right
auriculoventricular apertures are closed by their tricuspid and bicuspid valves.
So, blood of the ventricle cannot return to the atrium. When the two ventricles
relax, deoxygenated blood from the right ventricle passes through the
pulmonary artery towards the lungs. Here the blood becomes purified.

At the same time the oxygenated blood leaves the left ventricle through the aorta
towards the body and the opening of both the arteries (aorta and pulmonary
artery) are closed by the semi lunar valves which prevent blood from returning
into the ventricle. Thus successive contraction and relaxation of atrium and
ventricle help in continuous transportation of blood.

Functions of Heart: The heart is the principal organ of the circulatory system.
It helps blood to keep moving. The human heart is divided into four chambers.
In higher animals, the chambers are completely separated. So, oxygenated and
deoxygenated blood do not mix.

6.4.3 Blood vessels

The channels, through which mass flow of the blood occurs, are called blood
vessels. Through these vessels, blood is carried away from the heart to different
parts of the body and back again. According to the size, shape and function
blood vessels are of three types; artery, vein and capillary.

1. Artery: The blood vessels, which carry oxygenated blood away from the heart
to different organs of the body, are called arteries. The pulmonary artery is the
exception. This exceptional artery carries deoxygenated blood from heart to the
lungs. Each artery is made of three layers : (1) Tunica externa - which is made of
connective tissues. (2) Tunica media- the middle layer made of round involuntary
muscles (3) Tunica interna- the innermost layer made of simple endothelial
tissue. The walls of the arteries are elastic and thick. The arteries do not have any
Forma -19, Biology Class-9-10

146 Biology
valves and have a narrow passage or lumen. When the heart contracts, the blood
transports through the arteries and arteriole (small arteries) like a wave.
The expansion and contraction of the artery is known as the pulse. The flow of
blood within the artery, and elasticity and contraction and relaxation of the artery
walls are the main causes of pulse. You can feel the pulse by pressing the finger
tips of one hand on the wrist of the other.
Valve
Lumen
 — interna (
= 1
=p Tunica media
Tunica externa
Cara
ZSSRA
NSS
ZA
y we |
L/L
Capillaries
Artery Vein
Figure: 6.15 various types of blood cells
2. Vein: The vessels which carry blood from the various organs of the body
towards the heart are called veins. They are spread all over the body just like
arteries. Veins originate from the capillaries. Numerous capillaries together form
small veniule. Veins and the vena cave open directly into the heart. Veins are also
made of three layers, are thin walled, less elastic and have less muscles. The veins
have valves and wider passage or lumen. Veins carry deoxygenated or carbon
dioxide enriched blood. Pulmonary vein is its exception. This vein transports
oxygenated blood from lungs to heart.
3. Capillaries: The hair like small delicate blood vessels visible in the muscle
fibre, are called blood capillaries. These connect with the smallest artery in one ~
Ss
N

Transport in Organisms 147
side and the vein on the other side. All arteries are divided into secondary and
lateral branches and form a fine network of capillaries. Each cell is surrounded by
blood capillaries. The walls of the capillaries are thin. Through this thin layer,
substances dissolved into the blood diffuse into the cells.
Capillaries of head and arms
EEN
\\
Superior vena ek t
Pulmonary ay | Pulmonary artery (left)
% VA Al. \w Ae AWS \
/ Gy aes (\\ \
| er 2 bre WU)
= Right atrium: ye. i atrium SYS
Pulmonary vein (right) ‘Q\ a *\ Pulmonary vein (left)
. : Left
Inferior vena | Right ventricle ventricle; | J
( \ ( /| | Capillaries of body tissue
SSF -
SS Oxygen rich blood
SS” Carbon rich blood
Capillaries of legs
% Figure: 6.16 Huma blood circulation
>
NX

148 Biology
@) Individual Activity :

Activity : Determine differences between an artery and vein.

Characteristics Artery Vein

(a) Origin and ending

(b) Direction of blood flow

(c) Nature of blood

(d) Wall

(e) Lumen or passage

(f) Valve

(g) Location
6.4.4 Blood Pressure
Blood pressure is the pressure of the blood against the wall of the arteries. The
contraction of the heart is called systole. The pressure in the artery during
systolic condition is called the systolic blood pressure. The pressure in the artery
during systolic condition is the highest. Relaxation of the heart is called diastole.
The pressure during the diastole condition is called the diastolic pressure. The
pressure during the expansion of heart or ventricle i.e. in the diastole condition
is the least. Blood pressure can be measured using a sphygmomanometer. By
observing the systolic and diastolic pressure with the help of this machine blood
pressure is determined.
Ideal blood pressure: A normal adult’s \
blood pressure is generally near about _ ;
120/80ml. Blood pressure is expressed in r N
two numbers, first one is for higher r \ SS .
whereas the second one for the lower. The d
blood pressure in the arteries is the os ~
highest during systolic blood pressure and noe
the ideal range should be 120 or a x
slightly lower. Figure: 6.17 : Observation of pulse &

Transport in Organisms 149
The blood pressure in the arteries decreases during diastole. This is diastolic blood
pressure and the ideal diastolic pressure should be less than 80. In between the
time of two heart beats, this pressure is created. The difference between the two
pressures in the arteries are called pulse pressure. The normal rate of the pulse,
(the heart beat rate) is about 62-100 per minute in an adult at rest. Normally pulse
rate is measured in the radial artery at the wrist. It can also be measured by the
blood pressure machine on sphygmomanometer.
@) Individual Activity
Activity: Count the pulse rate of your friend, brother or sister. Count it again
after a short-run. Do you find any change? Explain why this happens.

High blood pressure or Hypertension: High blood pressure is considered to be
a silent killer. According to World Health Organization report, by 2020, stroke
and coronary artery diseases will be the number one life threatening disease. In
the south Asian countries it will break out as an epidemic disease. One of the
main causes of heart disease and stroke is high blood pressure.
What is hypertension?
When the heart pumps blood into the arteries, the blood pressure against the wall
of the blood vessels is called the blood pressure. When blood pressure rises
above the normal pressure, then it is considered as high blood pressure. In a
healthy adult the expected systolic pressure is below 120 mm and the diastolic
pressure is below 80 mm. When the systolic and diastolic pressures rise more
than the normal pressure, this is called high blood pressure or hypertension.
Causes of Hypertension and its risk
Those, who suffer from tension or have habit of smoking, have the probability of
hypertension. Increase in body weight, intake of excessive salt and fatty diet, and
history of diabetes and cholesterol of family members are main causes of this
disease. Eclampsia at the time of child birth can also be a cause of hypertension
in mothers.

2

g

150 Biology
Symptoms and signs of Hypertension: Headache, especially at the back of the
head, is the primary symptom of hypertension. Vertigo, neck pain, palpitation and
weakness are also some of the symptoms. Sometimes bleeding from the nose,
sleeplessness or insomnia, and fatigue can also indicate symptoms of
hypertension.
Diagnosis: Blood pressure can be examined with a sphygmomanometer. Before
measuring blood pressure the patient should take rest. Blood pressure should be
measured after a gap of at least 15 to 20 minutes.
(@)) Individual Activity
Activity: Learn the skill of measuring blood pressure and write your friends
blood pressure in the table given below.

Name of the student | Blood pressure (systole/diastole) Remarks
Prevention of high blood pressure : To prevent high blood pressure, a habit of
eating fresh vegetables and fruits is necessary. Body weight should be controlled
and physical work and exercise should be done regularly. High-fat foods and salt
should be avoided in meals. Smoking must be avoided.

Blood pressure may vary more or less due to health, age, activities and disease. If
the blood pressure is very high, consult a doctor and take medicine regularly.
6.4.5 Cholesterol
Cholesterol is a compound produced from the hydrocarbon cholestane. It is an
important component in animal cells. Cholesterol circulates in the blood as
lipoprotein.
There are three types of lipoprotein in blood :
29
S
N

Transport in Organisms 151
1. LDL (Low Density Lipoprotein) : This is called bad cholesterol because it
increases the risk of heart disease. Generally our blood contains 70% LDL. This
varies from person to person.
2. HDL (High Density Lipoprotein) : This is generally called good cholesterol
because it decreases the risk of heart disease.
3. Triglyceride : This cholesterol is in the plasma as fat triglyceride and is created
from animal fat and carbohydrate.
The ideal range of cholesterol in blood is shown in the table below.

Types of cholesterol | Mmol/Litre

LDL <18

HDL > 15

Triglyceride <17
Foods such as butter, prawn, oyster, liver of cattle, egg (especially egg yolk).
contain a high amount of cholesterol.
Demerits of high cholesterol: A supply of oxygen and nutrients is essential in the
heart as in all the other organs of our body. Blood circulation is interrupted if there
is an accumulation of fat in the coronary artery of the heart. Consequently, cardiac
muscle is damaged because of a deficiency of oxygen and nutrient. This condition
is called angina. Moreover, the possibility of heart disease increases to a great
extent when the blood circulation is disturbed because of accumulation of too
much fat on the artery wall.
Functions of cholesterol- Usefulness and its risk: Cholesterol is involved in
constructing the cell membrane and its protection. It determines permeability,
allowing certain substances to enter the cell. It helps in producing hormones such
as, androgen and estrogen. Cholesterol plays an important role in producing the
hormones of the adrenal glands and in the production of bile. In presence of
sunlight,the cholesterol in the skin prepares vitamin D, which is carried by blood
to the kidneys to be converted into the active form of vitamin D.
Cholesterol is essential for the metabolism of fat soluble vitamins, such as-
vitamin A, D, E and K and for the activities of neurons. Cholesterol is closely
related to the prevention of diseases. However, the presence of high cholesterol is

% also related to irregularities of the heart and blood transportation. Though it is
an important component of bile, it is alsoa waste product and it is eliminated

152 Biology
through the liver. Increased amount of cholesterol deposit in the gall bladder as
sediments. The sediment of cholesterol forms stones, known as gall bladder stone
or gall stone. In addition to from cholesterol, phosphate, and calcium may also
form gall stones.

6.4.6 Irregularities in Blood and Bone Marrow-Leukemia

Red blood cells are produced in the liver and the pancreas in the embryonic stage.
It starts developing from bone marrow birth. These mainly supply O,,. If the
production of RBC is interrupted for any reason, and an abnormal increase of
WBC happens, then the symptoms of leukemia is detected.

The cancer of blood cells is named leukemia. It occurs because of the abnormal
formation and multiplication of white blood cells from bone marrow, which
indirectly causes less production of red blood cells and platelets. Though
leukemia is called blood cancer, it is in fact a disease related to the malfunctioning
of blood production. A bone marrow is the most affected. Low red blood cell
count causes a deficiency of oxygen. As a result, patients become weak, pale and
have shortness of breath. Bleeding gums and nose bleeding may occur
abnormally due to a low platelet count. For the same reason, small red spots on
the skin and swelling and inflammation of joints may be seen. According to the
World Health Organization (WHO), there are more than fifty types of leukemia,
most of which have high white blood cell count. Though white blood cells
increase in number, in fact these are cancer cells and are unable to prevent
diseases as these are supposed to. So, a person suffering from leukemia is easily
vulnerable to various diseases. Swollen lymph nodes and a persistent fever may
also occur due to immunodeficiency disorder. Thus the symptom of this disease
shows the inability of almost all the blood cells to function properly. However,
symptoms may vary based on types of leukemia.

Treatment

Now-a-days this disease can be cured if it is diagnosed at an early stage and proper
treatment is ensured. Generally, bone marrow transplantation and chemotherapy
are the major forms of treatment, though treatment may vary based on types of
leukemia. In the past, there was no other alternative but going abroad for better
treatment of this disease. Now there is arrangement of bone marrow
transplantation in Dhaka Medical College Hospital, and chemotherapy is being
provided in many public or private hospitals of the country. s

Transport in Organisms 153
6.5 Circulatory diseases and their Remedies

(a) Heart Attack: When blood clots in any part of the heart, that stops blood
circulation. This causes the damage of cardiac cells. It results in Myocardial
infarction or coronary thrombosis which are commonly known as heart attack.
The number of patients of heart disease,(especially coronary heart disease) is
increasing in Bangladesh. Oxygen and nutrients are carried by the blood to all
cells of the body from heart. There are three main blood vessels of the heart that
carry out its activities .

These are called coronary arteries. Sometimes there is a deposition of lipids that
forms a blockage in the wall of these arteries, which creates obstacle in blood
flow. This causes life threatening heart disease. Nowadays, not only people aged
between 40 to 60, but also many young men have heart attacks.

The main causes of this disease are being over weight, uncontrolled proportion of
glucose in blood, eating unhealthy diet, such as: oily food (Biriani, Tehari etc.),
fast food (Burger, Beef or chicken patties etc.).Lack of physical exercise.
Depression, emotional strain, anxiety, and sadness increase the risk of this disease
at any age.

Symptoms of the diseases : Symptoms of a heart attack are feeling severe chest
pain, particularly pain in mid chest, that does not decrease by taking antacid. The
pain spreads from the left side to all over chest. Pain also spreads towards the neck
and left hand. The patient complains that he or she feels pressure on the chest and
starts sweating severely. Diabetic patients may have a heart attack without any
chest pain. When it is diagnosed, it may be too late. Therefore, a diabetic patient
needs to have regular medical checkup even if they do not face any problem.
Remedy: Do not ignore the situation. Do an E.C.G as early as possible, consult a
doctor and render treatment. Coronary heart disease is a dangerous heart disease.
- To keep free from this disease some rules should be followed, so that blood
pressure can be controlled.

- Avoid smoking, do regular exercise like walking.

- Eat sufficient amount of fruits and vegetables.

- Avoid fatty, fried, spicy and fast food.

Forma -20, Biology Class-9-10

154 Biology

(b) Rheumatic fever: Rheumatic fever is a disease brought on by streptococcal

infections such as strep throat, scarlet fever, tonsillitis or middle ear infection. The

initial attack of the disease usually occurs in childhood and may affect many parts

of the body, especially the heart. If rheumatic heart disease develops, it sometimes

injures the heart muscle and its valves. So, the heart can not pump adequate blood

and the flow of blood within the body decreases.

Sometimes it is difficult for a doctor to diagnose rheumatic fever. If not diagnosed

or treated properly, weight loss, anemia, exhaustion, loss of appetite, pallor etc.

indicate the severity of the disease. Later red, swollen and painful joints are seen.

If the disease is detected or identified at an early stage, penicillin may be used to

cure it. Many physicians recommend penicillin be given regularly to children who

have rheumatic fever until they reach adulthood.

Measures to keep the heart sound: The heart starts functioning even before a

baby is born and continues to so till the last breath. The heart plays an important

role both in life and death. In order to keep the heart healthy, it is necessary to

maintain a proper life style and select the right kind of food. Oily or high-fat foods

obstruct the proper functioning of heart. Cholesterol in the blood harms the heart

by blocking blood vessels.

Drug and alcohol addiction increases heart beat and heart functioning. So, the

addicted person gets mental pleasure and peace for a while, but it causes serious

long-term harm to the heart. Poisoning due to smoking and taking nicotine of

tobacco (Jordha) damages the heart. Avoiding a fatty diet, such as- oils, fats,

excess carbohydrate and regular exercise can make a person healthy.
Exercise

Short answer questions

1. What is transpiration?

2. What is diffusion?

3. How many kinds of blood cells are there and what are they ?

4. What are the functions of an artery?

5. What is blood pressure? S

Transport in Organisms 1S5
Essay type questions
1. Describe the measures of keeping the heart sound.
2. Describe the process of absorbing water, with a diagram.
Multiple choice questions
1. What is the name of the membrane covering the heart?
a) Epicardium b) Miocardium
c) Pericardium d) Endocardium
2. Arafat saw some swelled raisins in a food (payesh) made of rice, milk and sugar.
In this case, what is the cause of the swelling of these raisins?
a. diffusion b. absorption
c. osmosis d. imbibition
Observe table and answer questions 3 and 4.
Name Blood group
Rafin A
Tamim B
Tasmia AB
Ratul O
3. Ifblood input is necessary for Rafin , from whom he can receive blood?
a) Tamim b) Tasmia
c) Ratul d) Tamim and Ratul
4. Tasmia—
i) carries A, B antigen in blood
ii) can donate blood to Rafin
iii) can receive blood from Tamim.
Which one is correct?
a)i &ii b)i & iii
20 c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
8

156 Biology
Creative questions
S
Y= y
Zo)
i
one IONS 9
. — ene Onn
a. What is adhesion?

b. What is imbibition?

c. Explain what the effects will be on the process for the absence of the constituent S.
d. Analyze the problems that may develop in the plant ifthe element X does not
reach the region Y.

2. Mr. Hasan is 50 years old. He serves in a socio-economic institution. He is feeling
headache, palpitation, restless. His 7 year old daughter Moon feels joint pain, and
her skin turned swollen and reddish. They consulted a doctor. After some tests
the doctor advised necessary measures.

a) What is blood?

b) Explain how white blood cells protect body.

c) Explain the causes of Mr. Hasan’s disease.

d) Which disease is incurable from the problems mentioned? Explain.
co
=

Chapter Seven
Exchange of Gases
Gaseous exchange occurs in all organisms discovered till today. Gaseous
exchange is a physiological phenomenon of organism. Gaseous exchange in
plants and animals are of different types. Gaseous exchange in plants and
animals is the matter of discussion in this chapter.
z
8

158 Biology
® At the end of this chapter, we will be able to-
* explain the idea of plant's gaseous exchange.
* explain the function of main organs of respiratory system.
¢ describe the structure and function of lungs.
* describe the gaseous exchange in human.
* explain the causes, symptoms, remedy and the preventive

measures of the diseases of respiratory system.
* determine the nature of exhaled air.
* draw the labelled diagram of lung.
* create awareness to prevent respiratory diseases.

5

Exchange of Gases 159

7.1 Gas exchange in plants

We know that photosynthesis and respiration are the two very important process-

es in the life of a plant. A plant exchanges gases mainly through these two physio-

logical processes. These two processes are accomplished through many chemical

reactions. A plant gets CO, and O, gases from its environment for its physiologi-

cal activities. Plants take CO, from air and leave O, by Photosynthesis. On the

other hand, plants take O, from the air and leave CO, by respiration. There is no

special organ in the plant to breathe. The exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide

and other gases occurs through the stomata of leaves and lenticels on the bark of

the mature stem. In plants, the frequent exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide

does not occur as it happens to an animal. In daylight or in _ presence of suffi-

cient light, the rate of photosynthesis becomes high. An amount of oxygen gas,

produced in photosynthesis, is spent in respiration. Reversibly, an amount of

carbon dioxide gas, produced in respiration, is used in photosynthesis and so the

amount of gases, exchanged, are approximately the same.

@ xe
KE
Respiration Photosynthesis B l SQ
(Plants and Animals) a) :
Figure: 7.01 Gaseous exchange in plants

At night the light phase of photosynthesis process ceases, and so oxygen gas is

not produced. But the respiration process occurs round the clock, day and

night, and the production of CO2 continues. The carbon dioxide gas is released
~ in the environment through stomata. These gases are also exchanged through
S the lenticels developed in the bark of the mature stem. This is why breathing

160 Biology
problem may develop if someone sleeps under a big tree at night. A plant obtains
its required gases from its environment. Just as the leaf absorbs oxygen, carbon
dioxide and other gases, root also absorbs required gases from the soil water.O,
gas is produecd as a result of the reaction between CO, and water which plants
absorb from the soil by the root. Then O2 gas returns in the atmosphere. In this
way exchange of gases goes on in a plant.
7.2 Human Respiratory System
To sustain life, oxygen is indispensable for a living being. Not a single animal
can survive without oxygen . Oxygen enters the body with air and is pushed into
the lungs, and is then carried to all of the organs through the blood. Within the
somatic or body cells food substance uses oxygen to break down the digested
food substances sugar (glucose) to produce heat and energy. This heat keeps the
body warm and supplies necessary energy.
Oxygen reacts with digested food substances (glucose) to produce carbon
dioxide and water. Blood carries these substances to the lungs. Here oxygen is
absorbed and carbon dioxide is expelled. The process of inhaling oxygen with
which to digested food substances in the body cell are oxidized, convert the
potential energy into useable energy (kinetic energy) eliminate carbon dioxide,
is called respiration. The exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide occurs within
the lungs and cells simultaneously. The simple equation of respiration is given
below:
C6H1,05 +60. ——> 6CO, +6H,O + Energy (ATP)
Glucose + oxygen ~— carbon dioxide + water + energy (ATP)
You have learnt in class seven that inhaling of oxygen is inspiration and
breathing out of carbon dioxide is expiration. If the supply of oxygen stops for 3
- 4 minutes death is inevitable. In both conscious and unconscious states
inhaling of oxygen and expelling of carbon dioxide occurs continuously. Along
with this process other processes also continue.
ce)
S
aq

Exchange of Gases 161
7.2.1 Respiratory System

The Organs, which take part in respiration are / —
called the respiratory system. The organs Trachea
related with the respiratory system are : “a i

(1) Nasal cavity and nasal passage, / ce Bronchus
(2) pharynx, (3) larynx, (4) trachea, ft ( ol Broncheole
(5) bronchus,(6) lung and (7) diaphragm. Lung—j= io
(1) Nasal cavity and nasal passage : The \ a Ne Pleural
Nose is the beginner of respiratory system. It laphragm Pleural | cavity
is a triangular hollow organ situated above Fig: 7.02 Human respiratory system
the buccal cavity. It helps to sense the smell of a substance. A specific type of
nerve in the nose stimulates the organ, to give us the sense of smell. Its structure
is such that it makes the inhaled air suitable to be received by the lungs.

The Nasal passage extends from an aperture in front of the nose and up to
the pharynx behind. A thin partition divides —_

it. Its front side is covered with cilia and the

rear part is lined by mucous producing SE Nasal cavity
membrane. Nostr }

The cilia together with mucous serve to trap c) " Phar ox
foreign substances, such as germs and dust. y a ~ ‘ituchen
Before entering the lungs this makes the air , i Sie
relatively free from dirt. The inhaled air when nn ts
passed through the nasal passage becomes ire
warm and moist so that sudden cold air does a

not harm the lungs. Figure: 7.03 Nasal passage and pharynx
(2) Pharynx - If we open our mouth, the pharynx can be seen at the back of the
mouth. It extends behind the nasal passage to the upper part of larynx. At the back
of the roof of the mouth, there is a small tongue like part called the soft palate.
When swallowing food or drink, the soft palate closes the backside of the nasal
cavity. As a result food cannot come out through the nostrils. Another important
function of the soft palate is to produce mucous. There might be a link between
the development of the soft palate and evolution of the human oral system.
Forma -21, Biology Class-9-10

162 Biology
(3) Larynx - It is situated below the pharynx and at the top of the trachea. There
are two folds of muscle situated on opposite sides of the larynx. These are the vocal
cords. A flap of soft tissue at the back of tongue is the epiglottis. It acts as a lid at
the time of taking food. This lid covers the opening of the larynx (so food particles
can not enter the oesophagus) while keeping the larynx open during respiration.
So, air can get into lungs through this passage. But it has no function in respiration.
(4) Trachea- This is a long tube which lies in front of the oesophagus and
extends from the larynx downwards into the thoracic cavity. It is supported by
rings of cartilage and smooth muscles. The inner layer of the trachea is covered
with mucous membrane and cilia. Air flows through the trachea. But through the
constant rhythmic beating of the cilia the trapped dust, germs and other
unwanted particles are expelled.
(5) Bronchus- The lower end of the trachea is divided into two bronchi which
lead to the right and left lung lobes respectively. These are bronchi. Each of the
bronchi divides and sub divides repeatedly to form bronchioles. The structures
of the bronchi are just like the trachea.
(6) Lungs- The Lungs are the main organ of the respiratory system. The right and
left lungs are situated on either side of the heart within the thoracic cavity. They are
spongy,
Deoxygenated blood
A \ \ _- enters the lungs
0: ted blood =) \ s
ecto te heart “ A YW \ i antery
Pulmonary vein ~ tt Ze ) \ [Ss Wd may =
Bronchus fie- A 3 : 9 , BS
Bronchiole 4 ( : J} op i}
a = al Ler q CG) ~, AD
Alveoli ~~ ZAR Cy
BAAS)
Blood capillaries ~ YQ Reaky
i
Figure: 7.04 Air sacs inside the lungs g

Exchange of Gases 163
soft and light reddish in colour. The Right lung is three lobed and the left one is
two lobed. The entire surface of the lung is covered in a double layered
membrane which is named the pleura. The space between the two layers
contains a fluid. This saves lungs from friction, as the lungs rub against the
thorax during breathing movement. The lungs contain numerous air sacs called
alveoli, small bronchioles and blood vessels.
The smaller bronchioles (alveolar ducts) terminates in crusts alveoli. So, air can
enter from the nasal passage to the alveoli directly. Each alveolus (singular of
alveoli) wall is composed of a single layer of epithelial tissue. The alveoli are
surrounded by mesh work of capillaries.
When air enters the alveolus, it expands like a baloon and later contracts
automatically. The wall of the alveoli and blood capillaries are so thin that
gaseous exchange occurs between them.
®) Individual Activity
Activity : Draw a diagram of the respiratory system and label its different parts,
(7) Diaphragm- The Diaphragm is a muscular sheet which separates the
thoracic cavity from the abdominal cavity. It looks like a spread umbrella. When
the diaphragm contracts, it moves downwards, and the volume of the thoracic
cavity increases. When the diaphragm expands it moves upward, the throacic
cavity contracts and returns to its normal position. The diaphragm plays an
important role in respiration.
7.2.2 Breathing
All the organs related to breathing remain open only through the pharynx. The
other ends of the organs remain closed. The air enters air sacs of the lungs easily
through the nasal passage. Nerve impulses help in managing breathing. The inter
costal muscles (muscles within the ribs) and diaphragm contract, and the
diaphragm goes downwards and the thoracic cavity expands. The volume of the
« thoracic cavity increases and the air pressure decreases. So, the pressure within
the thoracic cavity becomes less than the outer atmospheric pressure. This forces

164 Biology
the lungs to expand and draw in air through the nose and trachea. This is
inhaling. After the contraction the muscles relax. Then the diaphragm expands
and the muscles relax, allowing the diaphragm and thorax to return to normal
position. So, the air pressure increases, the lung shrinks back, forcing the
moistened and carbon dioxide- enriched air out again. This is exhaling. In this
way, breathing goes on constantly. This is external respiration.
Inhaling i ) Exhaling i~\
Thorax (Relaxes) ga . es ts) “ (EE
Lung i Lung — <I y)
Pisghrsey ZZ; Kes
Figure: 7.05 Inhaling and exhaling
Gaseous exchange: Gaseous exchange means the exchange of oxygen and
carbon dioxide. It occurs in between the air and blood vessels of the lungs.
Gaseous exchange occurs in two steps, the absorption of oxygen and the giving
out or expelling of carbon dioxide.
Absorption of Oxygen: Gaseous exchange in the lungs takes place through
diffusion. In the blood oxygen does not remain free. A large amount of oxygen
combines with the haemoglobin of the red blood corpuscles and forms
oxyhaemoglobin. This is a temporary compound. Production of these
compounds depends on the concentration of oxygen in the plasma. During
blood transport, a large amount of oxygen diffuses from the plasma to the
lymph. 8

Exchange of Gases 165
This happens when the oxygen concentration in the lymph is less. So, the
oxygen concentration in the plasma becomes less. Then haemoglobin begins to
give up oxygen, which was bound with it. In this way at first oxygen enters the
plasma and then into the lymph or intracellular fluid. Steps which occur during
oxygen transportation are described below.
The exchange of gases between alveoli and blood and tissue occurs by
diffusion. Diffusion of gases takes place due to a gas pressure difference. After
entering into the blood from the lungs dissolved oxygen flows in two ways. A
small amount of oxygen flows in the plasma and most of the oxygen makes a
loose bond with the iron part of haemoglobin and forms a temporary compound
called oxyhaemoglobin. From oxyhaemoglobin oxygen separates easily.
Haemoglobin+ oxygen—oxyhaemoglobin (unstable compound)
Oxyhaemoglobin— free oxygen + haemoglobin
After entering the blood capillaries, oxygen separates and penetrates into lymph
by diffusion first from the red blood corpuscle and then blood capillaries. Last,
from the lymph, oxygen reaches the cell after penetrating the cell
membrane.
Carbon dioxide transport: Carbon dioxide is produced by the oxidation of
food. This carbon dioxide at first diffuses through the cell membrane into the
lymph. Then, from the lymph CO, enters the blood plasma through capillary
diffusion. Carbon dioxide is mainly transported as bicarbonate (by blood plasma
as NaHCO; and by red blood corpuscles as KHCO3) to the lungs. In the lungs
the carbon dioxide is released from bicarbonate and passed to the alveoli. Then
carbon dioxide is forced out, diffusing through blood capillaries and alveoli.
Individual Activity
Activity : Experiment to show the nature of exhaled air.
Apparatus : Two large test tubes, one 10 ml syringe without needle,
two plastic tubes (one of which should be fitted airtight in the syringe)
e and lime water.
So
Nn

166 Biology
Procedure: prepare two test tubes each
containing the same amount of lime \ 7
water. Then insert one end of both the oe ‘Ee
plastic tubes in the test tubes in such a : A
way that the end remains submerged Plastic tube<— \ || ~~ Exhaling
inside the lime water. Now one end of \
the plastic tube needs to be fitted Clear lime Water) || = Mily tie Water
airtight at the opening of the syringe. inhaling — : Exhaled air
But before that, the plunger must be =
drawn out fully. When the tube is Figure: 7.06 Experiment to show
attached to the syringe, the plunger the nature of exhaled air
should be pushed inside which will cause bubbles in the lime water kept
inside. Repeat the same process to insert air inside. Now put the end of the
plastic tube attached with the other test tube in your mouth and gently breathe
inside it. Keep your mouth aside when you inhale. Observe lime water in both
test tubes for 15 seconds. Continue the experiment for 15 seconds more if no
change is observed.
Observation: You may observe that there was no change in the lime water
where normal air was inserted through the syringe. But the lime water of the
test tube where exhaled air was inserted has turned milky.
Conclusion: The presence of CO? in the exhaled air has turned the lime
water milky. This is because the amount of CO? is more in exhaled air
than in normal air. So, the lime water was not changed when normal air was
inserted.
®) Individual Activity

Activity : Fill in the table :

O2
ee od

Co, eo

8

Exchange of Gases 167
7.3 Diseases of Respiratory System
The lungs are an important organ of respiratory system. This organ can be
damaged by the infection of bacteria and viruses. The lungs may be affected due
to air pollution, because of the presence of dust particles, and chemicals.
Carelessness may cause complex diseases and infections. Complexities and
death from common diseases can be decreased by learning about causes,
symptoms, remedies, and prevention of common diseases of the respiratory
system.
1. Asthma : Asthma usually occurs due to overactive immunity system. The
immunity system works more severely than necessary when a foreign body
enters into lungs. In many cases asthma patients have a family history of the
disease. It is not a contagious or microbe borne disease.
Cause: Certain allergic foods (prawn, beef, hilsha-fish etc.), smoke, dust, pollen
etc. entering the lung with the inhaled air, can be the cause of asthma. In infants,
common cold may cause symptoms of asthma.
Exception: A seasonal variation is noted. Symptoms of asthma increase in
certain seasons round the year.
Symptoms and signs: The symptoms of the disease are as follows -
- Sudden increase in respiratory distress.
- Suffocation, lip becomes blue, the veins of the neck swell.
- Rapid deep breathing is attempted and whizzing and whistling sound in the
chest.
- As sufficient oxygen is not available in the alveolus, that results in the
suffering of the patient.
- Sometimes white sputum may be discharged while coughing.
- Usually there is no fever.
- During inspiration, the skin between two ribs is drawn inward.
- Patient becomes weak.
Remedy: By medical treatment the disease cannot be fully cured. But by proper
medication prompt relief may be ensured.
“. Avoid allergens.

168 Biology

- Live in clean well -ventilated room.

- Avoid using or coming into contact with items like animal fur, artificial fiber
etc. that aggravate the symptoms.

- Becareful and follow physician's advice.

- Avoid smoking, tobacco, jarda, gul.

- Serve the patient liquid diet during breathing problem.

Prevention

- Live in hygienic atmosphere.

- Avoid air pollution and things that may cause asthma in the workplace or house.

- Always carry inhalers and medicine and take them when necessary. It is to
be noted that quacks treat patients of this disease with high dose steroids,
which gives instant relief from pain but causes long lasting negative health
consequences. This type of treatment as well, as quacks, should be avoided.

2. Bronchitis: Acute and chronic inflammation of the inner lining of any part of

the bronchi and bronchial tube is called bronchitis. The disease is caused by

bacterial infection. Living in unhealthy conditions, inhaling dust, polluted air,
smoking cigarettes and cold are some of the causes bronchitis. Once attacked by
bronchitis there is a possibility of recurring attack. Usually, infants and elderly
persons are attacked by this disease. Smoking, unhealthy environment and
pollution such as- industrial dust, smoke etc. are the main causes of this disease.

Symptoms

- Cough, chest pain and breathing distress.

- When coughing the patient feels severe chest pain.

- Fever and gradual weakness.

- Can not eat solid food.

- Sputum is discharged with cough. If phlegm or sputum comes out with
cough for continuous three months and if this disease attacks consecutively
for two years, it is considered to be chronic bronchitis.

Remedy : Preventive measures include-

- Stop smoking, drinking alcohol, use of tobacco.

ce)
S
aq

Exchange of Gases 169

- Follow treatment according to the physician's advice.

- Keep the patient in tolerable temperature and dry environment.

- Feed nutritious liquid and hot food, e.g. hot milk, soup etc.

- Taking full rest.

Prevention: Bad habits like smoking, drinking alcohol, taking tobacco should

be stopped.

- Abstain from working in environments with dust or smoke.

- Children or elderly people must not get cold.

3. Pneumonia: Pneumonia is a lung disease. Excessive cold may cause this

disease. Getting affected by cold after measles and bronchitis may lead to

Pneumonia. It is a dangerous disease for children and elderly people.

Cause: Pneumonia is caused by Pneumococcus bacteria. Pneumonia may also

be caused by viruses, bacteria or fungi. This disease may even occur enzymes or

saliva gets into the trachea.

Symptoms: These include-

- Deposition of mucous like liquid substances which produce cough.
Coughing and breathing distress.

- High fever and chest pain.

- Severe respiratory distress, at the last stage whizzing sound in the chest.

Remedy: These include -

- Seeking timely advice from a physician and to follow the treatment given.

- Serving hot and liquid nutritious diet.

- Drinking plenty of water.

Prevention: Preventive measures are-

- To be careful that the children and elders are not attacked with cold.

- Live in well ventilated house.

- Keep the patient in tolerable temperature and dry environment.

- Avoid smoking.

Forma -22, Biology Class-9-10

170 Biology

4. Tuberculosis: Tuberculosis is a well known air borne infectious disease. In

some cases, people coming into contact with patients having skin affected by

germs of tuberculosis are more likely to develop the disease. Those who work

hard, are weak, live in damp and unhealthy environment, suffer for malnutrition,

or remain exposed to patients of tuberculosis easily become the victim of

tuberculosis. Most of us think tuberculosis is only a lung disease. This idea is not

correct at all. Tuberculosis occurs at any organ of the body. such as- intestine,

bone, etc.

Not every person infected with tuberculosis becomes very sick and the

symptoms are not exposed easily. When the germs destroy white blood corpus-

cles, the body become weak then the symptoms are exposed.

Cause: The disease is caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, a type of

bacterium. However, some other bacteria that belong to the mycobacterium

family may also cause tuberculosis. This germ spreads in an unhealthy

environment easily.

Diagnosis: This disease can be found out by sputum test, skin test (MT test),

cyto- and histopathology test and chest X-ray.

Symptoms and signs

- Weight loss, general weakness.

- Usually cough and cold continues more than three weeks.

- Coughing, sometimes with blood.

- Evening sweat and rise of low fever.

- Chest pain, indigestion, abdominal diseases.

Remedy : It includes -

- Continue treatment according to the advice of physician.

- Treatment of the disease is a lengthy process, treatment should be continued
till the complete cure is achieved.

-  Physician’s instructions must be followed strictly.

- Patients with tuberculosis should be isolated or sent to hospitals for S
effective and complete treatment.

Exchange of Gases 171

- Keep the used belongings of the patient separately.

- Patient's cough and sputum should be buried in the soil.

- Proper treatment and adequate nutritious diet should be arranged.

- Without consulting the physician, medicine should not be stopped.

Prevention : To get rid of this disease, all children should be vaccinated by

B.C.G. The baby should be vaccinated within one year after birth. Though BCG

vaccination gives children protection against deadly tuberculosis, it doesn’t

remain effective in grownups. So administering vaccination in childhood is not

a lifelong protection. There is are facilities of vaccination in different health

centres of the country.

5. Lung Cancer: Among the various types of cancer, lung cancer is extensive

and terribly prevalent. In our country it is the leading cause of death of male

cancer patients. Smoking is considered to be one of the main causes of lung
cancer.

- Lung cancer may be caused by air and environmental pollution, coming in
contact with pollutants like asbestos, arsenic, chromium, nickel, solid metal
powder etc. in workplace or home.

- Tuberculosis or any other pneumonia causes one type of wound that
afterwards turns into cancer.

-  Itis assumed that shortage of roughage in diet increases the possibility of the disease.

Symptoms and signs: The sooner primary symptoms of lung cancer are

diagnosed and given treatment, the more is the chance of living longer. Primary

symptoms of lung cancer are found-

- long lasting dry irritating cough.

- chest pain, hoarseness of voice.

- gradual or day by day loss of weight, loss of appetite.

- asthma, frequent fever.

- repeatedly infected by pneumonia and bronchitis.

S - feel pain in bones, weakness, paralysis of any gland, jaundice.

172 Biology

Diagnosis

- Atthe primary stage lung cancer can be determined by examining cough and
sputum.

- X-ray of chest.

- CT scan

- MRI

For final confirmation, cytopathology or histopathology tests are done.

Remedy-

- When the symptoms are found, consult the physician without any delay.

- After the disease is diagnosed, treatment should be taken as per the advice
of the physician.

- Depending upon the necessity, use or apply radiotherapy.

Prevention: According to the view, preventive measures include-

-  Abstaining from smoking and drinking alcohol.

- Not taking excess fatty food.

- Regular exercise.

- Making the habit of taking adequate amounts of vegetables.

@)Exercise

Short answer questions

1. What is cellular respiration?

2. What is the function of Pleura?

3. What is Bronchitis?

4. What is the function of the Diaphragm?

5. What are the causes of Pneumonia? s

Exchange of Gases 173
Essay type questions
1. Write down the symptoms of tuberculosis.
Multiple choice questions
1. Which is the cause of tuberculosis?
a) Virus b) Bacteria
c) Fungi d) Protozoa
2. Gaseous exchange in plants occur through
i) stomata
ii) lenticels
iii) root hair
Which one is correct?
ai &ii bi & iii
c) ti & iii d) i. ii & iii
Answer the questions 3 and 4.
Rita went to the doctor with a complaint of weakness. Doctor informed her that she has
a deficiency of a particular blood cell. To meet this insufficiency he advised her
to take more nutritious food and vegetables.
3. Which one is deficient in Rita’s blood?
a) Red blood corpuscles b) White blood corpuscles
c) Platelet d) Plasma.
4. That Particular cell -
i) is a compound of iron
ii) reacts with oxygen
iti) contains carbon dioxide
Which one is correct?
a) i & ii b) i & iii
% c) ii & iii d) i. ii & iii
&

174 Biology

Creative questions

1.

4
) @
3 4S
Figure- P Figure -Q

a) Which cell carries oxygen in the blood?

b) What is the trachea?

c) Explain the process meant by P.

d) Pand Q are dependent on one another in connection with gaseous exchange.
Explain.

2. Rashed and Jamil works in ship breaking industry. Both of them called a
doctor for chest pain, cough and other complain. After different types of
tests, the doctor diagnosed that Rashed’s respiratory organ has irregular cell
division. On the other hand Jamil’s disease has spread in intestine and bones
along with respiratory organs.

a) What is the diaphragm?

b) What is external respiration?

c) Explain how does the disease spread in Rashed's body.

d) Which one of two diseases of Rashed and Jamil is comparatively easier to
be cured? Analyse.

<
&

Chapter Eight
Excretory System
A Bangladeshi scientist named Dr. Shuvo Roy invented an artificial Kidney
which is compatible for replacement in human body.
A good number of chemical reactions take place inside the cells of an organism.
So, all the physiological phenomena are performed neatly. Organisms remain
alive. Some products are produced by chemical reactions which are essential for
the body. The products of some of these reactions are poisonous, and these must
be removed from the body. For example, the breakdown of glucose during
respiration produces carbon dioxide. This is carried away by the blood and is
removed from lungs. Elimination of nitrogenous waste products and various
diseases in the kidney are discussed in this chapter.
=
&

176 Biology

® At the end of this chapter, we will be able to-

e Explain excretion in the human body.

@ Describe the production of excretory products in the human body.

© Describe the structure and functions of the kidneys.

e Describe the structure and functions of nephrons.

e Explain the role of the kidneys in osmoregulation.

© Describe the formation of kidney stones, remedies and prevention.

@ Describe the symptoms of kidney failure and what measures are to be taken in
these respects.

e Explain the role of dialysis to maintain the normal functions of the kidneys.

e Explain the concept of kidney transplantation and posthumous kidney donation.

e Describe the diseases of the urinary tract and measures taken to keep it free
from diseases.

e Investigate public opinion about posthumous kidney donation.

e Draw a labelled diagram of human kidneys and nephrons.

e Draw a poster to create social awareness about posthumous kidney donation.

e Draw a leaflet to create awareness to keep kidney and urinary tract (ureter)
free from diseases.

5

Excretory System 177
8.1 Excretory

Excretion 1s the biological process through

which harmful nitrogenous waste products Donal gore Kidney
produced by metabolic activity are removed >A

from the body. These substances are of no ¢ i

use for the body, but may cause ii

various diseases if they remain inside the oe ae awit artery
body for long. It can ever cause death. The Vanarcave .
system through which nitrogenous waste Renal Vein
products are excrete from the body is called i Unik

the excretory system. Excessive water, salt, Vaan A

and organic substances are excreted or Urinary
expelled from the body to maintain Y ~ bladder
physiological balance. The Kidney is an ¢— Urethra
excretory organ. The basic unit of the Figure: 8.01 Excretory system
kidney is the nephron.

Excretory products: Excretory products are mostly nitrogenous waste. Human
excretory products are expelled from the body as urine. Urine is almost 90%
water. Other components are urea, uric acid, creatanine and different kinds of
salts. The colour of the urine is light yellow due to the presence of a pigment
called urochrome. Excessive intake of proteins increases the acidity of urine.
Fruits and vegetables generally make urine alkaline.

8.2 Kidney :

The Excretory organ of the human body is the kidney. Two kidneys lie at the
back of the abdominal cavity, on either side of the vertebral column and the
lower part of the ribcage, attached to the back wall. They are red brown in colour
and bean shaped. The outer side of the kidney is convex, and the inner side is
concave, with an indentation called the hilus or hilum. The ureter and renal vein
comes out from the hilum and the renal artery enters the kidney. Two ureters
arise from each kidney, proceeding downwards to open into the urinary bladder.
The funnel shaped extended part (space) of the ureter is called the renal pelvis.
Forma -23, Biology Class-9-10

178 Biology

. _ Nephron

tion . 9 ~\ Collecting tubule
“| WY A Cortex
(¢ WZ \
-> Sf L) _ Medulla
Renal artery G; Gi NS ay Capsul
Renal . || IN? 4 “pst °
wan cae Pelvis
Renal pyramid
Figure: 8.02 : L.S of Kidney

Kidneys are enclosed with a special fibrous membrane, called the renal capsule.
Adjacent to the renal capsule is the cortex, and the inner side (part) is the
medulla. These regions are composed of connective tissues and blood vessels.
Generally, there are 8-12 renal pyramids in the medulla. The apex of each
pyramid is called papilla. These papilla project directly into the ureter.
Each kidney contains a particular type of tubules called uriniferus tubules. Each
uriniferous tubule has two parts, the nephron and the collecting tubule. Urine is
produced in the nephron and the collecting tubules carry urine to the pelvis.
Nephron : The functional unit and the secretory part of uriniferons tubule of the
kidney is the nephron. Each human kidney contains about Imillion to 1.2 million
nephrons. Each nephron is composed of a renal corpuscle, or malphigian body, and
renal tubule.
Each renal corpuscle is divided into two parts, the glomerulus and the Bowman's
capsule. The Bowman's capsule encloses the glomerulus. Each Bowman's
capsule is a cup- shaped organ, composed of two epithelial layers. Inside the
Bowman's capsule, is a small cluster of blood vessels called the glomerulus.
Afferent arteriols from the renal artery enters the capsule, and breaks into about
50 capillaries. These capillaries divide again and form a mass of fine capillaries.
These capillaries unite together and form efferent arteriols to leave the x
Bowman's capsule. 8

Excretory System 179
4 Dio Efferent
a yg Distal convoluted arteriole
re \) Vi) Md fatale / Glomerulus
ST N \ WA x Afferent arteriole
( ay y Bowman’s Capsule
Ce y Collecting| a convoluted
Sire) bul
ey, =; |
Gin) |
( \ MiSs 4] | — Loop of Henle
Figure : 8.03 A nephrone
The Glomerulus acts as a filter and produces filtrate from blood. The liquid
filtrate is called ultra-filtrate. This ultra-filtrate, when passing through the
tubules, repeatedly goes through absorption and excretion. Finally the liquid
filtrate that remains is urine, which passes to the ureter through the collecting
tubules and finally deposits to the urinary bladder, which spreads up to the
tubules called renal tubules. These convoluted tubules are behind the Bowman’s
capsule. Each renal tubules is divided into three regions, the proximal
convoluted tubules, Henley’s loop and the Distal convoluted tubule.
®) Individual Activity:
Activity: Draw a labelled diagram of kidney and a nephron.
Function of Kidney: A normal adult man expels almost 1500 milliliter urine
daily. Urine contains nitrogenous waste products, such as- urea, uric acid,
ammonia, creatinine etc. These are harmful to health. The Kidneys play an
important role in eliminating these waste products. Each nephron of the kidney
e 48 continuously producing urine through a complex process. This urine reaches
S the pelvis of the kidney through collecting tubules and proceeds through the

180 Biology
funnel- like extended part of the pelvis and enters the ureter. The Ureter carries
urine to the urinary bladder, where it is stored. When the urinary bladder fills
with urine, a sensation of needing to urinate is created and allows urine to pass
out of the body through the urethra. In this way, kidneys help to expel
nitrogenous waste product from the body. The Kidneys maintains the balance of
mineral salts e.g. sodium chloride, potassium chloride etc. also it
controls blood pressure and maintains the balance of water, acid and base of
blood.
Bowman’s Capsule
enclosses by Glomerulus Returning of urea-free
purifled blood into vein.
Enhtrance of blood into artery Uiyefltrate ir
with urea and other waste material |-=—=&
| € \ S)
a NN The final return of essential
Penetration of urea, watér ke SD), osterial into blood ‘
glucose and mineral salts Lf | front ureter.
into ureter from blood. ¢
Return of glucose aaah
; : : “(Sa
and mineral sal " ‘i ages <p Entrance of blood from
quandity:-intg popes el _L-collective tubule of ureter
Retum of water in required ep into urethra.
quantity into capillary tubule —_
(blood) from ureter.
Figure : 8.04 Function of Nephrone
Individual Activity
Waste products Organ Remark
Carbon dioxide
Nitrogenous waste products
Urea, Uric acid
Excessive water
ro}
3
N

Excretory System 181
Role of the Kidneys in Osmoregulation
For all physiological processes, an adequate amount of water is necessary.
Most of the water is removed from the body as urine. The main function of the
kidney is to keep the balance of water. The Nephrons of the kidney maintains
water equilibrium through reabsorption. Excretory fluids, water and other
substances are filtered in the glomerulus. In failure of the kidneys, water
accumulates in the body. The whole body, including eyes and face, may swell
up, and it can create high blood pressure. These are symptoms, of errors in
osmoregulation.
Kidney stone: Normal activities of the kidneys can be hampered due to some
diseases (illness). Burning sensation of kidney, problems in urination and kidney
stone may occur. The symptoms of kidney diseases are: the whole body may
swell up (waterlogged), loss of albumin during urination, urine with patches of
blood, burning sensation during urination, urinating often, or in some cases
urination reduced or stopped. Small stone like substances produced by the kidney
is known as the kidney stone. Any one can be attacked by these diseases. But
males have the higher possibility of stone formation than females. Excessive
body weight (obesity), infection in the kidneys, and intake of insufficient water
are the causes of kidney stones.
Initially the formation of kidney stones causes no remarkable problem.
Problems occur when the stone goes downward into the ureter and obstructs
urination. A very dull and steady pain in the lower back is the symptom of this
disease. Blood passes into the urine. Fever starts with shaking. Treatment
depends upon the size and location of the stones. Stones can be removed by
taking sufficient water and treatment. Stones can be removed by modern
methods such as uteroscopic, ultrasonic lithtripsi or surgical operation.
8.3: Kidney failure, Dialysis and kidney transplant
Kidney failure occurs gradually from diseases such as nephrities, diabates,
hypertension (high blood pressure), stones etc. Side effects of some medicine,
severe diarrhoea, excessive blood loss etc. are also causes of sudden failure of
the kidneys. Symptoms of kidney failure are, difficulty in urination and
increased level of creatinine in blood. A Kidney machine (dialysis machine) can
x be used to remove the harmful waste products from a patient's blood. The patient
& has to periodically use the kidney machine to purify the blood.

182 Biology
Dialysis: When the kidneys are badly damaged or inactive then the blood can be
filtered (purified) by a scientific method called dialysis. Generally dialysis is
done by a dialysis machine. One end of the dialysis tube of the dialysis machine
is led to the artery of patient’s wrist and another end is led to the vein of the same
wrist. Blood from the artery passes into the dialysis tube. The wall of the
dialysis tube is partially semipermeable, so urea, uric acid, other harmful
substance, are removed (as filtrate). The purified blood enters into the patient’s
body through the vein. The dialysis tube is submerged in a liquid similar to that
of blood plasma. In this way, harmful nitrogenous waste is excreted out through
dialysis machine. But this process is very expensive and time consuming.
Blood is flowing from
artery by pumping through
dialysis machine
¥ Dialysis tube made of selectively
permeable membrane
Entry of blood from / / Jf
dialysis machine to vein /
Ye
lg Urea and other waste
Dialysis fluid > material enriched fluid
Figure: 8.05 Dialysis machine
Transplantation: When the kidneys become damaged or inactive, they can be
replaced by a healthy kidney of a healthy person. This is called transplantation.
Kidney replacement can be done in two ways: a kidney taken from close relative
or from a dead person (posthumous). Close relatives means the patient’s father,
mother, siblings, uncle, aunt. A dead person would be a person who is brain dead
but the organs are kept alive artificially. Donation of posthumous kidney is a
good service to mankind.
Millions of kidney failure patients, get a healthy life by transplanting kidneys. In S
our country, kidney transplantation has been done very successfully. Due to “

Excretory System 183
legal complications in our country, persons other than close relatives cannot
donate kidneys and due to this, patients are deprived from getting a healthy
kidney. Only one kidney is enough for a person for his /her survival, so kidney
failure could be treated by transplanting one kidney. Before transplantation,
matching of tissue is necessary. The probability of matching of kidney tissue is
higher with patient’s father, mother, siblings and close relatives.
Leading an unhealthy life and drinking insufficient water may cause urinary
tract or ureter disease. An Infection in the ureter causes burning sensations along
with other symptoms. With proper treatment most patient recover completely.
Previously it was though that everyone should drink eight glasses of water daily.
Modern research has shown that intake of water varies with, sex, nature of job,
types of physical illness and weather. Excessive water should not be drunk
unless necessary. Water should be taken only to fulfil thirst.
Precaution: Many of us drink saline while sweating in hot weather, even if we
are not suffering from diarrhoea or vomiting, if we are tired or even without any
reason. This is not right, especially in case of elderly people it can bring danger
to their health. Even in case of suffering from diarrhoea and vomiting, people
should be treated with the prescribed amount of saline as suggested by a doctor.
In case of simple tiredness or sweating, it is enough to drink some water mixed
with lemon juice and a pinch of salt. Sugar can be added in the case of
non-diabetic patients.
@) Individual Activity:
Activity: Draw a poster regarding posthumous kidney donation and place it
in the class room.
Measure to keep the urinary tract healthy: Be careful about tonsillitis and
scabies in children and keep control of high blood pressure and diabetes.
Immediate treatment for diarrhoea, blood loss, avoiding smoking and pain
relieving medicine, drinking adequate amount of water, lead a healthy life.
@) Individual Activity:
co Activity: Make a leaflet in a group regarding how to keep the kidneys and
Ss the urinary tract healthy.

184 Biology
(?) Exercise
Short answer questions
1. What is dialysis?
2. What is the malpigian organ?
3. What is the pelvis?
4. What are excretory products?
5. What are kidney stone?
© Essay type questions
1. Explain measures to keep the ureter sound.
OS) Multiple choice questions
1. Where is urea produced?
a) Kidney b) Liver
c) Body cell d) Renal artery
2. Decreases the possibility of forming kidney stones?
i) decreasing body weight
ii) drinking insufficient water
iii) in taking less amount of protein
Which one is correct?
a)i&ii b) i & iii
c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
Read the stem and answer questions 3 and 4.
Tonni does not follow the rules of drinking water and eating. Recently she excretes
less urine and feels pain in her lower back.
3. Causes of producing less urine-
i) excessive sweating
ii) taking less fruits co
iii) taking salty food S

Excretory System 185
Which one is correct?

a)i&ii b)i & iii

c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
4. The causes of this problem-

i) deposit water

ii) inflammation in urinary duct

iii) elimination of sugar with urine.
Which one is correct?

ai&ii b) ii & iti

c)i & iii d) i, ii & iii
@ Creative questions
1.

(
~ Figure A
a) What is the medulla?
b) What is the glomerulus?
c) Explain why Figure-A is compared with a filter?
d) If Figure-A is damaged or inactive. What measures will you take to prevent
damage to Figure A? give your opinion.

Forma -24, Biology Class-9-10

Chapter Nine
Firmness and Locomotion
“itn ~
Bie -
mS } q <4
Humans move from one place to another in search of food, protection and
breeding. The process by which animals move from one place to another by
their own effort, is called locomotion. The system, which gives the structure,
definite shape and protection of different organs from injury and helps in
locomotion, is called the skeletal system.
In this chapter we will learn about the structure of the skeletal system, its
function, and way of protection.
%
8

Firmness and Locomotion 187
® At the end of this chapter, we will be able to-
¢ Describe the human skeleton.
¢ Explain the role of the skeleton in firmness and locomotion.
¢@ Explain the function of bone and bone joints.
¢ Explain the function of muscles.
¢ Explain the functions of tendons and ligaments.
¢ Describe the causes, symptoms, remedy of osteoporosis.
¢ Describe the causes, symptoms and remedy of arthritis.
@ Draw and label different parts of the skeleton.
¢ Be conscious about the soundness of bones.
FS
BS

188 Biology
9.1 Introduction of human skeleton
For the construction of a house at first a structural frame work is essential.
The Skeleton is the frame work of our body. The human skeleton is composed of
a combination of 206 long, small, flat, unequal bones. It gives the definite shape
to the body and protects the internal organs (heart, lungs, stomach,
intestine, brain etc.) Without a strong bony structure a fixed shape is not possible.
All bones and associated parts together constitute the skeleton.
— Cranium
aa Maxill
‘= axilla
. _ Mandible
SA Humerus—— SS Ss
Carpal. Lf — —« Te Se Se
Mii C=@) aw Rib
My ‘amen | WE, \ WZ SF
° fas ORY a
i di)
Femur—————____
Q 2) :
Patella ——@ _ieitiral col = Vertebra
( rai column .
Tibia —_ | | — Pubis
| . x Sacrum
Vi Coxis
| Fibula Vw « *
it AN Tlium
Tarsal —_@
meta tarsal ——f py
Phalanges —|__| Figure: 9.01 Human skeleton
Bone joints are connected together with the various parts of the skeleton and
assists in movement. Bones remain attached with voluntary muscles that helps
the movement of different organs. The skeletal system is composed of bones,
cartilages, ligaments, tendons, bone joints and muscles. 20
S
QQ

Firmness and Locomotion 189

Human skeleton is divided into two parts,

(1) Exoskeleton and (2) Endoskeleton.

(1) Exoskeleton : The parts of the skeleton that exist outside the body e.g. nail,

hair etc.

(2) Endoskeleton : The part of the skeleton which can not be seen from outside.

The endoskeleton is mainly composed of cartilages and bones.

9.1.1 Role of skeleton in firmness and locomotion

The skeleton has the following functions :

(a) Structure and firmness of the body- The skeleton forms the hard structure

of the body and gives a definite shape to the body. It joins lower organs with

upper organs.

(b) Protection- The Skull protects the brain, the spinal cord within the vertebral

column or backbone, and the lungs and heart within the thorax. Muscles are

attached to the skeleton and skeletal muscles are involved in carrying the weight

of the body.

(c) Movement and Locomotion- Hands, legs, shoulders and the pectoral girdle

and pelvic or hip girdle help in movement. The Muscular system has an

important role in this act. Due to the attachment of muscles with the bones, we

can move the bones and our bodies move.

(d) Production of red blood cells- Bone marrow produces red blood cells.

(e) Storage of mineral salts- Bones store mineral salts (calcium, potassium,

phosphorus). This is why the bones remain hard and strong.

9.1.2 Bone, Cartilage and Joint

Bone: The Bone is a modified form of connective tissue. It is the hardest tissue

of the body. The matrix of the bone (or intercellular substance of the bone) is

composed of organic compounds. Bone cells are scattered within the matrix. The

older bones decay and new bones develops simultaneously. Different kinds of

bone diseases occur if the balance (decay and development) is disturbed. In later

age, bone decay is relatively higher than bone formation. Bones are mainly

composed of different compounds of phosphorus, potassium and calcium. It

contains approximately 40-50%. Living bone cells contain 40% organic and 60%
FS inorganic substances. To develop bone cells, vitamin-D and calcium enriched
“' foods are needed. Due to the deficiency of these substances, normal growth of

190 Biology
bones is resisted. Sun light hits the cholesterol of the skin and brings some
changes which in turn brings some gradual changes in the liver and kidney and
thus, through this continuous process, vitamin-D is synthesized. So it is
necessary to come in contact with adequate sunlight. There is a possibility of
suffering from deficiency of vitamin-D for those who always stay at home and
wear clothes that covers the whole body.
Cartilage: Cartilage is not hard just like bone. These are relatively soft and
elastic or flexible. It is a different form of connective tissue. These cells are
found solitary or in pairs and are densely scattered out within the matrix. From
the cartilaginous tissue a kind of hard semitransparent organic substance is
secreted. Matrix is composed of chondrin. It is light blue in colour. In living
cartilaginous cells the protoplasm is transparent, with a round nucleus and cavity
is noticed within the chondrin. These are called capsules or lacunae.
Chondrocytes and chondroblasts are inside it. All cartilage is enclosed by a layer
of fibrons connective tissues that is called the perichondrium. This layer is
glazing white in colour. So, cartilage looks white, bluish and glazy shining.
There are various types of cartilage within the body, e.g. the cartilage in the
pinna. Cartilages is found in different joints, or on the articulating surface of
some of the bones.
®) Individual Activity

Activity: Find out the differences between bone and cartilage.
Bone joint or articulation: The joints between two or more bones are called
bone joints. In every joint, bones are joined firmly together by flexible elastic
tissues called ligaments. So, the bones can not be dislocated easily. The joint
helps in the movement of limbs. All the joints of our body are not of the same
type. Some are fixed, e.g. intervertebral joint. Some are freely moveable e.g.
joints of hands and legs.
Synovial joint: When two ends of two bones touches, it makes a joint to form a
synovial bone joint. When more than two bones make a joint, it is called complex
synovial joint. 20
The parts of synovial joints are: bone ends are covered with cartilage, and %

Firmness and Locomotion 191
synovial fluids and a cover or
capsule which is a tough fibrous 21 | __ spongy bone
tissue or ligament that firmly holds js Suit é Perjosteum
the joint. The synovial fluid and the ¢ eehectt, strong b x
cartilage of the joint reduces friction ‘rere = Fie naa E
so that less energy is consumed for Synovie membrane’
movement of joint. tain pumulnansy 5
Bone joints are of different types. xe oF Cartilage
(a). Fixed joint - The bones are fethrete | Ligament
joined firmly, so it is immoveable.
Example - joint of the cranium. Figure: 9.112 Synovial jomt
(b). Slightly movable joint - These joints are joined with one another and has a
small sliding surface. So, we can bend the body. Example - joint of back bone.
(c). Freely movable joint - These joints can be moved easily. Example-wrist
joint ball and socket joint.
(os)
cunt Wz
A ¢
\ Ball & Socket joint
Hinge joint
Figure: 9.3 Ball and socket and hinge joint
(i) Ball and socket joint : Joints where the round one head of the bone fits into a
cup shaped socket or cavity of another bone in such a way that it allows the bone's
movement in all planes. This is also a type of synovial joints.
For example: Shoulder joint, ball and socket joint of thigh bone.
(ii) Hinge joint: The elbows, knees, joints of the finger are the examples of hinge
eo Joints. It moves like a hinge of a door. It can be moved in one plane only. These
S are also examples of synovial joints.

192 Biology
®) Individual Activity
Activity: Draw the different parts of the human skeleton and label them.
9.2 Muscles
The muscular system consists of involuntary muscles of the internal organs, the
wall of the blood vessels, the cardiac muscles of the heart, and the voluntary
muscles that are attached to the bones. You have learned earlier about muscles.
The muscular system performs various important functions, such as :
¢ Movement of organs, helps movement, placing the organs in orderly manner
and balancing.
¢ The muscular system along with the skeletal system gives a definite structure
that stores energy for the future and muscles stores glycogen.
¢ The cardiac muscles are of special type, it maintains heart beat and blood
circulation.
¢ Muscles keeps active role in the expulsion of stool from the body and in the
movement of food particle inside the alimentary canal.
9.2.1 Role of bones and muscles in human locomotion
The muscles and bones perform an important role in locomotion. The skeleton
constitutes the structure of the body and muscular system makes the covering of
this structure. Voluntary muscles are attached to the bones by a strong elastic
part named a tendon. Muscle contraction is the result of nerve impulses. With
the withdrawal of impulses the muscle again extends or relaxes. This
contraction and relaxation of muscles, attached with the bones, helps in
movement.In this way muscles help in stretching or extension of limbs.
Contraction of the muscle draws a bone or limb away from the body or towards
the body, helps in lowering a part, lifting a part or rotating a part etc. The role of
muscles in the movement of bones is described with an example : observe how
muscles work to bend or extend the elbow. The arm can bend at the elbow. The
biceps muscle is attached to the scapula at the top and the radius at the bottom.
By the stimulation of voluntary nerves when it contracts, the biceps S

Firmness and Locomotion 193
pulls the radius and ulna towards the body, so the arm bends. At that time the
triceps muscle relaxes. To push the arm back down again, an opposite
phenomenon occurs.That means by stimulation of voluntary nerves, the triceps
muscle contracts and straightens or extends the radius and ulna. At the same
time, the biceps relaxes. In this way we can bend and extend our arm by the
simultaneous contraction of the biceps and triceps muscles. In this way
various muscles help in the movement of different organs.
7
Bish cael “T muscle
Triceps muscle Triceps muscle ‘
Figure: 9.04 shows opposite action of biceps and triceps muscle
in movement of forearm.
9.2.2 Tendon and ligament
When we say that muscles are attached to the bones or one bone is attached to
another bone with the help of a band then a question may arise, how and why
this happens. The Terminal portion of muscles form a rope like strong structure
which is attached to the bones. This strong terminal portion of the muscle is
called a tendon. Tendons are composed of dense, white fibrous connective
tissues.
Unbranched white fibers are scattered in the matrix. These are composed of
parallel bundles. Numerous fibers form a bundle. These bundles together make
a bunch of bundles. The outer surface of these bundles is surrounded by areolar
tissue and make a big bunch. Blood vessels, lymphatic ducts and nerves enters
into the tendon through this areolar tissue. It is flexible, but inelastic.
The fibers of the tendon are attached with the sarcolema of the muscle fibers. At
the junction between muscles and tendons the areolar tissues that surround the
bunch of bundles of tendon forms a continuous connection with the muscle
bundles to build a strong connection. The tendon is strong and has less chance
Forma -25, Biology Class-9-10

194 Biology
of tearing or breaking than that of a muscle or bone, but if it does tear, there is
no chance of repair. The tendon the a rope like structure which is attached to
the bone and constitutes a structure of the body that renders firmness, helps in
the formation of ligament and makes a mechanical defense against pressure.
Bones are attached to each other by a thin, cloth-like, soft but strong, elastic
band like structure. These are ligaments. They are composed of a combination
of white and yellow fibers. The number of elastic yellow fibers is excessive. A
fine, branched network of elastic fibers is scattered in this kind of tissue. The
fibres stay separate instead of in bundles. These have elasticity and are
composed of elastic protein. There are fibroblast cells in the fibers. Just like a
hinge attaches the door to its frame, in the same way tendons and ligaments are
firmly attached to the bones. So, the organ can bend, stretch and move and the
bones are not dislocated or separated.
Tendon Ww ¥ — - = —
Ligament _ ————————
Figure: 9.05 tendon and Ligament
©) Individual Activity
Activity: Draw this table in your note book and fill it.
Characteristics Tendon Ligament
Structure
Function
Elasticity
=
8

Firmness and Locomotion 195
9.3 Diseases of Bones
(a) Osteoporosis : You have learned earlier that, calctum is an important
ingredient for the formation of bones and for their strength. Calcium and vitamin
enriched food is essential for the growth of bones. Osteoporesis is a calcium
deficiency disease.
Generally, elderly males and females suffer from this disease. There is a higher
chance of having this disease, in males who are taking medicine with steroids and
the females after their menopause. Those, who lead lazy life, do less physical
labour and are suffering from arthritis, have a higher chance of being attacked
with this disease. Beside this, there is a maximum possibility of osteoporosis in a
person if the person has suffered from arthritis for a long time.
Cause : This disease develops due to the deficiency of mineral salts, particularly
of calcium. After reaching the menopause stage the density and thickness of
bones declines in females, and the bones become brittle.
Symptoms:
* bones become brittle, thickness decreases
* muscle strength reduces
* feel back pain
* pain in bones
Diagnosis : The disease can be diagnosed by examining the density of the bone
with the help of density measuring equipment. At the preliminary stage of the
disease, the symptoms are not noticed. Suddenly hip bones or any other bone
may fructure.
Remedy:
¢ Elderly people should take 1200 milligram calcium.
¢ Drink skimmed milk and other dairy products.
¢ Consume orange juice, green vegetables, soya product and calcium enriched
food.
Prevention:
* Come in contact of adequate sunlight.
¢ Taking vitamin - 'D' and calcium enriched food.
* Regular exercise (those who are already suffering from osteoporosis should
take doctor’s advice before starting exercise).
«Take balanced and cellulose-rich food.

196 Biology
(b) Rheumatoid Arthritis: Of the hundreds of type of arthritis, rhneumatoids
arthritis is one of them. Generally elderly people suffer from this disease. A young
person’s pain in the joints may be a symptom of rheumatic or any other disease
(to be seen in chapter-6). Treatment varies according to the nature of pain in
bone joints. Two persons may suffer from two different joint pains but show the
same symptom. In this case both of them need different treatments. So treatment
should not be stopped without doctor’s consultation. It may bring bad effects
instead of benefits.
Symptoms
¢ Inflammation and pain in bone joints.
° Stiff bone joints.
¢ Pain during articular movement.
¢ Joint swelling.
Remedy : The disease is not fully cured in elders. But the following measures
may relieve the disease to some extent.
¢ Avoid hard labour.
¢ Apply luke warm heat in the affected joint.
° Do light exercise to keep the joint moveable.
¢ According to the doctor's advice taking pain relieving medicine and proper
treatment can relieve from this disease.
Prevention:
Regular exercise to be done according to doctor’s advice.
Taking balanced and fibrous food.
@) Individual Activity
Activity: Collect information about life style, and consumption food of the
women who are above 50 years. Find out the causes of osteoporosis,
arthritis among them and write them down.
—
&

Firmness and Locomotion 197
(?) Exercise
@) Short answer questions
1. What is a bone joint?
2. What are the five functions of skeleton?
3. What are the differences between tendon and ligament?
4. What are the characteristics of a synovial joint?
5. What are the differences between bone and cartilage.
Essay type questions
1. Write down the causes and symptoms of osteoporosis.
OS) Multiple choice questions
1. Which one is a characteristic of bone?
a) Elastic b) Soft
c) Strong d) Fibrous
2. Tissues of tendons are —
i) white and glossy
ii) unbranched and waved
iii) fibrous and in cluster
Which one is correct?
ai&ii b) i & iii
c) ti & iii d) i, ii & iii
Observed the stem and answer the questions 3 and 4.
60 years old Rahima Begum can not work due to pain in her hand and foot.
= Doctor has said, she is sufferrng from osteoporosis due to calcium deficiency.
N

198 Biology
3. Which one is a symptom of this disease?
a) increase the density of bone b) bone becomes brittle
c) feel pain in waist d) increasing muscle strength
4. Which one is a preventive measure of this disease -
i) taking roughage based food
ii) to avoid lazy life
iii) taking less vitamin ‘D’ enriched food
which one is correct?
ai&ii b)i & iii
c) ii & iii d) i, it & iii
Creative questions
1. 12 years old Binita is healthy and restless. She spends most of the day time
running and playing. One day while she was running she fell down and the ligaments
of her leg were injured.
a) What is bone?
b) What do you mean by Arthritis?
c) Explain why the injured part of Binita’s body can be compared with a_ hinge.
d) What type of co-ordination is necessary to carry out the activities done by Binita?
Analyse it.
a) What is a tendon?
b) What is osteoporosis?
c) Explain why the cell structure of ‘X’ is different?
d) How does co-ordination between X and Y plays a role in movement? x
Analyse it. “

Chapter Ten
Co-ordination
TN fee SR PP
\ ‘ Pci

We know that, various physiological actions and reactions are happening within
the body. These activities happen all together. Co-ordination of these activities
is necessary because if there is a lack of co-ordination then abnormalities occur.
In plants there is co-ordination to perform all physiological processes, such as:
movement, reproduction, metabolism, germination, growth etc.
The Human body performs different activities with the co-ordination of brain
and hormones. The co-ordination of plants and human are discussed in this
chapter.

=

BS

200 Biology

® At the end of this chapter, we will be able to-

« Explain the co-ordination system in plants.

« Explain the co-ordination system in animals.

" Explain the functions of the different parts of the nervous system.

« Explain the structure and functions of a neuron.

« Explain reflex actions.

« Explain emotional transmission.

" Explain the main functions of hormones.

« Explain irregular secretion of hormones that creates physical problems.

« Describe instant measures to be taken against stroke and its treatment.

" Describe nervous disorders’ causes, symptoms and remedies.

" Analyse the effects of tobacco and drugs in coordinating activities.

« Investigate the cause of physical disorders regarding hormones.

" Raise awareness regarding the harmful effects of drugs or addiction.

« Draw a leaflet or poster regarding the harmful effects of drugs or addiction.

" Be aware of the harmful effects of tobacco and drugs on the nervous system.
5

Co-ordination 201
10.1 Coordination in Plants

Different physiological actrvities are simultaneously and continuously carried
out in a plant cell. These activities are accomplished through some systems and
methods. The coordination of physiological activities is an essential act. If there
is no coordination in plant life, many abnormalities will arise.

In the life span of a plant the stages in the life cycle, such as germination, growth
and development, flowering, the development of fruit, aging, dormancy etc.
follow a set of systematic rules. The significance of weather and climatic factors
on these processes is also notable.

With the growth and movement, the different physiological activities in plants
are complex and ceaseless. Despite this, these activities are accomplished
following special regulations and systems. One activity does not interrupt
another in any way.

10.1.1 Phytohormone

The biochemical substance which is produced in the plant body and regulates
growth and development of the plant, is called a hormone. Plant hormone is called
phytohormone. Some describe phytohormones as plant growth substances.
According to most scientists, any chemical substance, being produced in cells and
being translocated to other distant cells, and controls their activities and this
substance are called hormones. Every cell of a plant has the ability to produce
hormones. The main natural phytohormones are auxin, gibberellin, cytokinin,
abscisic acid, and ethylene. The hormones, which are usually found in plant, are
auxin, gibberellin, cytokinin and abscisic acid. Hormones are not plant nutrients
but it regulates the activities of the plant.

Other than the hormones mentioned above, there are some other hormones which
could not be separated or identified. They are called postulated hormones. They
mainly help activities related to the development of flowers and reproductive
organs. Florigen and Vernalin are the main hormones of this type. Florigen is
formed in the leaves and, being translocated to the base of the petiole, transforms
the vegetative buds into floral buds. So, florigen helps a plant in its flowering.
Forma -26, Biology Class-9-10

202 Biology
The main phytohormones are mentioned below:
(a) Auxin: Charles Darwin first discovered this phytohormone, and later Kogl
and Haagen Snit called it auxin. Charles Darwin studied the effect of light on the
coleoptiles of plants. When light shines on one side of coleoptiles, it turns
towards the source of light, but in darkness it grows erectly. By performing
experiments, scientists found that a chemical substance at the top of the
coleoptiles is for that type of movement. This substance is auxin. After the
application of auxin, roots grow from grafted buds, preventing the premature
shedding of fruits. In plant cells the movement of auxin happens downwards.
The rate of osmosis and respiration is increased due to auxin. It also plays a role
in producing fruits without seeds.
(b) Gibberellin: The causal organism of Bakanae disease of rice is a kind of
fungus, which causes an over growth of the rice plant. An organic substance can
be extracted from it, due to which the overgrowth of rice plant occurs. This
substance is gibberellin. Most of the gibberellins are found in mature seeds but
they are also traced in seedlings, cotyledons and meristematic regions of the
leaves. Elongation of the internodes are influenced by the phytohormone. So, the
plants grow excessively in length. If this hormone is applied to a stunted plant,
it grows more in length than a normal plant would. It plays a role in blooming
flowers and in shortening the period of dormancy in seeds and in germination.
(c) Cytokinin : Cytokinin is found in fruits, cereals and the water of green
coconuts. It is also found in the roots of some plants. This generally stimulate the
process of cell division, mixed in different level of concentrations with Auxin.
The hormone also plays a role in the growth of cells, the development of organ
or plant parts, breaking the dormancy of seeds and organs, and in delaying the
aging process. During cell division cytokinesis occurs in a cell because of the
effect of cytokinin.
(d) Ethylene: This hormone is a gaseous substance. It helps the fruit to ripen. It
is also found in fruits, flowers, seeds, leaves and roots. Ethylene breaks
dormancy in seeds and buds, and helps seedlings to grow. It also play arole in ,
S
N

Co-ordination 203
the growth of seedlings, stems and triggers the initiation of growing flowers and
fruits. Ethylene accelerates the shedding the of leaf, flower and fruit. It is also
used to ripen fruit artificially.
Uses of hormones: Auxin and other hormones help in growing roots in graft
tissue. A kind of auxin named Indole acetic acid improves the effectiveness of
cambium. As a result, uncontrolled cell clusters are developed and the injuries
are healed up. By applying auxin, the shedding of fruits is delayed. Auxin and
gibberellin are also used in producing fruits without seeds.
Growth
The effect of light and temperature on the development of different organs of the
plant is remarkable. Through different synthesizing methods, the formation of
distinct elements causes the development of new organs. In the presence of light,
the hormone auxin becomes inactive and so, in the dark (absence of light), the
concentration of auxin increases. Some scientists believe that auxin in lighted part
moves to the dark region and there growth occurs at a higher rate. The growth of
lighted part, being inhibited, turns more towards light.
The tip of the plumule or radicle can feel the stimulus of gravitation. This is
called geoperception. Owing to gravitation, the components of the cell are
translocated downwards. They cause a pressure on the wall of cell laterally. This
is why gravitational movement is accomplished.
The flowering of most plants depends on photoperiod. For example, the
Chrysanthemum is a short day plant. Long day light causes inhibition to their
flowering. The rhythm of the light and dark periods in a plant is an example of a
biological clock.
On the basis of the rhythm of light and dark in plants, plants are divided into
three categories-
(a) Short Day Plant: Average daily photoperiod of 8-12 hours is required for
flowering. For example, Garland chrysanthemum and Dahlia.
(b). Long Day Plant: Average daily photoperiod of 12-16 hours is required for
flowering. For example, Lettuce and Jhinga.

« (c). Day Neutral Plant: Photoperiod has no role on flowering. For example,

& Garden Cucumber and Sunflower.

204 Biology
Like light, heat and also plays a role in the growth of plant and flowering in
them. If cold is applied to the germinating seeds of many plants, their flowering
periods get advanced. The acceleration of flowering of plants by applying cold
is called vernalization. Scientists have proven the effect of temperature on the
flowering of plants. Flowering is prolonged if the wheat of winter is cultivated
in summer. If 2°- 5° C temperature is applied on the seeds after sowing, normal
flowering occurs in them,

In this way, plants develop the coordination in their physiological activities.
Movement

Like other living organisms, plants are able to perceive stimuli. This is why the
reflex made by external and internal stimuli cause movement in plants. Some
movements in plants happen because of growth and other movements occur in
plants because of internal and external stimuli. Movement always occurs due to
some factors.

Movements in plants can be categorized

into two: movement of locomotion and

movement of curvature. When any part

of a plant holistically moves from one

place to another is called movement of ¢: a

locomotion. For example, this type of a Ke

movement is found in the gametes and ( > &

zoospores of some fungi and higher ei)

plants. It is also found in some bacteria

and algae, for example, Volvox, a>
Chlamydomonas and diatoms. Figure: 10.01:Response of planttowards
Higher plants anchored in soil cannot move from one mace to another. But they
can move and curve their organs or parts of organ to some extent. This type of
movement is called movement of curvature.

Movement of the stem towards light, movement of the root towards dark and
twining of tendril around suitable host are the examples of movement of =

Co-ordination 205
curvature. Movement of locomotion and movement of curvature are of many
types. Among them phototrophic movement is notable.
Phototrophic movement or phototropism
Phototrophic movement is a kind of movement of curvature. The stem and
branches of a plant always move towards light and the root always moves away
from light. The movement of the stem towards light is called positive
phototropism and the movement of root away from the light is called negative
phototropism.
@) Individual Work
Activity : Observe a plant for a week keeping it by the side of a window
of your classroom and present the results obtained, with reasons.
@) Individual Work
Activity : Test the movement of germinated chickpea root towards gravity
and present the results with reasons.
10.2 Co-ordination in animals
Influence of Hormones : Necessary co-ordination in animals is done by nerves
and hormones. An animal's activities (movement, or behavioral change) occurs
due to hormones. Hormones are secreted from different ductless glands, which
control each other. The activities of hormones are controlled by the nervous
system. Activities of hormone can be considered to be workers. As a whole
which worker works, where, and how long he will work are all controlled by the
manager. Like this, the nervous system controls the activities of the hormones.
The hormones have a long term effect on the function and development of the
«» nervous system.
S

206 Biology
At first there was an idea that a hormone is a stimulating substance. But later it was
found that all hormones are not stimulating in function, some are inhibitors. Very
small amounts of hormones are required to control particular physiological
functions. Asa stimulator or inhibitor hormones controls growth, development and
functions of various tissues. The influence of hormones on an individual’s
behaviors, nature, and emotional impulse is very important. Hormones are carried
by the blood from the place of origin to distant places where they stimulate certain
cells or organs to respond. So they are often called chemical messengers.
Animals use hormones for co-ordination. If an ant gets a trace of food, it secretes
a hormone from the source to its destination known as a pheromone. Other ants
go to the food by following the path of this pheromone. After eating all the food
ants stop secreting the pheromone, and so influence the other ants not to go there
again. Some insects secrete pheromones in the air even from 2-4 kilometer
distance. Humans make use of pheromones to destroy harmful insects. This
process is very environmentally friendly to control harmful insects.
Influence of nerves : Different organs take part in different activities, such as :
walking, sitting, talking, thinking, laughing, crying etc. To regulate these organs,
coordination and integration are necessary. The nervous system and hormones
together directs, controls and coordinates all those activities. The system,
through which the animal responds to stimuli, maintains connections of various
organs, co-ordinates activities, and physiological processes and maintains
relations with the environment, is called the nervous system. To perform
different activities our body needs the co-ordination of millions of cells.
The nervous system plays an important role in coordinating the different
activities of a body.
All the activities of the body are performed by receiving stimuli from the
environment and producing responses. The outside of the body is the
external environment and the inner side is the internal environment. Stimulus
from the external environment is sound, sight, taste and touch. These create
stimulation at sensory nerves of the ear, the nose, the eye, tongue and skin.
Internal stimulants are heat, pressure and various chemical substances. Some x
S
N

Co-ordination 207
nerve impulses originate inside the central nervous system. Two types of
stimuli can create stimulation to the sensory and motor nerves. Impulses which
pass along sensory neuron fibers to the brain. The brain receives impulses from
the sensory organs and then sends impulses through the motor nerves to the
glands and muscles, causing them to function accordingly.
10.3 Nervous system
Nervous system: The nervous system coordinates with different organs and
systems, carries impulses to different parts of the body, and maintains a relation
with the environment by responding to stimuli.
The nervous system :
| Nervous
system
Central nervous ‘Peripheral nervous
system system
Brain | (Spinal cord) { Cranial spinal epeneeic
nerves system
; i S thetic P; theti
10.3.1 Central Nervous System
Central nervous system consists of the brain and the spinal cord. The Brain is
protected by the skull.
Brain : The swollen part of the nervous system, at the top of the spinal cord and
inside the skull, is called the brain. The Brain is the manager of the nervous
system. The brain is divided into three parts: a) Fore brain b) Mid brain and
c) Hind brain.
eo)
S

208 Biology
a) Fore brain or Prosencephalon : The largest part of the brain is the cerebrum,
which consists of two completely divided lobes, the right and the left. They are
separated by deep furrows. These are the cerebral hemispheres. Though there is
a deep furrow between two lobes, they are still connected by a bunch of nerves
named the corpus callosum. The right hemisphere controls the left side of the
body and the left hemisphere controls the right side of the body. This part of the
brain has a folded and wrinkled surface. It is covered by a membrane called
maninges. The left lobe of the cerebrum is comparatively well developed. The
cerebrum is also called the fore brain. The exterior surface of the cerebrum is
named the cortex and is composed of numerous neurons and is gray in colour.
So, the other name of the cortex is grey matter. The deeper layer of the cerebrum
consists of axons of neurons which is covered by white coloured mayaline. So
the white matter is situated in the depth of the cerebral cortex.
Cerebrum is the higher organ which receives nerve impulses and sends
responses (nerve impulse) to the various organs of the body. Cerebrum is the
centre for body movement i.e., for every activity and sensation. Conscious
activities, e.g. speech, vision, hearing, intelligence, memory, thinking, will and
activities of voluntary muscles are controlled by the cerebrum. It also helps in
taking decisions and in responding to stimulation.
ff Sy Skull
lL Ne Cerebrum
Corpus Callosum | ( Cas \\ Thalamus | Forebrain
Mid brain (OS — we \ i SJ) eiypotnal ating
Y . 1 7a
12 e/ Pons ) rin
Ir / Medulla oblongata)
Spinal ol aoe =
Fig: 10.02 Human brain in Sagital Section ws
3
Q

Co-ordination 209

b) Mid brain or Mesencephalon : The upper part of the hind brain is the mid

brain or mesencephalon. It is a bridge between the fore brain and the hind brain.

There is a cylindrical part located at the back part of the mid brain called the

pons. It forms a connection between the cerebellum and the medulla oblongata.

Its functions is to co-ordinate the activities of various muscles and maintain

balance. It also, plays an important role in vision(seeing) and hearing.

c) Hind brain or Rhombencephalon : This consists of cerebellum, pons and

medulla oblongata.

(@) Cerebellum: Cerebellum is located at

the back part of the pons. It is divided into (a rai

the right and left lobes. Its exterior part is yo ~) van

composed of grey matter and the inner part \ Spinal cord

of white matter. The Cerebellum controls

muscle stress, co-ordinates and movement, TE =— nerve

balance, control and the activities of {| Gp \ \

voluntary muscles. E NV \\

(ii) Pons : The pons is located in between 1 ?¢ > i|

the medulla oblongata and mid brain. It vING \ \

consists of a bunch of nerves. ON \ \\\

(iii) Medulla oblongata : It is the most | \ ie IN

posterior part of the brain. Its front part is ( /a'e\ \

connected with the pons and the back to the \

spinal cord. 1 \E \)

There are 12 pairs of cranial nerves, |

extending from the cerebrum and medulla f |

oblongata. Within these eight pairs of q

nerves originate from the medulla \ j

oblongata. These nerves control the \ (

functions of the heart, lungs, pharynx, and yi) ANN

swallowing of food. These nerves are also .

associated with functions, such as : Figure: 10.03 Human nervous
. . system

hearing, balancing.

Forma -27, Biology Class-9-10

210 Biology
12 pairs of cranial nerves originate from the brain and spread to different regions
: mouth cavity or buccal cavity, tongue, eye, nose, ear. These nerves are sensory
or motor or mixed in nature.
Spinal cord : The spinal cord originates from the posterior part of the medulla,
leaves the skull through the foramen magnum, and extends upto the lumber
vertebra. It is protected by the vertebral column. The spinal cord is composed of
grey matter and white matter. But their position is quiet opposite to the brain.
White matter is at the outer part and grey matter is at the inner part. 31 pairs of
nerves originate from the spinal cord and pass through the hole located in
between the vertebrae. These are the nerves of the neck, shoulder, chest, back,
hands and legs. These nerves are mixed in nature.
Nervous tissue
Tissue that can receive stimulus from the environment and can transmit
accordingly to make an appropriate response, is called nervous tissue. Nervous
tissue is composed of many nerve cells or neurons. The neuron is the basic
functional unit of the nervous system.
Structure of neuron: The neuron is made up of two parts a) cell body and b)
Elongated part.
a) Cell body: The part of the neuron which contains a nucleus, and cytoplasm,
remains bounded by plasma membrane,and is round, oval, or star shaped is
known as cell body. The cytoplasm contains mitochondria, golgi bodies,
lysosome, fat, glycogen, nissel's granules.
b) Elongated part: A variable number of nerve fibers extends from the cell
body, which are called elongated part. Elongated part are of two types, e.g.-
(i) Dendron: There are small branched elongations around the cell body called
dendrons. The branches coming out from the dendron are called dendrites. The
number of dendrites in a cell body may be from zero to more than one hundred.
Dendrites receive stimuli from other nerves.
-s)
S
aq

Co-ordination 211
(ii) Axon: A long extension originates

from the cell body called Axon. A thin

layer encloses the axon called the __ — Dendtrite
neurilemma. There is a fatty layer

between the neurilemma and the axon. ——< Cell body

It is called the myelin. The end part of pelts

the axon is divided into axon terminals Riera
and, these terminals sends a impulses Rew o— Re ane
to the dendrites of other neurons. Axon

Numerous axons and dendrites units aa of Ranvier
together form a nerve.

The neurilemma is not continuous. Axon _ S

Generally, it is interrupted at regular 9 *™™! f

intervals. There is a direct connection Figure : 10.04 A neuron

of neurilemma and axon at the

interrupted parts. This uncovered part .

) Nerve impulse
is known as node of Ranvier. The Nog = through
membrane which covers the main axis ; oe / —a

: } process

of the axon is called the axolema. iG

The terminal end of one neuron does KA ~ +h ae

not join directly to the next (2nd) NSS 0 \#x

dendrite of the neuron cell. This ¥ Oe

junction of two neurons is called nA —_

the synapse. Nerve impulses are Ny

transmitted through axon terminal Ne Ze

synapses to neuron by an gg Re

electrochemical process. A liquid is Figure : 10.05 Nerve impulse

present in the synapse, called the neurohumor or neurotransmitter. Nerve

impulses are transmitted from one neuron to another by crossing synapse.

Through this, nerve impulses or stimuli travel in one direction only. In the

human brain there are nearly hundred billions of neurons and each neuron is
S connected to seven to ten thousand neurons through synapses.

212 Biology
pital Cand | Whi Grey matter
= ite matter
. \ le ) Intervertebral
\ \& A dise >
5 ! -_ () Vertebral bone | section
through spinal cord
Figure 10.06 : Spinal cord
The main function of the nerve is to conduct nerve impulse. Sensory neurons
receives stimulation through receptors the and transmit it to the brain, then
motor nerves send those impulses from the brain to effectors.
®) Individual Activity:
Activity: Draw a labelled diagram of a neuron.
Shine a torch light in your friend's eye. Immediately his pupil contracts. Why
does this happen? The impulse reaches the brain from the retina and brain
instructs the circular muscle of the lens to contract. So, the pupil becomes small.
The sudden stimuli causes an automatic reaction, so the eye closes instantly.
Reflex action : A reflex action is a sudden response or automatic reaction.
If needle pricks the hand or we touch a hot object, we immediately move the
hand from the source of stimulation. This is the result of a reflex action. We can
not willfully control the reflex. These actions are controlled by the spinal cord,
not by the brain. (That is, the immediate response to a specific stimulus,
the controlled by spinal cord instead of brain, is called a reflex action).
Example: a needle prick on the hard while sewing carelessly may cause a
sudden jerking away of the hand. That is a reflex action. The events in such a
reflex action are as follows : S

Co-ordination 213
At the time of pricking the dendrites of the sensory neuron, the skin accepts the
stimulus. The skin acts as a receptor.
This stimulus transmits from the finger to the grey matter of the spinal cord
through the axon of the neuron. The relay neurons transmit impulses from the
spinal cord to the dendrite of motor neuron. Here impulse is transmitted from the
axon of the sensory neuron located at the grey matter of the spinal cord to the
dendrite of the motor nerve by electro chemical process. So the impulse from the
dendrites ultimately reaches the muscle and the muscle contracts (according to
the command of the central nervous system). So the hand moves away from the
source of the stimulation automatically.
Dendrite of afferent
neuron of the finger Cell body of
skin receives the pain Axon of Relay neuron
afferent neuron
Se ) ra _( j Transverse section
/ ger “through spinal cord
VS
\ e\ (( = Cell body of
Sy) nN \ ¢ “> efferent neuron
\ Oa )
<<
‘ 7 == —\ Pa esses Afferent nuron
Muscle Muscle-adjacent Axon Relaymeuron
terminal of efferent neuron Efferent neuron
Figure 10.07 : Reflex arch in human
2
BS

214 Biology
10.3.2 Peripheral Nervous System

12 pairs of nerves from originate the brain and 31 pairs of nerves originate from
the spinal cord , divide into small branches and spread all over the body. These
nerves together are called the peripheral nervous system. The cranial nerves
originating from the brain control the functions of the organs, (eye, nose, tongue,
teeth, face, heart, stomach etc). The nerve originating from the spinal cord, helps
in the movement of organs and carries the rest of the impulses of body to the
brain.

Autonomic nervous system: The organs, which are not controlled at will, are
regulated and controlled by the autonomic nervous system. The functions of the
internal organs of the body, (e.g- heart, intestine, stomach, pancreas etc.) are
therefore regulated by the autonomic nervous system. As there is no direct
influence of this brain and spinal cord on the functions of this system is largely,
independent.

Transmission of Impulse: Numerous neuron fibers are connected to each other.
Impulses transmit through them and finally reach the brain. The velocity of this
movement is approximately 100 meter per second, through it varies depending
on the nature and type of neuron. The message is taken by the nerves from the
environment, and the nerves carry it like a wave and send it to the brain. These
are called nerve impulses. As a result of the neuron’s activity, impulses
are transmitted to the different parts of a body.

If a nerve impulse is transmitted to a muscle then the muscle responds by
contracting. So, we can move our different organs according to our need. If this
impulse reaches a gland, it secretes chemical substances. If a sensory nerve is
stimulated, it transmits towards the brain, and one can feel the sense of touch,
sight, pain etc.

How a nerve impulse works can be explained with the example given below.
Say, a teacher is giving dictation and you are writing. In this event the light
reflected is from the book and stimulates the retina of your teacher’s eye and
creates an impulse. This impulse reaches the sight centre of the brain. The
centres of thought, memory etc. sends message or impulses to the voluntary
muscles of the face. Muscle accept the impulse and contracts. Here the teacher's FS
muscles involved in speaking are the effectors or response organs. “

Co-ordination 215
1
Light comes from the sun 2
and reflects on the book Reflected light from the book
ii i enters into the eyes and
i) ~>=~.__produces impulse in retin = 3
>a) Sa Light (Retina impulses)
an “SN. a enters into the brain through
Teacher’s voice enters eo: optical nerves and then
5 into the ear as sound (a the brain gives necessery
Responding to instruction wave and produces ( . Kk instruction to the voluntary
Cents) ae stimuli in lesa ao. muscle of face.
voluntary muscles of hand. ae
Figure 10.08 : Impulse transmission process
The teacher's speech creates a sound wave. This sound wave stimulates the ear
drum of the student and reaches the auditory centre of the brain through the
auditory nerve. From there, impulses transmit through the centre of memory,
thinking etc. and reaches the voluntary muscles through motor nerves. Then the
muscle responds and the student starts writing. Here the students muscles are the
effectors or organ response.
10.4 Hormone
There is a special kind of gland in certain animals and in humans. The
chemical substance secreted from these glands and are carried by the blood and
control various physiological processes. The secretions produced by the ductless
glands or endocrine glands are known as hormones. These glands have no
separate ducts to transport hormones. Hormones are carried by blood flow and
reach specific cells, influence the biochemical function within the cells, and
regulate the biological process. Hormones are secreted from the glands
« according the body’s needs. But over and under secretion of hormones can cause
S various undesirable reactions.

216 Biology
Ce = _—Hypothalamus - (@)
<) Pituitary Ly
ui Ties ee
———.Parathyroid— ‘a {\
a.)
| — Thymus | \
L(+ Adrenal tains,
C\ ee
. ) Testis—_{ {|
| iy | %
Figure 10.09 : Main endocrine gland in human body
10.4.1 Introduction of main endocrine gland, functions, and secreted
hormones
(a) Pituitary gland: The pituitary gland or hypophysis is situated beneath the
brain. It is the main hormone producing gland in the human body, because it
secretes several hormones. Some of these have an influence on other endocrine
glands. It is the smallest in size, but it is a very important endocrine gland. It
secretes thyroid stimulating hormones, such as: gonadotropin, thyrotropin,
prolactine, somatotropin etc.
(b) Thyroid gland : The thyroid gland is situated at the upper part of the trachea.
It produces thyroxine hormone. Hormones secreted from the thyroid gland
controls the rate of metabolism. It also secretes another hormone, calcitonin,
which helps in calcium metabolism.
(c) Parathyroid gland : Humans have four parathyroid glands which are situated.
in the posterior part of the thyroid gland. These hormone regulatese calcium and
phosporus metabolism by secreting parathyroxine hormone. w=
Ss
aq

Co-ordination 217
(d) Thymus gland : The thymus gland is located in the neck. The thymus gland
helps in developing resistance power against diseases. In childhood it is
developed, but with the increasing of age the size decreases. This gland secretes
thyroxin hormone. In adult age, this hormone is absent. In rare case, if
sometimes found, it contains a very negligible amount of hormones.

(e) Adrenal gland : The adrenal glands are located just above the kidneys.
Adrenal glands regulate essential metabolic processes. These glands secrete
adrenaline hormone.

(f) Islets of langerhans : The islets of langerhans is situated in the pancreas. The
group of cells in islets of langerhans regulate carbohydrate metabolism. Its ductless
cells secrete insulin and glucagon which regulates the level of glucose in blood.

(g) Gonad or reproductive organ : These glands are situated in the ovary of a
female and in the testis of a male. The hormones secreted from these glands
control development of sex organs and secondary sexual characters. It also
controls the development of the reproductive cycle and reproductive behavior. In
mature males and females reproductive organs produce testosterone and
oestrogen respectively.

10.5 Abnormalities due to Hormone

(a) Thyroid problem : Sea water contains iodine. So, marine fishes are one of
the main sources of iodine for human beings. Food, containing iodine, helps to
produce the thyroid hormone. Place far away from the sea, such as - at the foot
of the Himalayas, Nepal or in north region of Bangladesh number of goiter
patient is high. A deficiency of thyroid hormones creates an obstruction in mental
development. It causes rough skin, and distinct facial features. A good effect can
be obtained by taking iodide salt, banana, sea fish, fruits, arum etc. A detailed
discussion has been made on it in Chapter Five.

(b) Diabetes : Within the pancreas there are ductless glands called islets of
langarhan's. These glands secrete the hormone insulin. Insulin regulates the
Forma -28, Biology Class-9-10

218 Biology
metabolism of carbohydrates. If the pancreas fails to produce the required
amount of insulin, then the level of glucose increases in the blood above the
normal level. Then, glucose is released in the urine. This condition is called
diabetes mellitus. Diabetes is of two types, Type - 1 and Type - 2. In Type - 1, the
patient's body does not produce insulin at all. So, the patient has to take insulin
injections. Insulin is partialliy produced Type - 2 patient's body. In this situation
the patient has to take medicine orally to help pancreatic cells to produce
adequate amounts of insulin. Sometimes, in the case of Type- 2 diabetes, there
may be the chance of permanent deficiency of insulin, or if medicine is
prohibited due to other diseases, then there is no option but to take insulin
injections. This disease is usually genetically transmitted or occurs under the
influence of the environment. It is not an infectious or contagious disease. When
the level of glucose increases in the blood above the normal level, then the
symptoms are frequent passing of urine, excessive thirst, excessive hunger,
gradual loss of weight in spite of excessive eating, feeling tiredness and
weakness, disturbed vision, roughness of skin, and delayed healing of wounds.
Earlier it was assumed that only the elderly suffer from this disease. But this idea
is not correct. People of any age, can suffer from this disease. But people, who
do not work physically or are obese or overweight have a greater chance of
developing diabetes mellitus. This is a hereditary disease. If a close family
members, like father, mother, grander father, grand mother suffer from diabetes
mellitus, then there is a greater chance of developing the disease. Because of
genetics some children produce less insulin, resulting insulin deficiency disease.
Diagnosis and treatment of Diabetes mellitus: Diabetes can be detected by
testing the urine and blood sugar levels. This disease can not be fully cured, but
by treatment it can be kept under control. According to the views of doctors, the
disease can be controlled by following three 'D' s. These are Discipline, Diet and
Dose. 3

Co-ordination 219
(@ Discipline: Discipline is for a diabetic patient. This includes:
(1) Regular intake of adequate quantity of a balanced diet, (2) Regular exercise
(3) Cleanliness and foot care (4) Regular checking of urinary glucose and
(5) Consulting physician or doctor if any problem arises.
(ii) Diet: Dietary restriction is one of the main measures to control diabetes.
A balanced diet should be eaten and sweet items should be avoided. By
following a doctor's suggested food menu, one can get good results. There is no
connection of eating or avoiding sweets with those, who do not have any
diabetes mellitus.
(iii) Dose: Without doctor's advice no medicine should be taken. On doctor's
advice, oral drugs or injectable insulin may be taken regularly. If the patient is
not treated properly, his respiratory rate may decrease, while the sugar level of
the blood increases. The patient or have a heart attack. Ifa diabetes patient faints
in that case, the patient needs to be helped to sit and should be made to drink
sugar or glucose mixed water to drink. This can help to avoid critical moments.
(c) Stroke : A Stroke is, when the activity of the nervous system is hampered
due to a lack of blood supply to the brain. A stroke happens in brain, not in heart,
though there is a misconception about it. A stroke can happen either by brain
hemorrhage or by blood clotting in the brain. In both cases it obstructs blood
supply to the brain. A brain hemorrhage is the most dangerous. Generally, high
blood pressure is the cause of a brain hemorrhage.
Symptoms : The symptoms occur suddenly. They are- vomiting, severe
headache, patient becomes unconscious within a few minutes, shoulder may be
hard, muscle relaxes, respiration and pulse rate decreases, face turns red. To
measure the level of severity of a stroke, patients should be kept under
observation.

5

220 Biology
In such an emergency the patient should be transferred immediately to a
hospital and ensured proper treatment. By proper treatment the patient may
survive. If the patient survives, they may become conscious after a few days.
Then the patient becomes restless and gradually the paralysed organ’s firmness.
If the speech controlled centre is harmed, then the patient may mumble. The
attached paralysed organ muscles of (such as- hand) may gradually get back its
power of movement but the patient may lose the power of doing minute work
forever. At the primary stage the patient recovers quickly but after two months
the improvement slows down. Nerves which are suddenly attacked temporarily
loses their activity. These types of strokes show rapid recovery. The nerves,
which are affected completely, lose their ability to work forever.
Diagnosis and treatment: It may ensured by detecting if there is any blood
clotting or brain hemorrhage. In many cases the exact cause of the stroke can not
be ascertained. It is not possible to stop bleeding in the case of hemorrhage. Take
measures to keep high blood pressure under control. Surgical operation can be
done if it is necessary. Proper nursing, cleanliness, ensuring diet are very
necessary. According to the necessity arrangements can be made to feed the
patient by using a tube. It is also necessary to move the paralysed organs, to
resist stiffness of the joints. On gaining sense the patient is to be encouraged to
move on his own or her. When stroke symptoms are found, ensure proper
treatment as early as possible to obtain desired results.
Prevention : Avoid smoking, keep high pressure under control, diabetic patient
should take medicine regularly, keep free from anxiety and lead a normal life.
10.6 Physical disabilities due nerve disoder
(a) Paralysis : Loss of sensation and motion (voluntary muscle) in a part of the
body is termed paralysis. When there is damage in a part of the brain, then that
receive stimulation muscles lose their activeness. Then the body is paralysed.

x

R

Co-ordination 221
Cause: Generally a stroke is the cause of paralysis. Neck or spinal cord injury or
accidents may also be the cause of paralysis. Nerve disease, damage of spinal
cord may also be the cause of paralysis.
(b) Epilepsy : Epilepsy is a type of brain disease that starts with convulsions. In
many cases the patient becomes unconscious. Epilepsy is also known as fainting
disease. Because of this disease, the patient loses his ability to work temporarily
and may fall on the ground with convulsive movement. Water and fire have no
direct connection with epilepsy. Ifthe patient falls in water, they may not be able
to get up from water on their own and may die by drowning.
The main cause of epilepsy is not yet known. Epilepsy may have some causes
such as meningitis due to head injury, encephalitis, congenital brain disorder or
brain tumor. In some cases of epilepsy there is no long term influence but in
some cases there may be a chance of permanent damage of the brain. So
diagnosis must be done by a specialist and treatment should be done
accordingly.
(c) Parkinson disease : Parkinson disease is a condition of the brain that causes
jerking of the hands and legs. The patient becomes unable to walk and move.
Generally the disease starts after the age of 50 years. But in exceptional cases
young people may suffer from this disease; in this case it is usually hereditary.
Nerve cells produce a substance called dopamine which helps in muscular
movement. Due to Parkinson disease dopamine producing cells are gradually
destroyed. Without dopamine, nerve cells becomes unable to send stimulation to
the muscles. So, the muscle loses its effectiveness. With the increasing of age,
muscles of a Parkinson disease patient becomes more inactive, so the patient
finds movement difficult.
Parkinson disease gradually turns severe. At the preliminary stage of the disease
it begins with tremor and patient has difficulty moving his leg or foot. Additionally
tremor of eye lids, constipation, trouble in swallowing of food, problem in walking
straight, stiffness in face, pain in muscles :

=

Rg

2) Biology
feeling uneasiness at the time of standing walking.
With the consultation of a doctor, taking physiotherapic treatment, balanced diet
and leading a healthy life the patient may feel better.
@) Individual Activity
Activity: Investigate the cause of physical distress and difficulties created
by hormonal problems and write a report on it.
10.7 Influence of tobacco and drugs on co-ordination.
In Bangladesh tobacco, ganja, charas, bhang, affim, morphin, cocaine, alcohol
and heroin etc. are known as addictive substances. Some medicines are prepared
artificially from cocaine or similar substances these medicines create addiction.
Example - Sedative pill.
There are many reasons for drug addiction in humans, such as : inquisitiveness
regarding addictive drugs, influence of friends, trying out a new experience,
looking for easy happiness, use of addictive substances in the family, easy
availability of addictive substances, family dispute and discontentment,
unemployment, economic insolvency, frustration, lack of awareness about the
harmful effects of addictive substances. Recent research on drug addiction
shows that, the main cause of drug addiction is deterioration of normal
relationships with family and society.
Use of tobacco, chewing jarda or smoking increases nicotine levels in blood. At
first nicotine stimulates nerve cells and afterwards it creates the demand of
nicotine in the body. To meet this demand, people become addicted to smoking
and using jarda. Nicotine destroys the effectiveness of nerve cells. Hands, legs
and head trembles involuntarily. It causes problems, such as, difficulties in
putting thread in the needle, drawing a straight line,writing etc. Addiction has a
bad effect on the nervous system. Due to addiction a person is compelled to
lo}
3
AQ

Co-ordination 223
take addictive substances. His thinking capability is gradually destroyed because
of the addiction. An addicted person loses his attention to his work and fails to
lead a normal life. Excess addiction makes him unconscious or senseless.
Addicted person feels extreme physical discomfort if they fail to take deugs.
Sometimes have an attack of convulsion. Drug, addicted persons often become
associated with crime to obtain the money to purchase drugs. There are
treatment and rehabilitation centers for drug addicted persons. So, one can get
rid of the bad habit by taking treatment from rehabilitation centers. This needs
co-operation and sympathy of family members towards the addicted person.
Harmful effects of addiction: Taking addictive substances may cause harmful
effects, such as : physical, social, economic etc.
Measures to get out of this situation :
- Keep family and social environment friendly and healthy.
- Increase moral education.
- Arrange employment for the unemployed.
- Stop easy availability of addictive substances.
- Stay away from bad company and raise awareness about drugs’ harmful
effects.
- Initiate social mobilization and strongly enforce laws regarding addiction.
We should not hate or neglect addicted persons. They are to be handled
sympathically and arrangements made to rehabilate them. Take the assistance of
rehabilitation centers if it is necessary. In Bangladesh the Directorate of Narcotic
Control was established and started functioning in 1990. Day by day its field of
work is widening. In this program law making, its implementation, control,
treatment and rehabilitation are noteworthey.
©) Individual Activity
Activity: Draw a poster or leaflet regarding the bad effect of tobacco and

« | addictive substances and present it to students in the class room.

Ss

N

224 Biology
@)Exercise
Short answer questions
1. What is a phytohormone?
2. What is gravitational feeling?
3. What is the nervous system?
4. What constitutes the central nervous system?
5. What are the causes of paralysis?
Essay type questions
1. Discuss the role of hormones in the growth of plant.
2. What are the symptoms of thyroid problem?
OS) Multiple choice questions
1. What hormone is secreted by the thymus gland?
a) Thyroxine b) Parathyroxine
c) Thymoxine d) Thyrotrapine
2. Islet of langarhans —
i) helps in carbohydrate metabolism.
ii) secretes insulin hormone.
iii) controls metabolism of the body.
Which one is correct?
a)i bikii
c) ti & iti d) i, ti & iii
On the basis of the following diagram answer the questions 3 and 4.
3. Which one of the following is applied to ‘A’.
a. Phototropism b. Geotropism «
c. Hydrotropism e. Chemotropism » S
4. Which one of the following is applicable in the “
development of part A : 1.
a. Auxin b. Gibberellin past Ses 2
c. Cytokinin d. Abscisic acid a S

Co-ordination 225
Creative questions
1. Ohona observes different types of plants at an agricultural farm. She notices

some small seedlings kept in electrical light in a cold room. She also

observes that flowering is not occuring in some fruit, trees, and some fruits

being immature, are falling off the trees.
a. What is a biological clock?
b. What is vernalization?
c. What are the causes of the problems found in the fruit trees mentioned in the

stem above?
d. Explain the causes of keeping the seedling in the environment notices.

: ot
()
()
(\
\
NS

a) What is a reflex action?
b) What is a hormone?
c) Explain the role of part 'A' to create stimulation in human body.
d) The structure and nature of this cell is different- Analyse it.
Forma -29, Biology Class-9-10

Chapter Eleven
Reproduction in Organism
4 , ‘

Reproduction is a basic characteristic of living organisms. Organisms give rise

to other organisms of the same kind to continue generations. The process of

reproduction can be of various types. Human reproduction is to discussed in

this chapter.
s
8

Reproduction in Organism ay
® At the end of this chapter, we will be able to-
¢ Explain the concept and significance of reproduction in organisms.
¢ Describe the functions of a flower as a reproductive organ.
¢ Explain sexual reproduction in plants with the life cycle of flowering plants.
« Explain the asexual and sexual reproduction of animals.
¢ Explain the nature of reproduction.
¢ Make differences between external and internal reproduction.
¢ Explain the steps of human reproduction.
¢ Describe the role of hormones in reproduction.
¢ Explain the development of embryos.
¢ Explain the mode of transmission, prevention and remedy of AIDS in the
human body.
¢ Explain the preventive measures of AIDS .
¢ Draw the poster and leaflet describing the prevention of AIDS.
¢ Dhow sympathy towards AIDS patient.
5

228 Biology
11.1 Concept of reproduction in organism and its significance
Death is inevitable. If only death occurred, organisms would be come extinct.
But this does not because on one hand organisms are dying, but on the other
hand organisms are reproducing. Reproduction is a physiological activity
through which organisms continue existence by producing offspring.
Reproduction is of two types, asexual and sexual. In most lower organisms,
sexual reproduction does not occur. Most higher plants and all higher animals
produce offspring through sexual reproduction.
In sexual reproduction, two reproductive cells of are fused. In this case, one is
called the male reproductive cell or sperm and the other is called the female
reproductive cell or ovum. In higher plants, there are two types of reproductive
cells produced in the same body. These are monoecious plants. When two types
of reproductive cells are produced in separate bodies, these plants are called
dioecious plants.
The precondition of developing any reproductive cell is that the germinal mother
cell will have to divide through meiosis. As a result, the number of
chromosomes in a reproductive cell becomes half that of the mother cell. The
zygote develops by fusing one male gamete with one female gamete and thus the
number of chromosomes becomes the same as the mother cell. Later, the zygote
divideds repeatedly through mitosis to develops the new body of the newly born
organism. In this way, an organism gives birth to many organisms. An organism
this way also maintains the flow of its future generations.
If reproduction did not occur in organisms, they would be extinct. From a
bacterium up to human beings, all organisms maintain the existence of their
species by reproducing . How an organism accomplishes its reproduction
depends on the characteristics of the organism. This is why a lower organism
does reproduction through cell division, while an organism of a higher level
accomplishes reproduction through the complex process of sexual
reproduction. Though sexual reproduction isa complicated, laborious and time
consuming process in comparison to asexual reproduction, it has still takena _
S
N

Reproduction in Organism 229
place in evolution. Due to meiotic cell division it would is easy to get gene
variation from one generation to the next . We have seen in the third chapter and
will see in chapter twelve and thirteen that this variation is very helpful for the
existence of any species in unfavorable enviromental conditions . On the other
hand through asexual reproduction the daughter cells that are produced are
exactly the same as the mother cell, so very little variety is seen. Comparatively,
in simpler living organisms (such as Bacteria, Protozoa) reproduction is possible
in large numbers using very little energy, so asexual reproduction still exists.
11.2 Plant Reproduction
11.2.1 Reproductive organ: Flower
A flower is a special type of modified shoot for reproduction. A flower is the
reproductive organ of a higher plant. Two (androecium and gynoecium) of the
five whorls of a flower are very significant for reproduction. They directly take
part in the reproduction. Though other parts or whorls of a flower do not directly
take part in reproduction, they help the process. The flowers, which have five
whorls, are called complete flowers, such as- China rose, Datura. If a flower
lacks any of the five whorls, it is called an incomplete flower, such as-Bottol
gourd, Pumpkin. The flowers, which have pedicel, are called sessile flower, such
as- China rose, Pumpkin and those which have no pedicel, are called non-sessile
flower, such as- Indian heliotrope. When both the androecium and the
gynoecium are present in a flower, it is called a bisexual flower, such as- China
rore, Datura. If the androecium or gynoecium is absent, this flower is called
unisexual flower, such as- Bottle gourd, Pumpkin. If both the androecium and
gynoecium are absent in a flower, it is called a neuter flower.
Different parts of a flower
(a) Thalamus: This is usually round and is developed at the tip of a floral axis.
=
Rg

230 Biology
The other parts or whorls of a flower are arrayed consecutively on the floral axis
one after the other.
(b) Calyx: The outermost whorl of a flower is called the calyx.Each of the part
of calyx is called a sepal. If the sepal of the calyx are not separated, it is called
gamosepalous / aposepalous. If the sepals are separated , it is called
polysepalous.
The green calyx takes part in the production of food. Their main function is to
save the inner parts of a flower from the sun, rain and attack of insects and pests.
When the calyx is of different colours, it plays important roles in pollination, and
it attracts different animals such as insects, birds etc. as the medium of
accomplishing pollution.
(c) Corolla: It is the outermost but one whorl of a flower. If the corolla is
segmented, each segment is then called a petal. If the petals in a corolla are
separate from each other, the term polypetalous is used then. In case of having
sepals wholly or partially fused, they are called gamopetalous. Corolla are
usually colourful. They protect the internal parts of a flower from the sun and
rain. Bright colourful corolla attract animals - birds, insects etc., and helps
pollination. Sometimes insects draw nectar from the corolla of a flower. The
purpose of pollination is served when the carriers complete these activities.
Stioma Petal
Gynoecium Style wo @ Anther
Overy
{ZI
@ \ 1S 7 Filament
Tn
A + Sepal
. \\ Floral axis
Pedicel ——__—————Q_
Figure: 11.01 Different parts of a flower g

Reproduction in Organism 231
(d) Androecium: It is the third whorl from outside of a flower, and it is an
essential whorl. Every part of an androecium is called a stamen. In an
androecium, there may be one or more stamens. The stalk like structure of
stamen is called the filament and the sac like apical structure of it is called the
anther. The part of a stamen, which connects the anther to the filament, is called
connective. Pollens are developed in an anther. A pollen tube is produced from a
pollen after germination. The male gamete is produced in the pollen tube. The
male gametes directly take part in reproduction. In some plants, the filaments
may be connected to each other, and sometimes the anthers may combine with
each other. When the stamens merged together with all the filaments into a tube
like group, is called a monadelphous, such as in Chinese hibiscus. If the filaments
are attached with two groups, it is called a diadelphous and when in many groups,
it is called a polydelphous, such as cotton tree (Salmalia malabarica). When
anthers are united into a single group, it is called syngenesious. The state of being
of the stamen free of attachment to corolla, the androecium, is called epipetalous,
such as in Datura.

She A,

Oe PD

( wit
‘ i
A B Cc D E
Fig: 11.02 Different types of stamen: a. Monodelphous b. Diadelphous,
c. Polydelphous d. Syngenesious e. Epipetalous
(e) Gynoecium: The of gynoecium is at the centre of a flower. It is another
essential whorl of a flower. A gynoecium may be structured with one or more
carpels. A carpel has three parts, the ovary, style and stigma. When a gynoecium
is formed with many more carpels which are completely merged with each other,
then it is called, syncarpous and when they are separated, it is called polycarpus.
80
Ss

232 Biology
One or more ovules are in a flower, arranged inside of the ovary. Within the
ovule, the female reproductive cell (ovum) is produced. This ovum, like an
androecium, is directly involved in the process of reproduction.
(@)) Individual Activity:

Activity : Observation of different whorls of a flower.

Elements: a flower, blade, forceps, and blotting paper.

Procedure: Collect a flower and seperate the different parts of a flower, placing

them on a blotting paper.
®) Individual Activity:

Activity : Observation of the transverse section of ovary.

Elements: A mature flower, blade and simple microscope.

Procedure: Separate the ovary from a flower. Observe it under a simple

microscope and write down what you have seen.
Inflorescence: Clusters of flowers arranged in a branch of a tree, is called
inflorescence.

Youngest flower. —

Cite j A /_ > Youngest flower
Oldest flower $3 i \ ae
(a) (b)
Figure: 11.03 (a) Indefinite inflorescence (Recemose) S
(b) Definite inflorescence (Cymose) “

Reproduction in Organism 233
It is called peduncle on when flowers are orderly arranged, this is called
peduncle. If the growth of this axis in unlimited, it is called indefinite
inflorescence (recemose) and in case of limited growth of the axis it is called
definite inflorescence (cymose). An inflorescence plays important roles in
pollination. Two consecutive steps occur in reproduction, pollination and
fertilization.
11.2.2 Pollination
Pollination is also called the linking of pollen. Pollination is a precondition for
the development of fruits and seeds. The transfer of pollen from the anther to the
stigma of the same flower or to the stigma of another plant of the same species
is pollination. Pollination is of two types, self-pollination and cross- pollination.
(a) Self-pollination: On the same flower or on two flowers of the same plant,
transfer of pollen can occur. This is called  self-pollination. For
example- brassica, cucumber and datura usually pollinate through this way.
Wastage of pollen is less, the process is not dependent on a carrier, and the
occurrence of pollination is ensured. The plant that develops in this way cannot
make changes to their characters, and so the features of the species can be
maintained. This way, a species can maintain purity. No new characters appear
in the new generation of plants. The newly born plants breed seeds with less
vigour. The ability of adaptation in the new plant is reduced,which means this
species can become extinct. :
Ripa
(b) Cross-pollination : When the Cross-pollination 7 = =
attachment of pollen occurs in between all ae -Y* sel pollination
two distinct flowers of the same i u) SN
. a . i t es Llination' a

species, it is called cross-pollination, VE p)
such as, cotton tree (Salmalia .y Vi Self-pollination
malabarica), papayas (Carica papaya) v \)
pollinate this way. ®

Figure: | 1.04 Self-pollination and

Cross-pollination

Forma -30, Biology Class-9-10

234 Biology
New characters emerge through cross-pollination. The rate of germination goes up
and much more vigorous seeds are produced through this way of pollination. As
the pollination occurs in between two different plants, the seed produced this way
is born with new characteristics. The plant, which grows from that seed, also has
new characteristics. This is why new varieties of those plants emerge. As it is a
carrier dependent process, pollination is not ensured and large waste of pollen is a
consequence of this type of pollination. So, the purity of the species is impaired.
Medium of pollination
In most cases, a medium or accomplishes the
transfer of pollen. The carrier which carries pollen,
Te is called the pollen carrier. Air, water, insects and
yey a flies, birds, vampires, snails and even humans may
Wt ge be the media of pollination. To consume nectar
\ ie a from a flower or after attraction to the charming
‘ {r ~K, colour of the flower, the carriers travel from one
= flower to another. When the carrier sits on the
flower, the pollen attachs to it. To obtain the aid of
Figure: 11,00 Envemophillic the carrier, some plant adaptations are remarkable.
Insect pollinated flowers are big, with coloured nectar secreting glands. In these
flowers, the fragrance of wet fluid is alluring. For example, hibiscus, gourd, mustard
etc. Air pollinated flowers are lightweight and do not have nectar secreting
glands. The flower has no fragrance can
easily wander in the air. Their stigmas are r
branched and sticky, and sometimes ~~ . 3 ny ‘ yy
feathery. Branched stigmas will attain 7 4 ik
pollens from the air. For example, Oryza VA
sativa.
Figure: 11 .06 zoophillic flower
5

Reproduction in Organism 235

Water pollinated plants are small and lightweight, so that they can float in the

water. They have no fragrance. The petiole in the female flower is longer than

that of the male. Mature male flowers, detached from the petioles, float in the

water and after coming in contact with the female flowers, they accomplish

pollination, for example, Vallisnaria.

Animal pollinated flowers are usually large in size. If they are small, they are

arranged in the inflorescence. They have attractive colours. Fragrance may be

present or absent in them, such as Kadam, cotton tree (shimul) and taro.

Microsporogenesis

A pollen is the first cell of a gametophyte. Pollen mother cell (2n) produces four

pollen (n) by meiosis. Soon after becoming mature harbouring in the pollen sac

starts to germinate. The nucleus of the pollen gets divided through mitotic

division and two cells, one large and another small, are formed. The large one is

called the tube cell and the small one is called the generative cell. The tube cell

turns into the pollen tube and two male gametes are produced. Division of

the generative cell takes place in the pollen or pollen tube.

___ Generative Nucleus
Pink
Pollen Intine e nike )
Tube Nucleus "y Y sails gamete
Fig - 11.07 : Different stages of the development of male gametophyte

Megasporogenesis

Near the micropyle, being nourished in the nucellus of an ovule, a cell starts to

become larger. Its protoplasm is dense and the nucleus is comparatively large.
- The cell divides into four haploid cells through meiotic division. Every cell,
S except the smallest one, gets disintegrated. Growing gradually, the larger cell

236 Biology
matures into an embryo sac. The nucleus of the cell is haploid. The nuclei are
evolved as the nucleus divides. These two nuclei take positions in two opposing
poles. Next, these two nuclei consecutively divide twice and result in four
nuclei.
Hout dogennating
Megaspore — °BASPOTE megaspore
Mother cell 1
Un [sam fe Wn
a6-8-
Tay UY)
\
Antipodal cell —_ QY a
; € € - he -(®
Secondary Nucleus —{ - ‘ 6 s (0 /
Egg —We te 4 e/ X
Synergid cell #4"
Figure: 11.08 Different stages of the development of female gametophyte
In the next stage, two nuclei from the two poles come to the middle of the cell
and get fused to cause the emergence of two haploid secondary nuclei. The
nuclei in the two poles turn into cells with some amount of cytoplasm.
Collectively, the combined structure of the three cells near the micropyle is
called the egg apparatus. In between the cells, the one occupying the middle
place is the ovum, which is a little larger. This is called an egg cell and the other
two are called synargid cells. The cells in the opposite pole to the egg apparatus
are called antipodal cells. This is how the process of developing the embryo sac
is done.
11.2.3 Fertilization
Through pollination, the mature pollen lands on stigma of a carpel. Then the
pollen tube grows, penetrating the style and absorbs some liquid. Once the tips
of the extended pollen tube enter the embryo, it ejects two male gametes into the
embryo sac. One of them, meeting with the egg, causes the emergence of a
zygote. The other male gamete, mixing with the secondary nuclei, develop 8
triploid endosperm cells. “

Reproduction in Organism 237
Petal
Filament
Sporophyte au s) Ani F L. \ ‘ilamen
“i WF Se) "Fa oveny
hy ate j __Ouule
Alo J\Ox 9
= Male gametop! > \ Y
Seed germination (SY
c Flower
i ® :
=
Endosperm a) i
Seedcoat— porang - @ Megaspore
Embryo ; fi
Pollen _(e) ©
O) ther cell (2: es
composes ON mother cell (2n) J ee
<4 Four Daughter
Cy, Pollen cell or as ©
: microspore(n) ye (ela
Mitosis) oe
Daughter Embryosac
Pollen tube ———— Pollen cell or QY
ollen grain (ny \° :
Figure: 11.09 Life cycle of flowering plant
The two fusions, mixing of a male gamete with an egg and mixing of another
male gamete with secondary nuclei, take place at about the same time. This
phenomenon is called double fertilization.
Development of new sporophyte
A zygote is the first cell of a sporophyte. Two cells are produced after its first
division. At the same time, the flourishing of the endosperm is also initiated. A
« zygote divides transversely. The cell towards the micropyle is called the basal
3 cell and the cell towards the centre of the embryo sac is called the apical cell. The

238 Biology
division of these two cells continues simultaneously. Gradually, the apical cell
turns into the embryo. The suspensor also gets developed concurrently. The
cotyledon, radicle and plumule are developed one after another and the
secondary nuclei start to make the endosperm. The cells in an endosperm are
triploid, meaning they posses three sets of chromosomes (3n). At maturity, the
ovule with the endosperm and embryo turns into a seed. As the seed germinates,
a complete sporophyte is developed.
Pollen ——— x ine : Chalaza
P Stigma 7, hy LBD ‘Nuecleus tissue
‘ollen tube ——___1 ED 1 KE SED
“TA [EERISS\ \
“ Hy Paar oh Antipodal cell
a i rates Secondary nucleus
i} \\? ‘ H Nite! ORT Embryosac
ome KS \ Rie So i i} —— cell
Male gamete Le i pacrophyle
Funiculus
Figure: 11.10 Structure of ovule and fertilization
The sporophyte and gametophyte, run in a repeating way one after another
through the life cycle of a flowering plant.
Origin of fruits: When we think about fruits, the images of mango, jackfruit,
lichi, banana, grape, apple, guava, sofeda etc. appear in our mind. Bottle gourd,
gourd, Jingha, pointed gourd are also fruits, though, they are called vegetables.
In fact, they are all fruits. The process of the formation of fruits begins
immediately after the completion of fertilization. Fertilization initiates
stimulation in the ovary to develop fruits steadily and ultimately, ovules are
turned into seeds. The ovary after fertilization turns into the fruits. If only the
ovary turns into a fruit, it is called a true fruit. Mango and berries are examples ,
of true fruits. When along with the ovary, other parts of a flower get mature, $

Reproduction in Organism 239
this type of fruit is called false fruit. Apples, Chalita are the examples of false fruit.
All the true and false fruits are grouped into three categories: fleshy fruit,
aggregate fruit and compound fruit.
11.3 Animal Reproduction
Reproduction is of two types in animal kingdom. (1) Asexual reproduction and
(2) Sexual reproduction.
Asexual reproduction : Asexual reproduction happen in lower animals. Asexu-
al reproduction occurs in different ways, such as - budding, binary fission,
fragmentation etc.
Sexual reproduction : The process through which two animals of opposite sex
(male and female) complete their reproduction by means of producing male and
female gametes, fertilizes and produce offspring is called sexual reproduction.
11.3.1 Fertilization
Fertilization is necessary for sexual reproduction. It is a universal biological
process. In sexual reproduction the fusion of sperm and ovum is called
fertilization. During sexual reproduction active sperm penetrates into the ovum,
and the two nuclei fuse together. The cell is formed by the fusion of the nuclei is
the zygote. Each of the sperm and ovum contains a haploid number of
chromosome, and each of them carries one set of chromosome. Due to
fertilization zygote is produced, which is a diploid new cell (it carries two set
chromosomes). The maturity of sperm and ovum is a precondition of
fertilization.
Fertilization is a special process. It happens only with the matured sperm and ovum
of the same species. Generally fertilization is unchangeable. Once an ovum is
fertilized, it will not fertilize again. On the basis of the place of occurrence,
fertilization is divided into two types. (1) External reproduction and (2) Internal
reproduction.
(a) External fertilization : If the fertilization takes place outside the body of
male and female animals it is known as external reproduction. This type of
fertilization occurs in most aquatic animals, such as, different types of fishes.
= But there are exceptions, such as: sharks and some other species of fishes.
N

240 Biology
(b) Internal fertilization : The fertilization which takes place inside the
reproductive organ of the female is called internal reproduction. This fertilization
occurs introducing sperms of the male into the female reproductive organ. It is a
characteristic of terrestrial animals.
The basic significance of fertilization : Restoration of diploid chromosomes
within the embryo accumulates heriditory characters of both the male and female,
and makes the ovum active for its development. Chromsomes carry the
characteristics of both the father and mother. These characteristies combine,
determining the sex of the embryo. The picture shows the steps of the gamete
formation.
or Rpana
mother cell Meiosis Yon
cell om
5,
:
Figure 11.11 Different stages of reproduction (block Picture)
For continuity and restoration of hereditary, reproduction is essential. This process
includes formation of the embryo and giving birth to offspring. Humans are
unisexual, so male and female reproductive organs are present in different
individuals.
11.3.2 Role of hormone in human reproduction
You have learned that a hormone is a type of organic substance, is secreted from
ductless glands. It acts as a chemical messenger and is transported all over the
body through the blood, to help in chemical reactions and control different .,
metabolic and physiological processes. Ss

Reproduction in Organism 241
Reproductive hormones secreted from endocrine glands within the body are
described below. (1) Pituitary gland (2) Thyroid gland (3) Adrenal gland
(4) Testis (5) Ovary ( 6) Placenta.

The growth stimulating hormone and the producer hormone are produced by the
pituitary gland. These hormones regulate growth of reproductive glands
secretions and functions, and controls mammary gland and milk secretion. These
hormones also regulate the contraction of uterus. The thyroid glands secretes
thyroxine hormone. This regulates metabolic function, and ensures physical and
mental development, and sexual characteristics. Hormones secreted from the
adrenal gland regulate development of the reproductive organs, and exposition of
sexual characteristics. Testosterone hormone secreted from the testis and
androgen help to produce sperms and secondary sexual characteristics, such as:
deepening of the voice and growth of a beard.The Ovary secretes estrogen,
progesterone, and relaxin hormones. These hormones cause the development of
sexual characteristics, such as: menstruation, enlargement of the well of uterus for
implantation of the embryo and placenta. It also has a particular role in the
formation of the ovum. Gonadotropic and progesterone of placenta stimulates
ductless glands of the ovary and helps in enlargement of mammary glands.
When the baby is born their reproductive system remains immature. Children
pass childhood, to become adolescents. The transitional period of adolescence
and youth is named puberty. At that time secondary sexual characteristics
develop. Organs of the reproductive system grow and develops. Hormones play
an important role in this respect. Both inner and outer changes occur, such as:
growth of beard on the face, deepening of the voice, widening of shoulder etc.
are the external changes in males.

During puberty the changes within the girls are - softness in skin, loveliness in
appearance etc. In this stage of puberty usually monthly discharge of blood or
menses from the uterus begins at regular intervals. This is the menstrual cycle or
menstruation. After 1-2 years of puberty girls gain the ability to
reproduction. Then they begin to produce ovum from the female reproductive
mother cell within the ovary. This continues up to 40-50 years. Menopause is the
Forma -31, Biology Class-9-10

242 Biology
time of cessation of the menstrual cycle, and normally occurs in women aged
between 40-50 years. The menstrual cycle remains temporarily stopped during
pregnancy. 6 weeks after child birth it starts again.
Marriage is a social, spiritual and family tie. A family is formed by the efforts of a
husband and wife’s adjustment through marriage. They become intimate with each
other. A relation of love, affection and attachment develops between them. There
should be a specific minimum age for getting married. Before 20 years, a female
should not marry. Early marriage causes a girl to become pregnant in immature
age. There is every possibility of harm for both mother and the baby.
Sexual reproduction occurs through physical relationship in between husband
and wife. During physical contact, the sperm of male enters the female
reproductive organ. A sperm has a tail which helps it to swim into the female
reproductive system. The Fusion of sperm and egg nucleus occurs within the
oviduct. This fusion is called fertilization. An egg (ovum) is fertilized with a
single sperm only. In this way, internal fertilization occurs within the human
body. Each of the sperm and ovum contains one set of chromosomes (haploid).
By the fusion of these haploid sperm and ovum, a diploid zygote is formed.
11.3.3 Development of the embryo
The fertilized egg gradually passes along the oviduct to the uterus. Immediately
after fertilization, cell division begins in the zygote. This is called cleavage. At the
last stage of cleavage, the growing embryo arrives in the uterus. At this stage, this
mass of cells of the growing embryo is called a blastocyst. The changes that
happens in the uterus are very important for the development of the embryo.
For the development of next stage of blastocyst the embryo has to be embedded in
the inner wall of the uterus. So the blastocyst becomes embedded with the uterine
wall. This process is called implantation. Imbedded in the uterus, the embryo
grows and turns into a human body. Time between implantation and child birth is
called pregnancy. At that time menstruation or menstrual cycle does not occur. The
embryo or fetus develops in the uterus for 38-40 weeks. ~
S
N

Reproduction in Organism 243
Placenta : The special organ through which the fetus in the uterus is connected
to the tissue of the mother is called the placenta. Implantation is completed
within 4-5 days after the embryo reaches the uterus. Some cells of the
developing embryo along with the endoderm of the uterus compose a oval
shaped and blood vessel enriched placenta. The placenta is formed within twelve
weeks of zygote formation. In this way a temporary unseparated organ is formed
between the fetus and endoderm of mother's, uterus. At the time of child birth the
placenta is eliminated from the body.
The embryo is implanted into the uterine wall with the help of the placenta. The
embryo needs food for its growth. Carbohydrate, (glucose), protein (amino
acid), essential minerals, water etc. are transferred from maternal to fetal blood
to nourish the developing embryo. The placenta acts more or less like a lung.
The dissolved oxygen in the blood of the maternal blood diffuses into the fetal
blood and exchanges carbon dioxide from the fetus to the mother. The placenta
also acts as kidney; metabolic waste product is diffused from the embryonic
blood capillaries into the mother's blood stream. In this way the waste products
are eliminated. The placenta produces some important hormones which protect
the embryo and helps in normal development.
: = = = — Artery (food and
3 : SS = _ oxygenated blood carrier)
fi ‘ € jl in umbilical cord
EN Umbilical cord vA Transmission of CO, and
> — other waste product in
\ y Me Ses Qs A (5) mother’s blood
‘ | ia Uterus VED ae ~ v
& . Gyr ) ES4
7-7 —Amnion |) a. } ‘The chamber is filled
( : e734 with pregnant mother’s blood.
—— Z —
eS A Artery in umbilical cord
Fluid that protects ti) \SSs7—— carrier of waste product.
embryo from injury SS —— Vein in umbilical cord
" (food and oxygenatid blood carrier)
Figure 11.12 Placenta and Embryo in mother’s uterus
5

244 Biology
Placenta contains a huge amount of blood capillaries. The embryo is attached to
the placenta by a tube called the umbilical cord. It is a tube through which the
exchange of different materials occur between mother and fetus. At the time of
pregnancy, it secretes some hormones which helps to produce milk and facilitate
child birth.
Foetal membrane : The embryos of each species have a series of embryonic
membranes which are essential for easy, normal and safe development of the
embryo. These help in fetus nutrition, gaseous exchange and elimination of
waste products. The embryonic membrane protects the fetus (embryo) and
controls other important actions.
36 Hour Later 72 Hour Later 4 Week Later
Sperm cell
Penetrate the egg <= Morula J ss
i. ( sie } cay Head of embryo
4 Ws a . A ‘ 3. 16 cells structure after 4. Afetr four weeks the embryo is
1. Fertilization of | 2. Cell division of fertilized egg approximately 72 hours. floating in a fluid-filled sac.
sperm and ovaum after approximately 36 hours. —_In a few days, the ball of cells The heart is beating and the
will settle in the uterus. brain has started to develop.
5 Week Later 8 Week Later 28 Week Later 38 Week Later
Ce Umbilical co:
£N\ if / Va Ne ORS
(| B\ } f he a\| A \ Ry
\ & \7 vaerus “ola ©)
W\ ae (4 G
5, After approximately 5 weeks, 6. After 8 weeks, the embryo 7. After 28 weeks, the foetus is 8. About 38 weeks after
the growth of embryo is going on. celled foetus. But the organs fully developed in the expanded fertilization, the foetus has
It has bud that will become are in small size. uterus. moved its head downward
arms and Legs. . . in preparation for birth.
Fig. 11.13 : Embryonic Growth and development
In humans, pregnancy lasts for an average of 40 weeks. During this time the mother's
anterior pituitary and placenta begins to secrete two hormones. These hormones
actively promote uterine contractions at regular intervals that results in pain. This
increasing pain is called labour pain. At the last stage of child birth the embroyonic .,
membrane bursts and fluid enclosed by the membrane comes out, and the child is bor. &

Reproduction in Organism 245
10.4. Reproduction Related diseases
10.4.1 Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS): At present AIDS is
well known as a killer disease of the world. This disease was discovered in 1981.
Taking the first letters from ‘Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome’ the
disease AIDS has been named.
According to the statistics of USAIDS world wide more than 2.3 million people
are infected by AIDS. Almost 40% of the infected persons are female. According
to World Health Organization this disease is spreading in about 164 countries.
AIDS disease is caused in human body by the attack of a virus named HIV
(Human Immune Deficiency virus). This virus destroys white blood cells,
causing obstacles in antibody formation, that results in the gradual shortage of
white blood cells and antibodies. In human body this virus can remain dormant
for a long time. It destroys the victims immune system. There is no effective
medicine discovered to regain the immune system completely, so the ultimate
fate is death.
Causes of AIDS : A healthy person can be infected by this life threatening
disease in the following ways:
(i). Sexual relation or physical relation with infected males and females.
(ii). Transfusion of blood
because of blood loss due to Phospholipid layer
accident, excessive bleeding at / - a
the time of child birth, anemia, sts i Capside
pthallasamia, cancer etc. , s % e8 aa
Transfusion of blood from a HIV & xo) Xa,
infected person to a healthy : as , ;
person may transmit the disease. ie >s pong
(iii). Anew born baby of HIV- infect- a Reverse
ed parents may be infected. A baby “ye liad
may be infected from an HIV- infected

~ mother during breast feeding. Fig. 11.14 Structure of HIV

3

N

246 Biology
(iv). The disease may transmit to a healthy person, through sharing of infected
needles, syringe, dental and surgical operation related instruments etc.
(v). Transplacement of HIV infected organ or tissue in the body of healthy person.
Symptoms of AIDS : Signs and symptoms of the disease are exposed 6 months
after the germs of the disease enters the body of healthy person. Then
symptoms are very negligible and after some days it disappears. After the
entrance of HIV in human, it may remain harmless for few months to years and
it just increases in number in the host body. When the number of HIV virus
become enormous, then suddenly the patient is in a serious condition and there
is nothing elso to do for the patient. Before this it is not easy to tell that infected
person is the carrier of this disease. The symptoms are -
- rapid loss of body weight.
- fever for more than one month for unknown reasons.
- dry cough for prolonged period.
- pain in armpit, neck and face become rough.
- puffiness and swelling of some organs, such as : face, eyelid, nose etc.
- itching in the whole body.
Prevention of AIDS : You have learned earlier about this disease. Let us
see if we can remember it.
- What is the necessity to prevent AIDS?
- Is it possible to avoid the causes that spread the infection of the disease?
- Write the measures of prevention on the black board and summarize.
®) Individual Activity:

Activity : Form a group of 5 students and draw a poster/ leaflet regarding the

preventive measures of AIDS.

Reproduction in Organism 247
(?) Exercise
Short answer questions
1. Why are humans called unisexual animals?
2. What is the uterus? What is its function?
3. What is the placenta? What are the functions of the placenta?
4. What measures should be taken to prevent AIDS?
5. Explain the functions of hormones in reproduction.
Essay type questions
1. Why is a flower called the reproductive organ?
2. Describe the causes, symptoms and remedies of AIDS.
(XS) Multiple choice questions
1. In which flower, are the stamens diadelphous (that is filaments of stamens are
united in two bundles)?
a. Chinese hibiscus b. Pea
c. Cotton tree or shimul d. Sunflower
2. The air pollinated flower is-
i. large in size.
ii. with undivided stigma.
iii. without nectar glands.
Which one is correct?
a.i& ii b. i & iti
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
°9
Ss

248 Biology
Look at the stem and answer the questions 3 and 4:
. : 9

3. Which part of the stem turns into a seed? hes 0 i
aN BO (i)

c.P d.Q @\—p s ee

4. Which one does play a role in producing i >M
endosperm? \ ly 6 {3
aM&Q b.M&P \\f/ e—_N
c.M&N dN&P

Creative questions

1 Ap

alie-— P
ae
“Se

Ss ;

a. What is an embryo sac?

b. What is indefinite inflorescence?

c. Explain the problems there will be in pollination if the part P is absent.

d. Express your opinion how part Q serves its species.

2. 12 years old Ridoy sings with a melodious voice. Recently with some
physical and mental changes, his voice becomes deep. So, his mother
consulted with a doctor, who said, this change is normal for children.

a) What is the placenta?

b) Why is AIDS called a fatal disease?

c) Explain the causes of the events happened in Ridoy's body.

d) Explain the role of the elders towards Ridoy. %

S
N

Chapter Twelve
Heredity in organisms and evolution
iy. is ee a a < ie A a
nr 5 4
fi ty 7 y
ete e y rs ae
teed 9 ae 4
| ee
A Picture showing comparison among the skulls of human, orangoutang and macaque monkey.
Structural and behavioural traits from both the parents, mother and father, are
passed to the offspring generation after generation. We will learn in this
chapter how traits from both the parents are transmitted to the offspring. We
will also learn about the existing classes in the living world, which emerge
from their ancestors through evolution, and express their visible form of
present existence.
Forma -32, Biology Class-9-10

250 Biology

® At the end of this chapter, we will be able to-

¢ Explain the concept of heredity.

* Describe the content containing the behavioural materials obtained through
generations.

¢ Explain the passing of behavioural characteristics from generation to
generation.

¢ Explain the transmission of heredity.

¢ Explain the replication of DNA.

¢ Explain the role of DNA in transferring heredity materials.

¢ Explain the necessity of DNA tests.

¢ Explain the role of a male in determining the gender of an offspring.

¢ Explain the causes and results of genetic disorders.

* Explain the cenception of the evolution.

« Describe the natural selection theory of evolution.

« Explain the significance of evolution in the survival of species.

¢ Determine the differences between the similar and dissimilar features of the
mother and father.

* Conceive the roles of DNA test in our life.

S

Heredity in organisms and evolution 251
12.1 Heredity in organism
All the organisms in the world are characterized with their own unique features.
Features of individual organisms pass to the next generations and evolve in them.
This natural principle is applied to all organisms in the world. This is why rice
plant grows from rice seed, mangoes from their seeds, jute does also this the same
way. This way the characteristics of species are maintained in offspring through
generations. Heredity is the passing of traits from father and mother to their
offspring through generations. In depth discussions and research concerning
heredity are done in the special branch of biology called genetics.
@) Individual Activity
Activity: Identify the similar and dissimilar traits from your parents and.
place them in a chart with a nice presentation.
12.1.1 Components carrying (heredity materials) behavioural features to
the offspring from generation to generation
The features of parents are transferred to their offspring through heredity materials.
These are chromosomes, genes, DNA and RNA. These are discussed below:
LE ~ Qe
Fas aN 4
| (SE OO bs Histone
ee eS. Y .,
i BROS | iy , ~
Se ae, if —
Se a \eP , De ny
Rn ey oh 6f ,
REE @ &> 4 Nucleosome ¢
x
S KIPID PID Sra hetix
<
S Figure: 12.01 Location of Chromosome in Nucleus

Bey) Biology
(a) Chromosome: The main heredity material is the chromosome. It is spread in
the nucleoplasm of a nucleus as a thread like structure named the chromatin. The
scientist Strasburger first discovered the chromosome in 1875. Across species,
the number of diploid set of chromosomes (two sets chromosome, one set from
the father and the other set from the mother) may be 2 to 1600. In length a
chromosome may be from 3.5- 30.00 microns (I micron =I/100 mm) and in width
0.2 to 2.0 microns. The function of chromosomes is to carry genes (which
contro] the characteristics of organisms) to the offspring from the parents.
Colours of human eyes, nature of hair, compositions of skin etc. continue intact
through the flow of heredity carried by chromosomes. This is why chromosomes
are designated as the physical basis of heredity.
(b) DNA : The main component of a chromosome is deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA). It is usually a double stranded spiral structure of polynucleotides. One
strand is complementary to the other. In it there are five carbon sugars, nitrogen
bases (adenine, guanine, cytosine, thymine) and inorganic phosphate.
OAS
rs)
-- =: (s) <a>
[AlL---- ii (5) C=

3) GIF 2:2: € ; A

n Gg. &

a ) i SG

I—S
x
Figure 12.02 : DNA &

Heredity in organisms and evolution 253
These three components collectively are called a nucleotide. DNA is a stable
substance in a chromosome. In 1953 American scientist Watson and British
scientist Crick first described the double helical structure of DNA and for this
contribution both of them won the Nobel Prize. Nitrogen bases are of two types, a
purine and a pyrimidine. Adenine (A), guanine (G) are purines and cytosine (C)
and thymine (T) are pyrimidines. The Adenine of one strand bonds with the
thymine of another strand by two hydrogen bonds, and guanine of a helix connects
with a cytosine of another helix by three hydrogen bonds. This bond is always
developed between a purine and pyrimidine. So, a strand of DNA is
complementary to another strand but not identical to it. A complete twist in a helix
is 34A° long and in a complete twist, there are ten nucleotides. So,the length
between the two adjacent nucleotides is 3.4A° (from top to bottom). The two
strands of polynucleotides in DNA are positioned antiparallelly. It looks like rungs
in a twisted ladder. The bases are connected flatly and horizontally in position
from the main axis. The external two strands or two axes of DNA are
composed of consecutive arrangements of sugar and phosphate, and internal
nitrogen bases are plainly aligned. In fact, DNA is a precise thread, but in a
prokaryotic cell DNA is usually circular and the surface area would be a few
microns to centimeters. It is composed of thousands of nucleotides and the
diameter of the twisted helical structure everywhere is 20A°. DNA is the main
component and chemical carrier of heredity. DNA is the true structure and carrier
of the behavioural characters of organisms, and it directly carries the
characteristics of parents to their offspring from generation to generation.
Group Activity

Activity : To develop a DNA model.

Required equipment: Iron wire - 1 meter, 2 used ball point pen,40 beads

of 1.5 cm diameter, 7-8 drinking straw, Coloured paper (Red, blue, yellow

and green), Glue, Scissors, One (empty) shoe box.

S

254 Biology
Procedure
1. To build this model, 40 beads of 1.5 cm diameter are needed: (If beads are
not available they can be made from dough. Small balls with holes can be
made from dough and used as beads). These beads will represent phosphate.
2. Each straw is to be cut into three equal pieces. Each piece will be nearly 9
cm long. 20-25 pieces are necessary which will represent nucleotides.
3. In each piece of straw, make holes in parallel, at both terminal end of the straw.
4. Cut coloured papers in ribbon like shape with 2 cm width.
5. Now from these ribbons cut down 3 cm long green paper and wrap it up
around 2 cm part of the straw starting from center to one end. In the same
way, wrap up the other side of the straw with yellow ribbon. In this way
10-12 pieces of straw are to be wrapped up with yellow and green ribbons.
The green part will represent A (adenine) while the yellow portion will
represent T (Thymine) of nucleotide. Thus each piece of straw will represent
one base pair.
—+ \S |e
a . — C)
or 6
oe,
—— So
g © Ba,
Figure 12.03 : Different stages of the preparation of DNA Model 20
S
AQ

Heredity in organisms and evolution 255
6. In the same way the remaining pieces of straw will be wrapped up by blue
and red ribbons of paper. Here the blue will represent C (Cytosine) and the
red portion will represent G(guanine) The pieces of straw with red and blue
represents one base pair CG.

It should be remembered that yellow would be paired with green and blue with

red.

7. 1 meter long iron wire is to be cut into two pieces and tied at two ends of

the ball point pen, keeping a gap of 7-8 cm space.

8. Now insert the wires through the holes made at both ends of each piece of straw.

9. Now pull up the straw to the pen and then insert both ends of the wire

through two beads.

10. Thus insert one piece of straw and then two beads at both end

alternatively. Try to make a nice combination of base pairs while continuing

the process.

11. After finishing the arrangement of straw and beads through the wire, tie

the remaining ends of the wire with another ball point pen. Cut off any extra

wire, if there is any.

12. In real DNA the rotation of strands occur after every 10 base pairs. As

there are 20 base pairs, it will give two rotations. So twist the two pens to

make two full rotations along with the base pairs. This will show the model

of DNA structure (double helix).

13. Now imagine the yellow colour band as A and the green as T, in the same

way blue as C and red as G. Beads represent phosphate and the part of straw

between two beads is carbohydrate.

14. To keep the model safe, keep it in the empty shoe box by twisting the ball

pens and tying it with the side of the shoe box.

Remarks

The DNA model built in this way have 20-22 base pair. Ovserve it from

different angles. Focus a torch on it and observe the shadow it makes. This is

important because Rosalind Franklin (1920 — 1958) took pictures from
S different angles by focusing X Ray. By analyzing the X Ray photo, James

256 Biology
Wilson (1928 — till now) and Fancies Greek (1916 — 2004) discovered the
DNA structure and won the Nobel prize for it in 1962.

Limitation
This model looks like real DNA but here the structural ratio between
the different molecules and chemical groups is not accurate.

(c) RNA

RNA stands for ribonucleic acid. Most

RNA has contained single polypeptide ow iQ

strand. It is composed of 5 carbon ribose

sugar, inorganic phosphate and nitrogen a , oy No

bases (adenine, guanine, cytosine and \ 5 ( S

uracil). In the genome of RNA virus, <4 Ay =

RNA is found as a_ permanent oN

component or the inherited component. cA by ) D>

In some viruses (i.e. tobacco mosaic > 0

virus) DNA is absent. The viruses which A

are not composed of DNA possess RNA S ppl U

as their nucleic acid. In this situation, the / — Ee

RNA serves itself as the hereditary Figure : 12.04 RNA

material.

(d) Gene

The unit of controlling all the visible and invisible signs and characters of

organisms is called the gene. Genes are positioned throughout the chromosomes

of organisms. The location of a gene throughout a chromosome is called the

locus. For a specific characteristic, a gene is responsible. In some cases, a

characteristic is expressed through cooperative action of several genes. In other

cases, one gene controls more than one characteristic. From different research,

it is clear that a gene is the perfect master of heredity. By taking necessary

signals from DNA, RNA enters into the ribosome of the cytoplasm and
according to that signal, protein is synthesised. In the case of a eukaryotic cell this |
protein (synthesised) is first deposited in the endoplasmic reticulum and then it $

Heredity in organisms and evolution 257
passes through the glogi body and vesicle. Meanwhile the protein undergoes
many changes and is carried to necessary places. In the prokaryotic cell protein
directly reaches the destination. This protein determines the nature and speed of
biochemical reactions and from that, the characteristics of living organisms are
determined with respect to the environment. These characteristics include
everything from structure to the behavior of any living organism. It can be
expressed as: DNA — RNA — Protein — Characteristics.

The number of genes in different organisms is not the same. In organisms of the
same nature, the number of genes is more or less same. Genes are arranged in
common principle along side from one end to another end. Chromosomes are
separately spread from each other in a linear form.

Different replicas (edition) of the same genes can express the same characteristic
in different levels. For example in a Pea, for tallness, the height determination
gene is ‘T’ and for shortness the height determination gene is ‘t’. When Tt is
combined, it expresses its tallness. So “T’ with respect to t is called the dominant
gene and ‘t’ with respect to “T’ is called the recessive gene. When in an organism
two genes are recessive, only then does the recessive gene express the recessive
characteristic. e.g., only pea plant with ‘tt’ is short in height.

To see how the characteristics or traits of parents are expressed in the next
generation (offspring) scientist Gregor Johan Mendel did some experiments with
pea plants in 1866 and discovered a valuable theory of genetics. The factor takes
the presently glamorous from known as the gene. Gregor Johan Mendel is called
the Father of genetics.

Mandel took a tall and a short pea plant and transferred pollen grain of a tall
plant into the stigma of a short plant. In the same way, he transferred the pollen
grain ofa short plant into the stigma of a tall plant. This resulted in reproduction.
He made sure that the Tall Dwarf other pollen grain would not appear. The
reproduced seeds were sowed and it was found that all the plants were tall in
size and no plants were short. Out of these plants,one was taken into
Forma -33, Biology Class-9-10

258 Biology
reproduction through self-pollination and the seeds were sowed. It was found
that there were both tall and short plants. Among them, » were tall and % was
short.
aie.
Slee aero Parents
eo ig ; hat
7 i
¢ i) & i) Gamete
T _@ t
7 = is Plant (All one tall)
5 b - \
> > ie * oe F, Plant(% tall, % short)
CHL Sw A] CEB ‘
Figure 12.05 Experiment of Mendal’s law
This theory of Mandel is applied in breeding of plants and animals. The
controlled sexual reproduction is done in plants and animals to bring about
desired characteristics. As a result, a generation with various characteristics are
produced. From this generation, desired characteristics are selected for breeding
to get plants and animals that have desired characteristics. At present, this theory
is applied largely for the production of improved variety of crops.
DNA replication
Through the process, a new DNA molecule is synthesized from an existing
molecule of DNA. DNA replicates in a half-conservative way. Through this
process, the double stranded DNA becomes single stranded by breaking .,
hydrogen bonds. 8

Heredity in organisms and evolution oo)

Then the floating nucleotide in a cell

creates new complimentary strands by [71 4 LZ

combining “A” (adenine) with ‘T’(Thy- 7 SJ

mine), ‘T’ with A, ‘C’ with ‘G’ and ‘G? SS

with ‘C’. Thus one of the old strands Wim G ZB

remains and combines with a new strand to sz

make a complete DNA. At the end, a new = ow

strand, combining with another old strand, SS A

forms the structure of a molecule of DNA. Ss ll

As the new DNA emerges, it has a new and ex <=

an old strand. This principle is known as Ss ZB

the semiconservative method. In 1956 | ZZ.

Watson and Crick first successfully Figure 12.06 DNA Replication

proposed the replication process of DNA.

@ Individual Activity

Activity: The teacher will ask the students to demonstrate a diagram of a
DNA after drawing it in a big piece of paper with a pencil.

12.1.2 DNA Test

Throughout the present century, DNA technology and the significance of it in

the field of medical science, agriculture, fish and animal resources and in the

industry of medicine have introduced a new chapter on creation. In Bangladesh,

along with evidence, witness, eyewitness dependent judiciary system, DNA has

opened a new window of ensuring true justice.

A scientific and practical method of DNA test is called DNA fingerprinting. The

name DNA typing or DNA testing is also used. To perform the DNA test, the

first requirement is an organic specimen. Bone of a person, teeth, hair, blood,

saliva, semen can serve as valuable organic specimens. The profile from the

place of occurrence of crime or the profile from the specimen of the victim of a
o crime is compared with the profile obtained from the blood or organic specimen
3 ofa suspect.

260 Biology
In this method DNA is isolated from the sample by a chemical process and then
DNA are cut into pieces by one or more restricted enzymes. Then, through a
special method (electrophoresis by egrose or polyacrylamide gel) the pieces of
DNA are sorted according to the length of different bands.

Then, active isotope DNA pro is hybridized, keeping it on a special nitro
cellulose paper and then putting it on an x-ray film to determine different visible
bands by autoradiograph method. After that, the sample is compared with DNA
band ( DNA map) of the victim or suspected person. This method is termed as
finger print method. Currently by using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
method DNA test is done with even a small sample for identification without any
error.

12.2 Determination of human sex

In human and other mammals sex is

determined in the same way. In the 22 pairs of autosome

cells of the human body, the number

of chromosomes is 46, i.e. 23 pairs. y if ( i yf
Among them 22 pairs (total number

44) are autosomes and the remaining ( )

pair is the sex chromosome. ( \ K X i a
Autosomes play roles in ff }( x K
physiological, and embryonic (© Ne wo”
development and the formation of the

body of organisms which have no n ease of women Incase of man,
part in determining sex. The two sex a oe
chromosomes are marked with X and y \

Y. They play a significant role in Xx \ XY
determining sex. In females, in the Figure 12.07: 22 pairs of autosome and one
diploid cells both sex chromosomes pair of sex chromosome

are X i.e. XX. In males the two chromosomes one is X and the other is Y. Both
the chromosomes are long in structure, and rod shaped but Y chromosome is
shorter than the X chromosome. At the time of the development of the egg,
meiosis occurs, and every egg possesses an X chromosome along with other S

Heredity in organisms and evolution 261
chromosomes. But in case of a male at the es g
time of the formation of sperms, half the rp a
number of sperms contain an X chromosome \ ha)
and other half number of sperms contain a Y ae, i f
chromosome. An egg can be fertilized with \ | /
either type X or Y. So, a zygote can have both VAY
the chromosomes as type X, or can have one 2g! a dl y
X and the other Y. The baby, which is born xX
having both the chromosomes as X i.e. XX, ;
will be a baby girl and the baby, who is born
with one chromosome of type X and the other &. &x) XY
one of Y, will be a baby boy. In determining ) AN , he
sex, a mother plays no role because the eu. ler.
mother always produces eggs containing only Figure 12.08 : Sex determination
an X chromosome. On the other hand, the process of human child by
father produces sperms having both the type new Elpompsome
X and Y.
@) Individual Activity
Activity: Determine whether a son or a daughter will be born following
the following chart.

Mother and Father
ES ee
Ee

@) Individual Activity
Activity: Sex determination of bird, cricket (insect) and crocodile are
different from that of human. Investigate the sex determination process
S of these animals and prepare a report on it.

262 Biology
12.3 Genetic disorder:
In some genetic diseases, a mutation occurs in gene of sex chromosomes. These
types of diseases are called sex-linked disorder. As the size of Y chromosome is
comparatively short and there are less genes on it. In most cases sex-linked
disorders occur due to the mutation of the X chromosome. In female, there are
two X chromosomes. Even if one X chromosome is affected by mutation,
symptoms of genetic disorders are never expressed as the other X chromosome
remains normal. Two X chromosomes in a female are unlikely to have the same
type of mutation. So a female is not usually affected by sex-linked disorder, but
merely acts as a carrier (the person who is not affected by sex-linked disorder but
carries the mutant gene of the sex-linked disorder is called a carrier).
In genes of male, there is only one X chromosome. So they do not act as carrier,
rather they show the symptom of sex-linked disorders directly if only the X
chromosome is affected.
(a) Colour blind or colour blindness
Colour blindness is a condition when someone
cannot properly identify colours. To identify © 8
“ . ; 0% § 8 2, Ove
colours, we have pigments in our optical nerve S30° 2p. 200 ve.
cells. If colour blind, the patient is deficient of a tae oN
colour identifying pigments in their optical on oe os ove ee
@ br} . °, @o”
nerve. If someone lacks a single pigment then Pig woaae ata Rar
he would not be able to differentiate red and Set enieie
green. This is the universal problem of colour * race ?Z 0 oe
blindness. If lacking more than one pigment 65° Kear ied os
besides red and green, the patient cannot 05 8° eaeetse”
differentiate the colours blue and yellow. One "Oe"
man out of ten is colour blind. In comparison, figure 12.00 7A Picture taken
very few numbers of women suffer from this indentify red-green colour
problem. blindnes. It is designed in such
Along with heredity, some medicines such as away tt 2 colour bind man
taking hydroxy chloroquinine for the treatment , healthy man will see it 74. S
N

Heredity in organisms and evolution 263
of rheumatism triggers a side effect causing colour blindness by disintegrating
the colour pigment in the eyes. Advice from a registered ophthalmologist can be
a solution to cope with the colour blindness.
@) Individual Activity

Activity: In Picture 10.12 X’ represents a

mutant of X chromosome, Carrier mother Mother

(XX’) and sex linked disorder father (X’Y) ara x

produce the offspring that may have the

probability of ratio, such as: Z | | XX" | XX | baby Daughter

sex linked disorder daughter baby X’X’: m Y XY XY baby Son

carrier daughter XX’:sex linked disorder

son XY: Normal son XY = 1:1:1:1 Figure 12.10: How sex-linked

In this same way find the ratio of offspring: srsen eulooy bilndneasy

(a) Father X’ Y and healthy Golfer XX are aust ei leas beernatiosen

(b) BLD father X"Y and SLD mother X"X in panet square.

(c) Father XY and mother X’X

(d) Father XY and mother X’X
(d) Thalassemia
Thalassemia is a disease of abnormal state of red blood cells. Because of this
disease, red blood cells disintegrate. The patient suffers from anemia. This
disease genetically passes from generation to generation. In Bangladeshi
context, Thalassemia is an important hereditary blood problem. It is guessed that
every year 7000 babies are born with thalassemia and at present the number of
patients may be one lakh. It is an autosomal recessive disorder. i.e., when both
father and mother are the carrier or both are the patient of thalassemia, only then
does it dominates in the offspring. When the marriage is held between maternal
and paternal cousins or between close (blood related) relatives there is a higher
probability of giving birth to a child with thalassemia.
There are two types of thalassemia due to two types of gene disintegration i.e.,

za thalassemia and £ thalassemia.
N

264 Biology
a Thalassemia is caused when a globulin production is absent or defective. This
type of disease is prevalent in South Asia, the Middle East, China and Africa. In
the same way, B thalassemia is caused when the gene for the production of the
protein B globulin is disintegrated. This type of disease is found in the people of
the Mediterranean region. Some people having African, American or Chinese
origin may also suffer from this disease.
On the basis of the inherited gene, thalassemia is grouped into two categories. In
case of major thalassemia, the victim baby obtains genes from both the parents
and in case of minor thalassemia a baby obtains genes either from the father or
from the mother. This type of body does not express any sign of thalassemia but
functions as a carrier of thalassemia genes.
>» Thalassemia gene
R — Healhy gene
9

Mother-healthy Father-healthy

but silent carrier but silent carrier

of thalassemia of thalassemia

2O) MO
CO SO @O WE
Thalassemia affected child Healthy but carrier of thalassemia Healthy child
(Possibility one fourth) child (Possibility two fourth) (Possibility one fourth)
Figure 12.11 : The possibility of inheriting thalassemia from carrier father x
and carrier mother is one fourth. ss

Heredity in organisms and evolution 265
Symptom: Due to severe thalassemia, the baby may die in the womb. Babies
born with major Thalassemia may suffer from anemia just after birth, up to one
year of age.

Treatment: Thalassemia is treated by transfusing blood at regular intervals and
by providing the patient with required medicines. The patient must not eat iron
enriched fruits and medicine, as they may accumulated and cause harm to other
body organs. If the liver is badly affected, other diseases or jaundice can be
initiated. The patient suffering from major thalassemia faces threats of life from
age 20 to 30.

12.4 Theories on evolution of organisms

In this world of diversity, we are familiar with many living organisms, among
which only 1.3 million are animals. Besides this four hundred thousand
species of plants are identified. Once Man had an idea that the world is
unchangeable i.e., the shape, volume of earth remained unchanged from its
inception. They thought that there was no difference between the primitive
and current (present) living kingdom. But in 500 BC a scientist named
Xenophanes, first discovered fossils.

He proved that the living organisms are not unchangeable i.e., there are many
changes happening between the past and the present.

In 400 BC Aristotle proved that in the living kingdom there are some species
which are more developed in comparison to other species. These developed
species adapted with changes of the environment, and came to their present
form through evolution. Generally evolution is a slow process, and through
this process complex organisms originate from simple organisms. There are
also very few examples of abrupt evolution.

According to the latest scientific data, 4.5 billion years ago, the earth was a
heated gas mass evolved from the sun. This gas mass radiated heat and
gradually became denser to a liquid state. Then the mass solidified from outer
side to the inner side and released vapour, creating cloud surrounding the
mass. Rain produced from that cloud created the sea on the solid level of the
Forma -34, Biology Class-9-10

266 Biology
earth. In the course of time, life originated in the sea. These lives underwent
gradual changes and resulted in today’s diverse world.

After many hypothetical and research based experiments, modern people
have attained the concept that evolution is the basis of the origin of life.
Evolution comes from the Greek world “Evolveri”. The English philosopher
and educationist Herbert Spencer first used the world evolution. Once it was
thought that through slow and continuous changes a complicated and
developed species was developed from a simple and unicellular organism.
This process is known as evolution. But evolution does not always occur
slowly, sometimes it occurrs fast with environmental changes. Not only that,
sometimes complex organisms turns into simpler ones due to evolution (The
Mexican catfish lost its eyesight when it shifted from surface water to dark
caves of deep water).

So now the definition of evolution is given by gene alleles. (One specific
gene can remain in more than one form. Then each and every form of that
gene is called its allele.) According to Curtis-Burns (1939) the moder
definition, of evolution is the change of the gene allele frequency from
generation to generation within the species more or less similar in nature.
For example, a list was made after determining the genes of all the tigers of
the Sundarbans. At the same time, the number of alleles of the genes was also
counted. After some years, another list will be made by determining genes of
the next generation of tigers along with determining the alleles.

When comparing the two lists, if it is found that there is a noteworthy change
in the alleles then one can say that evolution occurs in the tiger population.
12.4.1 Origin of life

There are many opinions about how life originated on earth. But there is no
controversy about life originating from sea water. In this regard scientists put
forward logic in different ways. First, the presence of different mineral salts
in most living cells, blood and other liquid of body are similar to that of sea
water minerals. Second, there are still simple and unicellular organisms found ,,
in sea water. 3

Heredity in organisms and evolution 267
ar ww if : Fea on “Mesophytic plant
END \ Ze aad
Birds ) CN “ee &)
Reptiles Mammals Ye
bre a is} }
\—~//
A (
Amphibians BD WW,
; Fishes a
KS REE fr Sea weed
_ Worms
_, Vertebrates
Ecinoderms
0X0
OY) =pua Coelenterates
Fy) Plants
Protozoans
Gy
Protists
Figure 12.12 : Evolution is a complex network of numerous changes
occurring simultaneously in various branches.
The scientific hypothesis regarding how life originated on earth is like this:
260 years ago the air of the earth was filled with large amounts of
methane, ammonia, hydrogen sulphide, water vapour, nitrogen and carbon
dioxide. There was no trace of oxygen. Due to frequent eruptions of
volcanos, and the effect of ultra violet rays and lightening the atmospheric
« temperature increased and the organic materials combined to produce amino
S$ acid and nucleic acid.

268 Biology
The above process was proved by doing an experiment in the laboratory.
Nucleoprotein is produced from the combination of amino acid and nucleic
acid. Gradually the nucleoprotein attains the power of replication and thus a
life starts. The origin of earth and its consequent evolution of life is called
chemical evolution.
It is assumed that the nucleoprotein is produced by the chemical combination
of protein and nucleic acid. A protovirus is evolved from the nucleoprotein
and from it, a virus evolved. A virus is a state between living and non-living.
After that, bacteria were produced and later on protozoa was originated. The
nucleus of bacteria is primitive in nature, it is called a prokaryotic cell.
Later on, true nucleus appears in Protozoa. In some unicellular organisms,
chlorophyll is formed and as a result synthesis of food became possible and
oxygen is produced as a by product. Then the aerobic organisms increase in
number. Initiation of multicellular organisms appear from the unicellular
organisms.
In this way evolution occurs in two stream, plant and animal. There are many
explanations about chemical evolution and the origin of living organisms but
the explanation given above is the most commonly accepted one.
Evolution never happens in a linear way. It has always been happening in a
complicated way in different branches. This is shown in figure 12.12.
12.4.2 Theory of Darwin or Darwinism
Charles Darwin, the British naturalist, brought a revolutionary idea to the
history of Biology and to science. Scientist Charles Robert Darwin
(1809-1822) was born in Shrewsbury, England. During his voyage to the
Galapagos Island in the Pacific ocean he was attracted to the amazing
diversity of plants and animals of that region and he came back to England in
1837 with a vast collection of data and samples. Twenty years after his return
ie., in 1859, he expressed his opinions in a book named the ‘Origin of
Species by means of Natural Selection.’
=
8

Heredity in organisms and evolution 269

It is mentionable that Darwin is not the founder of evolution but his theory is

known as the theory of evolution.

According to the discussion in this chapter, we have seen that scientists living

before Christ knew that organic evolution occurred on earth.

The success of Darwin was that he developed a mechanism based on scientific

data and proof which could explain all matters related to evolution.

Alfred Russell Wallace, (1823-1913), a contemporary British naturalist and

scientist who independently developed a theory on natural selection, also

mentioned natural selection as a cause of organic evolution. Due to some

historical reasons, Darwin’s theory was more popular than his.

According to Darwin, general facts about natural events:

(a) Increase of generation in excessive rate: A general characteristic of

living beings is to reproduce its species in an excessive rate. Due to this the

number of species increases both geometrically and mathematically. For

example, one mustard plant produces 7,30,000 seeds in a year. It is possible

to get 730,000 plant from those seeds. A female salmon fish lays thirty

million eggs in one breeding season.

According to Darwin, if all the elephants born from a pair of elephants would

survive, the number of elephants would be 1,90,000 ( one hundred ninety

thousand) in 750 years.

(b) Limited food and shelter: As the area is limited on Earth, shelter and

food for living organisms is limited.

(c) Struggle for survival: As the number of living organisms increases both

geometrically and mathematically, having limited food and shelter, living

organisms have to face hard competition for survival. Darwin called this the

struggle for existence. Darwin noticed that living organisms had to struggle

in three stages. These are:

(i Interspecific Struggle: For example, a frog eats an insect and a snake eats

a frog. A Peacock eats both snake and frog. Thus only due to physical needs
o (hunger), a cruel relationship develops among different species, where each
iS species plays the role of food or consumer.

270 Biology
(ii) Intraspecific struggle: As the same species has the same habitat and the
same food habits, when their number increases, they compete among
themselves for survival. For example, when in an island the number of
herbivorous animal increases, they fight for food and shelter among
themselves. The stronger animal (herbivorous) beat the weaker ones and take
the command of that area. As a result, the weaker animals die after a certain
period from starvation.
(ii) Struggle with Environment: Normal life of living organisms is
interrupted by unfavorable conditions like flood, drought, cyclone and
tornado, earth quake, volcano eruption etc. So living beings always have to
fight with these unfavorable environments to survive. Those who won the
struggle can survive, while others become extinct. For example, the koel of
Mid and North America became extinct due to severe cold and snowfall.
(d) Variation: According to Darwin, two animals (or group of animals) are
never exactly the same. There are always some differences, even if in a very
small scale. The difference between the two specimens of the same species is
called variation or mutation. Variation helps living organisms to survive.
(e) Natural selection: The process through which organisms develop
through adaptation, gain more success in struggling in comparison to others,
and enjoys more advantages in competition, is called natural
selection.
va
@o © 3 B ih Oo & OOS 8
OG 8 F CG 8 s® Sg 84°
Figure 12.13 : The chronological picture of struggle for survival between two living
organisms. Green beetles could not adjust with the environment and were easily marked ~
and later on consumed by birds. But brown beetles survived. &

Heredity in organisms and evolution 271
The organisms which win the competition in struggling through adaptation
are selected by nature and reproduce at a greater rate. On the other hand,
organisms which cannot adjust to the new changes cannot survive and
gradually become extinct.
According to Darwin, the organism which can survive in unfavorable
conditions by adaptation should be addressed as the fittest. Thus it can be
easily said that the fittest organism survive by winning the competition
through adaptation (Survival of the fittest).
(f) Origin of new species: Nature selects plants and animals and nourishes
them. Plants and animals that survive can cope with the changes of
the environment and are able to reproduce more than those who are unfit for
survival. The characteristics of variation are transferred generation after
generation. The generation which has the quality of environmental friendly
variation are again selected by nature. Over the years through natural
selection, plants and animals are selected and thus new varieties of species
are produced.
At present geneticists, cytologists and taxonomists following the theory on
genetics and evolution, believe that new varieties could be produced in three
different ways, such as :
(a) Being isolated from basic species
(b) Hybridization
(c) In hybridized species the accidental increase of chromosomes (due to
polygamy) occurs during cell division and as a result, a new variety produced
can adapt with the environment and is selected by nature for survival.
Significance of Evolution in surviving of species
During emergence of a new species through evolution, many species are lost
in the passage of time. For example, Dinosaurs The species which possess a
greater ability to adapt through evolution can go far.
So the species which can attain more ability to adapt with the environment,
flow of life and demography will survive for a longer period of time. This
& process is called adaptation.
8

272 Biology
It is not that evolution occurs only in nature. Evolution can also be done by
experiment in the laboratory. This is also evidence of realistic evolution.
There is no scientific evidence found against evolution till today. The more
knowledge we gain about the biological kingdom, the more difficult it
becomes to deny evolution.
(?)Exercise
Short answer questions
1. What is RNA?
2. What is a gene?
3. Why is a chromosome called the physical basis of heredity?
4. What is an autosome?
5. What does Thalassemia mean?
Essay type questions
1. Describe, with diagrams, how DNA replicates itself.
XS Multiple choice questions
1. Where is uracil found?
a. DNA b. RNA
c. Gene d. Locus
2. Which one does RNA contain?
i. ribose sugar
ii. inorganic phosphate
iii. nitrogenous bases
Which one of the following is correct?
a. i b.i &ii
c. ti & iii d. i, ii, iii
Answer the questions 3 & 4 using the figure given below-
S
hy
=O. © Ovum
A we 2%
Oo Oe 5

Heredity in organisms and evolution 273
3. In the state of X what is the number of chromosomes?
a. 46 b. 44
c. 23 d. 22
4. What type of chromosome are there in A and B?
a, X, XY b. X, XX
c. Y, XX d. Y, XY
Creative questions
1. Sifat is a farmer. He has two daughters. The older daughter looks like her
father. While the younger daughter’s hair and complexion are like her father,
she looks like her mother. As the mother has given birth to a female child
recently. Sifat became aggrieved with his wife. One day he learned from the
health workers of his village that he is responsible in determining the sex of
his offspring.

a, What is heridity?

b. What is replication?

c. What are the causes of physical development differences found in the

offspring of Sifat?

d. It is irrational that Sifat got aggrieved with his wife. Explain why.

2. Sohel has seen on television that a exhibition of pet cats is going on in a town
of Brazil. He saw that in spite of their belonging to the same species, they look
different in size, colour. Some days later, he watched film about growing up of
wild cats. His father explained to him the concept of evolution and adaptation
when he became interested to know more about it.

a. What is locus?

b. What do you understand by the term adaptation?

c. Explain the causes of difference with the animals seen by Sohel.

d. What will happen if the organisms in the stem first group are left in the

environment where the animals of the second group were found?

Forma -35, Biology Class-9-10

Chapter Thirteen
Environment of life
Sag a
-
The environment of an organism is all the living and non-living components
around it. Light, air, rain, storm, soil, water are important in the life of
organisms. The living world around it also plays significant roles in the life of
the organism. The steps that the organisms take in different stages of life, also
have effects on the lives of the other organisms living in the same environment.
In the living world the food chain and food web are very important issues
without which the existence of life cannot be imagined.
3
BS

Environment around life 215

® At the end of this chapter, we will be able to-

¢ Explain ecosystem.

¢ Explain the interrelationship between the elements of an ecosystem.

¢ Explain two objects: food chain and food web.

* Draw the comparisons between the energy flow and the nutrient elements of an
ecosystem.

* Compare the relationship between energy performances in between trophic
levels.

¢ Explain the concept of an energy pyramid.

« Explain the concept of an ecological pyramid in limiting the food chains.

¢ Explain biodiversity and types of biodiversity.

¢ Evaluate the role of biodiversity in sustaining the stability of an ecosystem.

¢ Explain the interactions and interdependence in between different organisms in
maintaining balance in environment.

¢ Explain the methods used for the conservation of the environment.

¢ Analyze the importance of the conservation of the environment in maintaining
the balance in it.

¢ Determine the reciprocal interrelationship between the producers, consumers
and transformers in a given locality.

¢ Identify the causes of pollution of all the elements of a specific environment.

* Draw a flowchart showing the flow of energy, food chain and food web in an
ecosystem.

* Perceive the contribution of the components of an ecosystem to the maintenance
of balance of the environment.

ES
&

276 Biology
13.1 Ecosystem
Our environment consists of all the organisms, and non-living substances in the
world. Organisms actively collect components from the non-living world and
carry on their life, and after death become waste substances and mix with the
environment again, sending back all the elements to the environment. Green
plants collect carbon dioxide from the air and water from the soil through
photosynthesis, and produce carbohydrates, releasing oxygen into the air. For
the whole living world (plants and animals) the oxygen, required for respiration,
comes from the oxygen produced through photosynthesis. Both green and
non-green plants absorb mineral salts from the soil as food. Herbivorous animals
survive by eating different parts of plants in different ways. Carnivorous animals
consume herbivorous animals and other small carnivorous creatures. Waste
materials from all animals become mixed with the environment again. After
death, all plant and animal bodies go back to the environment and are
disintegrated. Bacteria and microorganisms do this disintegration process. This
way, the balance in the natural environment is maintained.
The exchange of energy and materials, between plants and animals and the
living and non-living substances, is called interaction. Interrelations are
developed through these interactions. An ecosystem is any unit of landscape
where there are non-living substances, food producing green plants, animals
dependent on plants and microorganisms for the disintegration of the dead
bodies of organisms, and a proper interrelation between these elements. For the
different elements for nutrition and other physiological activities, soil, air and
water are required.
13.1.1 Components of an ecosystem
The living community, inanimate components of the environment and the
physical conditions collectively develop an ecosystem. Each of these main
components is composed of some other small components. The living
components are greatly diverse.

=

BS

Environment around life UT
(a) Non-living matter: Non-living matter harbors the habitats of living
organisms, provide them with oxygen for respiration and can supply some
nutrient components as well. The components of all inanimate materials can be
divided into two groups, such as, inorganic matter and organic matter.
i) Inorganic matter: Water, air and mineral substances in the soil, which have
not evolved from any living body, but existed before the emergence of
organisms are the inorganic components of an ecosystem, such as calcium,
potassium, iron, nitrogen, oxygen and carbon dioxide etc.
ii) Organic matter: The waste materials of plants and animals or the dead
bodies of organisms or substances derived from them are called the organic
matter of an ecosystem. They are generally termed as humus. Some of the
components of humus are urea, cells, tissue and organs of plants and animals.
This organic matter is nutritious for plants. This is why compost should be
applied for the cultivation of plants. Most animals also like soil composed of rich
humus.
(b) Physical components: The amount of sunlight, temperature, presence of
water vapour in the air, air pressure and wind, depth and height from the surface
of the earth (under the ground or under the water) all influence the ecosystem.
These are all the physiological components of an ecosystem.
(c) Living organisms: The living world is the active component of ecosystem.
They cause changes in the environment through their activities. The living
components of the environment are of three types: 1. Producers 2. Consumers 3.
Transformers.
i) Producers: Green plants, in the presence of sunlight, obtaining carbon
dioxide from the air and absorbing water from the soil, produce their food
carbohydrates. At this time, oxygen is produced as a by-product. This is why
photosynthesis is the production process of an ecosystem. The producers are the
green plants. These green plants are also called autotrophs because they can

% produce their food themselves, they do not depend on others for their food.

S

a

278 Biology
ii) Consumers: No animal can produce food from non-living substances in the
environment. They directly or indirectly depend on plants for their food. This is
why they are called heterotrophic animals. The animals which directly consume
plants as food, are called herbivorous. They are the consumers of the first line.
Grasshoppers, chickens, cow, goats and deer are examples of herbivorous
animals.
| of ecosystem
te
Producer consumet |Decomposer

(Herbivor (consumers of Ist. level)

consumers third level)

(Top consumers 2

Figure: 13.01 Components of an ecosystem (in a chart)

The animals, which depend on herbivorous animals for their food, are called
secondary consumers or consumers of the second line. They are carnivorous
animals. Toad, fox, tiger are examples of carnivorous animals. The animals,
which eat secondary consumers, are also carnivorous. They may be called
tertiary consumers or top consumers, such as peacock, snake, tiger etc. There are
also animals who like to eat dead bodies of other organisms than the living body,
for instance, vulture, crow, fox, hyena etc. They are called scavengers because
they keep the environment clean by eating the dead bodies of different
organisms. Sometimes in the ecosystem, some animals play a double role as a
consumer in two different levels of the food chain.
iii) Decomposers: Some microorganisms, like bacteria and fungus, get their
food from the waste of plants and animals and their dead bodies, and as a
consequence, they are mixed with the soil and water by being decomposed.
These mixed components can be again consumed as food components. This is ,,
why these microorganisms are called decomposers or transformers. Ss

Environment around life 279
13.2 Ecosystem of a pond
To take a closer look at an ecosystem, a pond can be thought of. The deeper
relationships, between the organisms living in the ponds and the non-living
substances there, can be conceived. The non-living components are the different
types of organic and inorganic components (water, sunlight, carbon dioxide,
oxygen, calcium, phosphorus etc). The living components are the producers,
consumers of the first level, the consumers of secondary and tertiary levels and
the different types of decomposers.
Producer C)
Macrophyte
\ Phytoplankton q tact | /)
Nil} | \i
wa Te a
y / iy” Bee LS 2» ¥
j =x C f first level
} : a = (ogee)
4 | , Fy) K. > a of second level
| = we Consumers of third level
' MAS
pe § Sage
Inorganic component Ja ZF
(inorganic and organic compound)
Decomposer
Figure: 13.02 A pond ecosystem
(a) Producers: The producers are the photosynthetic algae and plants of shallow
water. The free-floating microscopic organisms are called plankton.
Phytoplankton, green algae and other aquatic plants, which produce food
so through photosynthesis are called primary producers.
So
AQ

280 Biology
(b) Consumer of primary level: Different types of floating insects, larva of
mosquito, very small animals, zooplankton , Rui and catla fish etc. are the
consumers of the first level. Free-floating small animals are called zooplankton.
These consumers cannot produce their food themselves. So, they live by directly
consuming the primary producers.
(c) Consumers of secondary level: Small fishes, some aquatic insects, toad etc.
are the consumers of the second level. They cannot produce their food
themselves and cannot directly consume the primary producers. They eat the
consumers of the first level as their food.
(d) Consumers of tertiary level: The consumer which eats secondary
consumers such as small fishes, prawns etc. is called the tertiary consumer.
Shoul, bhetki, boal like big fishes and stork are consumers of the tertiary level.
(e) Decomposers: Many fungi and bacteria live in the pond as saprophytes, and
they are decomposers. They live floating in the water or at the bottom in the
muddy habitat. They attack living and non-living organisms and help them to be
degraded, and as a result organic and inorganic chemical components required
by the producers are produced again for them. The producers in the pond can
again consume the substances created by the decomposers.
13.3 Food Chain
Among the living components of any ecosystem, first the green plants start their
activities. If they do not produce food, herbivorous animals and other
carnivorous animals may die in want of food. When the food energy is flown
from the primary producers through different tropic levels, then this flow is
called the food chain.
For instance, the green grass on a field is the primary producer and
grasshoppers live on of the grass. The toad eats the grasshoppers and the snake
eats the whole toad as its food. If the snake is small and there is a large gui snake
around it, a reptile of lizard family, it will definitely eat the snake. In this case, a
food chain may be formed as shown in the flowchart.
26
>
AQ

Environment around life 281
Grass ———» grasshopper -———>» toad —> snake —» gui snake
Producer consumer of consumer of consumer of consumer of top
primary level secondary level tertiary level level
In different ecosystems food chains may be different, such as Predator food
chain, Parasitic food chain and Saprophytic food chain.
(a) Predator Food Chain: The food chain, where organisms of the primary
level are of the smallest size and consecutively consumers of the higher levels
prey the organisms of the lower levels and eat them, is called a predator food
chain. The food chain mentioned above is an example of a predator food chain.
(b) Parasitic Food Chain: Parasitic plants and animals in most of the cases
derive their food from a host much larger in size than they are. In some cases
other smaller parasites are dependent on all the parasites for their food. In this
type of food chain, the primary producers may not be always at the beginning
level. The chain remains incomplete.
Man ———» mosquito ———» Dengu Virus
Remarkably, the blood sucked by a female Aedes mosquito does not provide any
nutrients to the mosquito but helps to develop its egg inside the body.
(c) Saprophytic food chain: If a food chain is stretched from the dead
organisms to the different trophic levels, then it is called a saprophytic food
chain.
Dead body ———» fungi ——— earthworm
Needless to say, this kind of food chain is incomplete and the food chain
describes only part of the total interaction or interrelations of an ecosystem.
Parasitic and saprophytic food chains are always incomplete since there is no
producer in them. Both types of food chains, to maintain their activities, depend
on one or more levels of the predatory food chain. The food chains of an
ecosystem are all based on the activities of the photosynthesis of the producers
green plants.
Forma -36, Biology Class-9-10

282 Biology
13.4 Food web
In most cases, the same consumer can be placed in different trophic levels. This
way some food chains collectively may form a net or web like structure. This is
called a food web. This is a phenomenon for both the terrestrial and aquatic
ecosystem. This concept can be made clearer by thinking of a pond ecosystem.
iC)
Y Zooplankton A
Big fish
Algae “ 4 < r “Vv
Neg il
Small fish Hawk
Figure: 13.03 Food web
In the diagram above, it is found that primary producers (algae) directly provide
zooplanktons and small fishes with their food. Both the small and big fishes eat
zooplanktons as their food. This big fish also eats the small fishes. A hawk eats
small fishes and some other small members of the big fish belonging to the same
species. Here five organisms have developed food chains in different ways. This
way, more complex food webs can be developed in different ecosystems than the
food web developed here.
Five food chains are found in the food web mentioned above.
1. algae———» small fish ———» hawk
2. algae ———” zooplankton ——» big fish——+» hawk
3. algae ——> small fish ——» big fish ———»hawk
4. algae ——* zooplankton ———» small fish —-+»big fish —-» hawk
5. algae ——» zooplankton ———» small fish ——» hawk =
g

Environment around life 283
A food web in a terrestrial ecosystem may be the following:
i 3) ———
: Monitor ak
Man {Vy ) “Us
Rabbit yo) “WN
) hs oa
Cd Toad ES Ss ya }
Peacock
yn oz Snake 2p,
Cente i | seul Live
: x “Y A
Deer i ve HL — 7
Tiger “ee
Fig-13 .4 : A food web of forest
®) Individual Activity
Activity : Write down the food chains in the food web mentioned in the
figure 13.04.
Nutrition flow in ecosystem
Plants produce food through the photosynthesis process after obtaining
necessary inorganic substances. A plant uses a part from the food it produces
itself, and the remaining food is stored in the plant body. Herbivorous Animals
eat these plants and carnivorous animals eat the herbivorous. After the death of
these plants and animals, decomposers transform them into inorganic substances
by using them as their food and the decomposers return the substance to the
states from where they are taken. Green plants obtain these substances and again
use them in producing food. The cyclic movement of nutrition materials is called
S the nutrition flow. The flow of nutrition materials through food chains is a
“unique character of ecosystems.

284 Biology
Energy spent
/— in respiration N
NS ¥v
boone Pe —
Figure: 13.05 Brief chart of the flow of nutrition and energy
Energy flow in the ecosystem
The sun is the main source of energy in any ecosystem. From the amount of light
and heat energy that reaches the planet earth, the green plants store only 2% of
the received energy through photosynthesis. Heat and chemical energy produced
by photosynthesis, are primarily stored as carbohydrate for the requirements of
the next stages of ecosystem. This energy, stored in plants, reaches different
trophic levels through different kinds of food chains. The energy again comes
back to the environment through the terminal acts of the decomposers.
The herbivorous animals, consumers of first level, maintain life by eating
leaves, stems, flowers, fruits, seeds or roots of green plants. The way the
chemical energy produced in green plants reaches herbivorous animals. The
carnivorous animals, who live by eating the consumers of first level
(herbivorous animals) are the consumers of the second level. The chemical
energy, from the consumers of the first level, is transferred this way to the
bodies of consumers of the second level. The chemical energy from the
consumers of second level reaches the consumers of third level in the form of
food. If any other superior consumers eat the consumers of the third level as
their food, the energy reaches the consumers of the top level.
After death, procurement of energy is stopped in all the organisms. Then the
chemical energy stored in the dead bodies comes back to the environment in the
form of inanimate substances and energy after being broken down by the
activities of decomposers. The energy stored in different inanimate substances &
N

Environment around life 285
of the environment becomes suitable for the plants to use again. And this way the
flow of natural energy in ecosystems is continued.
Some energy gets wasted in every level of all types of food chain. The
herbivorous consumer does not store the exact amount of energy, which it
procures from the producers of green plants. The amount of nutrition that a
consumer of the second level obtains from the herbivorous consumers does not
even reach its own body, as some of the energy is released into the inanimate
environment. This way, at the time of transferring food from one organism to
another, much energy goes out of the system in accordance with the principles of
the ecosystem. This is why, if in an ecosystem the number of trophic level is low,
energy waste decreases accordingly.
Relation of energy between trophic levels: Every step of a food chain is called
a trophic level. Each of all the levels, (primary producers, primary consumers of
the first level, consumers of the second level and the consumers of the top most
level) is a trophic level. The producers represent the first or the lowest level in an
ecosystem. The herbivorous consumers, consumers of first level are the
representatives of second trophic level. This way carnivorous animals of both the
higher and lower levels represent third and top most trophic levels respectively.
Some of the energy collected from the sun in the producers or in the lowest
trophic level of any food chain goes out in every consecutive step as heat energy.
As a result, it is found that the energy the producers collect from the sun is
reduced when reaching the second trophic level. The amount of energy is reduced
again when reaching the top most trophic level. Generally in any ecosystem 10%
the of the stored energy is transferred from one trophic level to another and the
remaining 90% energy is released as heat in the atmosphere or remains unused.
Concept of energy pyramid: The narrow apex of the three-dimensional
structure based on its triangular base is called a pyramid. The structure of
trophic levels in an ecosystem is shown with the structure of a pyramid. The
chart, describing the arrangement of energy storage and transfer of every
nutrition level, connected to food chain, is called the energy pyramid. The
e amount of energy is much higher in the level of producers than in the next
S trophic levels. The organisms of higher trophic levels than those of lower

286 Biology
trophic level lose more energy for respiration and other activities. This is why
the producers and the top most consumers are placed on the base and at the top of
the pyramid respectively.
Effects of energy pyramid to keep food chain in limit.
The flow of energy is always unidirectional. This energy flow can never be
turned around. About 90% energy is reduced in every stage. The ever-increasing
loss of energy limits the size of a food chain to 4 or 5 stages. The longer a food
chain is, the more energy is reduced in the higher trophic levels and at one stage
there would be no energy left.
Si Carnivor 4th trophic lebel
i zooplankton consumers
Zz 3rd trophic lebel
So.
VG
10 @ é ee =) Ce 2nd trophic lebel
WA | We \ f x 5D 1st trophic lebel
wa a Mi ICL
a0) Be ae
Figure: 13.06 Energy pyramid
13.5 Biodiversity
The environment is composed of animate and inanimate substances. It is the
assemblage of many types of organisms and innumerable kinds of inanimate
substances. How many types of organisms are there in the world? It is difficult
to give the exact figure of it but on account of species (who are similar to each
other in physical and reproductive characters and originate from the same
ancestor) it is easier to present. Until now, it has been possible to know the ,,
description and nomenclature of 13 lacs of animals and 4 lacs of plants. Every FS

Environment around life 287
species is characterized with its own unique features and is different and
identifiable from all other species. For instance, jackfruit is a species, and it is
possible to separate it from other species by its special characteristics. It has
become possible to group the living world into millions of species because of the
existing diversity in organisms. The human being is a species. At present about
seven hundred crores of human beings live on the Earth. They are all not exactly
the same and are different from each other in some characteristics. So, diversity
is there even among the members of the same species. Briefly, to say it can be
said that biodiversity is the abundance and variability among organisms existing
on the earth.
13.5.1 Types of biodiversity
Biodiversity can be divided into three categories, (1) species diversity,
(2) genetic diversity and (3) ecosystem diversity.
Species diversity: Species diversity generally means the total number of
organisms existing on the earth because a species is different from other species
by its distinctive characteristics, such as, a deer is distinct from a tiger in size,
habits, ferocity, number, mode of reproduction etc. The difference in different
issues of a species from other species is species diversity.
Genetic diversity: Differences in many issues are found in the members of the
same species. Though they belong to the same species, their structure, size, and
ability to resist diseases and to endure environmental adversities are different.
These differences emerge because of the small diversity in the composition of
their genes. Hereditary characters of organisms are transmitted through
generations by genes. There is a gene for every characteristic. Changes in
characteristic in organisms occur because of the changes in the structure and
arrangement of genes, and new species may evolve. Through this process, the
diversity introduced within organisms of the same species is called genetic
diversity.
Ecosystem diversity: If any changes occur with the physical, chemical and
~ organic components of a ecosystem, the balance of the ecosystem is
S hampered. These changes are, of course, slow and steady. To adapt with these

288 Biology
changes, changes also occur in the organisms living there. As a result the
biodiversity developed there is called the ecosystem diversity. In a small pond
ecosystem, the habitats, for the plants and animals are different than those in a river
ecosystem. In the ecosystem of a forest, grassland, lake, river, water reservoir, hill,
sea, or desert the living communities are developed with their own distinct
characteristics.
Effect of biodiversity on the maintenance of stability in an ecosystem
The components of the environment are deeply interrelated with each other. To
maintain balance in the environment, this complex relationship has developed.
With the activities of a large number of organisms, the balance is maintained in the
environment. The extinction of a species in an environment can cause a large
catastrophe. So, for the stability of the environment, biodiversity is especially
important.
Some organisms and animals, were once considered unnecessary and undesired.
With the passage of time, it has been found that these organisms are continuously
playing a necessary role for the conservation of the environment. Once there were
innumerable oysters in the coast of Check Pick in the United States of America.
They could purify the water of the whole locality in only three days. But now
99% of those oysters have been extinct. As a result, the remaining oysters cannot
purify the water of that total locality even by a year. This is why, the water of that
coast is gradually becoming muddy, and the level of dissolved oxygen in the
water locality is being reduced. A mature toad in a day can eat the amount of
worms and insects equal to its body weight. These worms and insects cause
harm to our cultivated harvest. rs ae hl
Because of pesticides, toads are » ” ie :
being killed. Worms and insects are .
the main food of birds. Among :
them, the number of the pests, : ; “nk
which cause harm to humans and ~~ 5 iy viele S
cultivated harvest, is high. Besides | aor Tees oe oe Pe ene =
that, birds play a significant role in a Re a
pollination. We know that 4° _ ee cae sper ase 5 3
owl, eagle, vulture, and raptor are Figure 13.07: Vulture, kite and crow a
regularly cleans the garbage of nature

Environment around life 289
predatory birds. By eating rats, they keep the number of rats under control. If a
pair of rats, living at a house of a human without any trouble could reproduce
freely, the number of rats would be 880 at the end of a year. But an owl can eat
three rats in a day. If vultures, raptors and crows would not clear the dead and
decaying organic matters, the world would be covered with them. This is why no
organism can be considered unnecessary. If any organism is extinct from the
environment, the stability of an ecosystem is destroyed. So, for the sustainability
of ecosystem the role of biodiversity is unquestionable.

13.5.2 Interaction and interdependence among different organisms and the
balance of environment

Green plants are generally called self-dependent because they are autotrophic.
Considered from environmental point of view, no organism is self-dependent,
not even the green plants. Plants, birds and animals, worms and insects and other
organisms influence each other..

A flowering plant depends on worms and insects for its cross-pollination and on
others birds and animals for the dispersal of seeds. For photosynthesis, green
plants use carbon dioxide that is released by animals during respiration.
Conversely, animals use oxygen released by plants in the daytime. Bacteria,
fungi and different microorganisms in different ways affect plants, animals and
worms and insects. It can briefly be said that mutual assembly and dependence
are the key to the regulation of the activities of life. In the living world existing
organic relationships between plants and animals can be designated with the
term symbiosis. In symbiosis, the related organisms are called symbionts. The
action-reaction, that occurs in between symbiotic organisms, is called
interaction. It has also been clear from the discussion made above that the
organism participating in interactions, are interdependent and none is
self-sustaining. Environmental scientist Odum says that this interdependent
relationship can occur in two ways:

(a) positive interaction and

(b) negative interaction.

Forma -37, Biology Class-9-10

290 Biology
(a) Positive interaction: The interrelationship, in which two organisms help
each other, is called positive interaction. Of these symbiotic organisms, one or
both may be benefited. This beneficial interaction can be grouped further into
two categories named mutualism and commensalisms.
(i) Mutualism: The relationship is mutualism when in the association both the
organisms are benefited. For example, a bee, or fly, etc. flies around from flower
to flower to attain the nectar and as a result, the pollination is accomplished.
Many birds and bats live on eating fruits, and they release seeds with their stools.
ING Nodule
; 2 fare ae ve
Oi @)
f aa Nodule
cf Iw
| N © Bacteria
\—— Root (> Root
(A) Nodules in leguminous plant (B) Longitudinal section of root and nodule
Figure: 13.08 Mutualism
In this way seeds are transferred and the distribution of plants is done. This seed
helps to develop a new plant. The association of an algae and a fungus forms
lichen. The fungus collects water vapour from the air and mineral salts to use for
both of them. On the other side, the algae produces carbohydrates for itself and
for the fungus. The rhizobium bacteria residing at the roots of leguminous plants
form nodules, fix atmospheric nitrogen in them. They supply this fixed nitrogen
to the host leguminous plant, and in return collect their carbohydrates from it.
(ii) Commensalisms: In this association only one organism gets benefited.
Though the other associate is not benefited, it does not lose anything. For
example, a creeper plant with its root is anchored in the soil and creeps uprounda
big tree. This way it collects a sufficient amount of light by spreading on other &

Environment around life 291
plant. Woody creeper does not depend on the plant that is providing shelter for it
for food, and does not do any harm to it. Epiphytic plants collect food from the
air but do not do any harm to the plant providing shelter. Some algae dwell in
bodies of other plants, but do not do any harm to them.
. EX ee UP sa.
(a) Creeper Plant ~~ (b) Epiphytic plant
Figure: 13.09 Commensalism
(b) Negative interaction: In this case the relationship is detrimental to one or to
the both. Negative interaction can be grouped into three categories, such as-
(i) Exploitation: In this case one organism enjoys its rights by exploiting
directly or indirectly another organism from its rights, for example, dodder. A
dodder with the help of the absorbing structure hosteria collects food from the
plant, which has provided it with shelter. A cuckoo is never able to build a nest.
It lays its egg in the nest of a crow, and the crow hatches its egg for it.
: =) AS Ong ; > | Be ‘e

| Vee es oe.

me > 24

: (A) Dodder and host plant. (B) Host- parasite relationship

= through longitudinal section
BS Figure : 13.10 Exploitation

292 Biology
(ii) Competition: There may be tough competition between organisms for light,
air, water and food. In this competition, the stronger organism survives and the
weaker one is abandoned. This is a good example of inter and intra-species
struggle of Darwinism.

Gii) Antibiosis: If the growth and Normal growth of a colony
development of any organism is partly or

wholly interrupted by the biochemical Inhibited colony
substance produced by an other organism SX Va

then this process is called antibiosis. This A

type of relationship mainly found in i |
micro-organisms. The reason behind the ,

discovery of penicillium by Alexender , J Inhibited zone
Flemming was keeping antibiosis along with Figure: 13.10 Antibiosis
penicilium.

It becomes clear from the discussion made above those actions and reactions are
continuously occurring in between the organisms existing in an environment,
and every component is interrelated to each other. By this relationship, some are
becoming benefited and some are harmed. This way, they are maintaining the
balance of the environment.

13.6 Significance and method of conserving environment

It is essential to conserve the environment to maintain habitable conditions for
the organisms living on our planet, the Earth. There are innumerable organisms
on the earth, and for their survival, there are different substances, such as, soil,
water and air etc. All these natural components are being damaged to meet the
different types of human demands, such as, food, clothes, dwelling place, and
health care for the excessive population of the present world. In this catastrophic
situation, if people do not become more conscious disaster will occur. In our
environment from the smallest plants, worms and insects to the large animals
and plants, none is valueless. In the realm of nature all the organisms and the ,,
inanimate substances are each other tied closer. The biodiversity is formed with S

Environment around life 293
millions of species of plants, worms and insects, birds, animals and humans etc.
and the existence and well being of human race are based on it. Forests, hills,
water reservoirs, sea are the very essential harbours of biodiversity. So,
biodiversity will be sustained if the environment is well conserved. It is to be
remembered that biodiversity can sustain without human but human cannot be
sustained without diversity. If the environment is well conserved, the basic
demands of human such as food, clothes, dwelling place, medicine, fuel, water
etc. will be continuously fulfilled without any disruption. If the environment
especially the forests are degraded, the rate of rainfall is reduced, and the
cultivation of crops is hampered. The temperature is raised for the increasing
amount of greenhouse gases (CO2, CO4, N20 etc.) and it is called enhanced
greenhouse effect. For the enhanced greenhouse effect sea level will rise and
consequently, vast coastal areas will be inundated, weather will be changed,
forest will be damaged, crops will be destroyed by different pests and the
severity of storm and tornado will raise. If the environment is well conserved, it
will be possible to be safe from enhanced greenhouse effect. This is why from
now on all the best measures should be taken to conserve the environment.
Nowadays man has raised his voice for the conservation of environment because
of his own existence. The whole world has to come forward for the maintenance of
a healthy environment. It is also essential to organise people for the protection of
environment. Plantation should not be limited only in a weekly or monthly
programme. For cutting a tree, two trees should immediately be planted. Tree
should not be planted in unplanned way. It should be planted with accordance to
the suitability of surrounding ecosystem. Before setting any industry and mills in
any locality, their adverse effects on the environment should be first taken into
consideration and safe disposal of industrial waste should also be ensured.
Urbanisation should be well planned. Massive plantation should be carried out side
by side with the rapid urbanisation. Instead of wood, solar energy should be used
as fuel. Excessive use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides damage the normal
quality of soil and degrades beneficial microorganisms, terrestrial worms and
insects, aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. So, the use of bio-fertilizers should be
increased. Use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides should be minimized.
2
&

294 Biology
Excessive population in different ways causes serious desolation on the
environment. Population should be controlled and communities of well-educated
people should be developed. Public awareness should be raised about negative
impacts of environment and to control the environmental pollution. Mass media
should play a prime role in this regard. The emission of greenhouse gases, carbon
dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide should immediately be reduced. To control the
soil erosion in coastal areas, massive plantation must be accomplished. This way
soil erosion will be controlled and the tornado and cyclone will be resisted as
well. Normal flow of water should be conserved by dredging river and water
bodies. This way salinity and water logging will be removed and the aquatic
ecosystems will remain in a normal state. It is essential to conserve the
biodiversity for the sustenance of healthy environment and with this view all the
plant and animal species, which are on the verge of extinction from nature,
should be conserved by special processes. Measures should be taken to control
the pollution of air, water, soil and sound. International and national principles
and guidelines should strictly be followed.
@)) Individual Activity
Activity: Find out what are the causes are of polluting the environmental
components in your locality and prepare a report on it.
(?) Exercise
@) Short answer questions
1. What is symbiosis? Explain it.
2. What is a plankton?
3. What is a parasitic food chain?
4. What is antibiosis?
5. What is mutualism?
Essay type questions
1. The balance of environment is restored through the interaction and 8
interdependence of different organisms. Explain it. N

Environment around life 295
(XS) Multiple choice questions
1. Which one is a saprophytic food chain?

a. grass ————_» deer + tiger b. saprophyte —>decomposer—> Amoeba

c. zooplankton-+fish — hydra d. green plants—+bird ———+ fox
2. Among the animals through commensalisms-

i. one is benefited from the associates.

ii. though none of the associates is benefited but none is also harmed.

iii. both of the associates become benefited.
Which one of the following is correct?

ai b.i & ii

c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
Answer to the questions 3 and 4 in light of the figure given below-

am grasshopper |
Green plant ———+ Small bird oe Snake |———>|_ Eagle
NS Small bird
Small Fish

How many food chains are there in the diagram mentioned above?

al b.2

c.3 d.4
3. In the light of the stem which one is the consumer of second level?

a. Small fish b. Snake

c. Rabbit d. Grasshopper
Creative questions

: ‘Carnivor
1. Green insect | ———» insect
Green plant L__J Small bird | ———>)| Fox
i ae rN
Snail Pa
=
8 Rabbit

296 Biology
a. What are decomposers?
b. What is a food web? Write in detail.
c. In which food chain in the food web mentioned above is the most energy spent?
d. Analyse what the consequences will be occurred in the ecosystem if the bird
in the food chain mentioned above is extinct.
aA 10°C
i 25°C
26%
a. What is biodiversity?
b. Write in detail what you understand by commensalisms.
c. Explain the causes of difference in temperature in the figure mentioned above.
d. Analyse the impacts of the reactions caused by the process mentioned in the
diagram above.
2
8

Chapter Fourteen
Biotechnology
2G be ~ > ee y eS) = 2 aS PRs. 4 eS ac)
oa J Oa ee a aS > oN
Te \, 7 i) ’ \ = 5
.h > aS
Jute Genome Project of Bangladesh has innovated a new variety of
Jute named robi - 1 by exploring the mystery of Jute life cycle.
Biotechnology is an applied branch of biology. It has opened new horizons in
solving many real problems in different branches of science. To improve human
health care, to develop advanced type of crops, to increase the quality and
amount of crops, to protect the environment, this technology has opened up
doors of immense potentials. In this chapter, we will try to know the facts about
this technology briefly.
Forma -38, Biology Class-9-10

298 Biology
® At the end of this chapter, we will be able to-
* Explain the concept and significance of biotechnology.
¢ Explain tissue culture.
* Describe the use of tissue culture in developing crops.
* Explain the objectives of genetic engineering.
* Describe the use of genetic engineering in producing crops.
* Describe the use of genetic engineering in producing insulin and hormones.
¢ Evaluate the efficacy of biotechnology.
* Describe the use of biotechnology in curing diseases of animals.
* Draw posters about the use of biotechnology and genetic engineering.
¢ Understand the contribution of biotechnology in our everyday life.
5

Biotechnology 299
14.1 Biotechnology
The word biotechnology is derived trom two words biology and technology. he
word biology means special knowledge about organisms and technology means
a manner of accomplishing a task specially using technical processes, methods
or knowledge. The interrelation between biology and technology is
biotechnology. In 1919 Hungarian engineer Karl Ereky first coined the word
biotechnology. Through the application of this technology, from a cell of an
organism, microorganism or a part of it, any new organism (plant or animal)
with new characters is developed or any processed or by product substance is
produced from this organism.
In the advancement of science, biotechnology is not only a new addition. From
the dawn of human civilization, man started to apply biotechnology. Man
acquired the knowledge of fermentation and brewing about 8000 years ago. In
nineteenth century after the discovery of Gregor Johan Mendel's laws of
heredity in the field of genetics, biotechnology started its new advancement.
With the continuity of the invention of double helix model of DNA by Watson
and Crick in 1953, today’s biotechnology has emerged.
Now a days, tissue culture and genetic engineering from many methods of
biotechnology are being used in multidimensional aspects in agriculture and
other fields.
14,2 Tissue culture
Due to the presence of totipotent stem in different parts of plant, it is possible to
grow exactly the same type of plant from any part of a plant. It is the principle
of tissue culture. Generally one or more than one type of a group of cell is called
tissue. This group of cells having the same origin and performing same activity
collectively is called tissue.
The process of separating a tissue from a plant and allow it to grow in a nutrient
medium is called tissue culture. Tissue culture is comparatively a new branch of
Botany. In plant tissue culture, any detached part of a plant or any part (pollen
grain, terminal or lateral bud, part of root) is cultured in any nourishing and
sterilized medium. All the elements for the nutrition and growth of tissue are
¢ supplied with the sterilized medium. The part of a plant being separated for
% tissue culture is called ‘explants’.

300 Biology
14.2.1 Steps of tissue culture
(a) Selection of mother plant: The healthy, disease resistant plant with high
quality is selected for plant tissue culture.
(b) Preparation of culture medium: For the growth of the plant culture, culture
media are made by mixing proper amount of essential mineral nutrients, vita-
mins, phytohormones, sucrose and condensing substance agar to bring the
medium to a semisolid state.
(c) Establishment of sterilized medium: Taking the culture medium in a glass
container (test tube, conical flask), its opening is usually closed with a cotton
plaque. Later in an autoclave machine, keeping it at the temperature of 121°C
under 15-Ib/sq. inch pressure for 20 minutes, the medium is sterilized. Then
again after closing the mouth or opening the glass container, it is kept in a room
with the controlling of light and temperature (25+2° C) for the growth of the
explants. After the turning of the medium into a cold and semisolid state,
explants are inoculated on it. In this stage, the tissue placed on the medium
through repeated cell division turns directly into a plantlet or callus or a cluster
of cells without differentiation.
Sample Tissue
o Placement of tissue
- ae, peuee arcane [) Develoment of Seedlings
eh <> mn transfering from callus
0-0
K \
de |
ai , Seedling
is
Plantation in natural Development of
environment Root
x
Figure: 14.01 Consecutive steps of tissue culture 8

Biotechnology 301
(d) Transfer in root developing medium: If no root is developed in the
plantlets by this time, then after attaining a definite height, shoots are cut and
again placed in the root developing medium.
(e) Transfer to natural environment or to field level: After washing with
water and putting them outside the room on the tubs, the plantlets are allowed to
adapt with the external environment. When the grown up plantlets become fresh
and strong, they are once planted in soil in natural environment.
14.2.2 Use of tissue culture
By utilizing the tissue culture, now a days in the reproduction of plants and in
field of developing new variety, much achievement has been obtained and new
horizons have evolved with the vast hopes. From the plant part in a short period
of time, innumerable plantlets can be produced with the same characters. Easily
disease free and especially free from viruses, plantlets can be produced. It can
be free from the limitation of producing plantlets in the specific season. As the
facility of producing plantlets in a short period of time in a very conspicuous
place, sufficient number of plantlets can be produced and the problem of storing
of seeds can be avoided. The attainment of plantlets of those plants which do not
reproduce by seeds and they can be speedily transferred in a short period of time
in fresh condition. Tissue culture technology is well accredited for the
production and conservation of the species about to be extinct. The plants, which
do not produce endosperm, can be developed directly by culturing their embryo.
The rapid multiplication of the plants, which do not reproduce through sexual
reproduction or of which rate of natural reproduction is low, can be done by
culturing their embryo. Tissue culture technology is being used for the
development of the plants of new characters. French scientist George Morel
(1964) proved that it is possible to obtain 40 thousand plantlets from a meristem
of the orchid plant named Cymbidium in a year. In natural way, only a limited
number of Cymbidium plantlets are produced in a year. In Thailand 50 million
plantlets, which are mostly orchids, are produced through tissue culture method
in a year. By exporting flowers, the countries like Thailand, Singapore, Malaysia
., etc. earn every year crores of foreign currency. In 1952 the scientist named
S Martin obtained disease free Dalia and Potato plant by culturing meristems

302 Biology
of them.Nowadays, it has become a regular practice to make some plants free
from viral diseases by culturing their meristems, such as potato tubers. In
Malaysia the reproduction of palm oil is done through tissue culture. It is
possible to obtain 44 crores of plantlets of Garland Chrysanthemum from a
vegetative part of it through tissue culture. Commercially the perfume atar is
being produced from the suspension of Jasminum using this technology in many
different countries. For the operation of heavy engine such as airplane, rocket
etc. a kind of oil from sperm whale is required. This sperm whale is gradually
becoming extinct. In an alternative way, this oil is being derived only from a
plant named jojoba but this plant does not grow anywhere except in a special
desert environment (such as, in Arizona, California), and their reproduction is
also time consuming. Through tissue culture, not only the reproduction of this
plant has become possible but also it has been changed to a level to adapt to the
climate of India. In Bangladesh by this time much more successes have been
made through tissue culture, such as it has become possible to produce the
plantlets of different orchids grown in the country and in other countries.
Disease resistant and high yielding plantlets of banana, wood apple, jackfruit
have been produced. Garland chrysanthemum, gladiolus, lily, garden carnation
etc. flower producing plantlets also have been produced. Plantlets of different
types of pulses, groundnut, jute have also been produced. It has become
possible to produce disease free plantlets and seed microtuber of potato
applying tissue culture.

14.3 Genetic engineering

Genetic Engineering is the technique of transferring a DNA with a specific gene
from an organism to a desired organism.

In a simpler way it can be said that changing DNA of any organism to develop
new characters, is called genetic engineering. All the techniques through which
gene is being transferred is combinedly called recombinant DNA technique.
Following this technique the transfer of the desired part of DNA is cut from an
organism and set it into a DNA of another organism to develop a new character,
the later DNA is called recombinant DNA. The process of develop recombinant
DNA is called DNA technology or gene cloning. S
With this technology, the transfer of the desired part of DNA from a bacteriato “™

Biotechnology 303
human being, from plant to animal and from animal to plant have become
possible. The organism with the new characteristics called GMO (Genetically
modified organism) or GE (Genetically Engineered) or transgenic.
GMO and transgenic organism are not the same. Any change that occurs in a
gene through mutation or in any other way is called genetic modification. For
thousands of years before the discovery of genetic method, man developed
genetically modified desired character by artificial selection of nature. The
process happening in nature for millions of years is called organic evolution. By
the blessings of the genetic technology, organic evolution occurs in a very
controlled way and in a very short time. Organism grows in this method is also
a GMO. Transgenic organism refers to those organisms where one or more than
one gene which has been taken from different types of species have been insert-
ed into genome.
14.3.1 Stages of the Preparation of GMO or DNA recombinant
In human dietary canal, there lives a type of bacteria called Escherichia coli.
Researching on this bacteria, most of the techniques of genetic engineering has
been developed. Genetic engineering or recombinant DNA technique is
accomplished by the steps mentioned below (Figure 14.2):
(a) DNA with desired gene is separated from donor organism. Then plasmid
DNA is separated from a bacteria to use it as a carrier of the gene. Plasmid is an
individual DNA besides the chromosome in bacteria cell, which is able to divide
or able in self-division.
(b) In this step plasmid DNA and donor DNA are divided by a special enzyme.
Desired gene is present in any of the part (location) of the donor DNA.
(c) Then donor DNA is placed in between the two terminal parts of a plasmid by
lipase enzyme. Lipase here act as adhesive. As a result DNA recombinant forms
with the specific desired gene. This recombinant plasmid now carries the desired
part of donor DNA.
(d) In this stage the bacteria recombinant DNA emerges into receiver bacteria.
The method of emergence of donor’s chopped DNA part into bacteria is called
transgenic organism. A new species of bacteria or organism created due to
transformation is called transgenic organism.
(e) In this stage bacteria with recombinant plasmid are identified and then separated.
S

304 Biology
Bacteria with desired genes are then made reproduce rapidly. Now each of these
reproduced bacteria contain the desired gene. The process by which gene is
reproduced is called gene cloning. To use the gene, plasmid is separated again.
: Q Isolation of DNA from two
jources (E.coli and Animal cel
2) cutting of DNA with CCS ee
Y restriction enzyme. ;
Plasmid ra — 4
wv | &
Sasey ead Desired gene
rs) development of recombinant DNA
adhesion of both DNA with DNA ligase
Recombinant f — Desired gene
DNA-plasmid y
4) Insertion of recombinant DNA-plasmid
in bacteria through transformation
J [5] cloning of bacteria
x
Figure 14.02: Recombinant DNA Technology 8

Biotechnology 305
This technology is being significantly used by innovators or investors because in
a short period of time very accurately desired characteristics can be transferred
by transferring genes. Genetic engineering is effective for the development of
new crops in comparison with traditional ways of reproduction, because the
transfer of gene is similar or limited to the nearest species through traditional
reproduction. But it is possible to directly transfer one or more genes to nearer
or distant species through genetic engineering. Moreover, it requires a long time
to achieve desired results through the traditional way of reproduction. It is
possible to obtain plants or animals or microorganisms with desired
characteristics in a very short period of time with genetic engineering. In case of
traditional reproduction, unexpected genes may be transferred with the desired
gene and the successful transfer of the desired gene remains uncertain. In genetic
engineering, there is no possibility of transferring unexpected genes and the
transfer of the desired gene is certain. Traditional reproduction is not controlled
by any rules or methods of bio-safety, but in the case of genetic engineering it is
controlled by internationally accredited rules and methods of bio-safety.
Toxicity is not tested in traditional reproduction but is done in genetic
engineering.

14.3.2 Genetic engineering in use

Genetic engineering or recombinant DNA technology is the most modern
biotechnology. The main objective of the technology is to develop organisms
with new and advanced characteristics and by which human beings can be
benefited. By this time, notable successes have already been achieved through
this technology.

(a) In developing Crops : Insect resistant varieties of crops have been
developed, such as Bt corn, Bt cotton, Bt rice (developed in China). These crops
are resistant to harmful insects under Lepidoptera and Coleoptera orders. Using
this technology, virus resistant varieties of crop have been developed, for instance
by transferring the genes, tomato mosaic virus (ToMV), tobacco mosaic
virus (TMV) and tobacco mild green mosaic virus (TMGMY), resistant
varieties of crop have been developed. The variety of papaya that is resistant
to ring spot virus (PRSV) has also been developed. Research is being
Forma -39, Biology Class-9-10

306 Biology
carried out for the development of late blight resistant variety of potato by
transferring late blight fungus resistant gene.

Varieties of corn and cotton tolerant to herbicides have been produced by genetic
modification.

Scientists have become able to develop herbicide tolerant tomatoes by
transferring herbicide tolerant genes into the tomato from bacteria.

This way herbicide tolerant varieties of soyabean, corn, cotton, canola etc. have
been produced.

Through genetic engineering more than one trait can be inserted into the same
plant. Nowadays, this type of transgenic plants is commercially available. For
instance, side by side both herbicide tolerant and insect-resistant characteristics
have been inserted in corn and cotton.

Through genetic change, the nutrition value of some crops has been improved.
For example, vitamin A i.e. beta-carotene gene has been transferred into rice.
Efforts to add iron to rice are being continued. Attempts are also made to
develop salinity and drought resistant varieties of crops through genetic
modification.

(b) In animals: In livestock, for example, transfer of the protein C gene has been
done to increase the protein in cow-milk, though this is still in research level.
Through genetic modification, genetic changes have been accomplished with
sheep by transferring the growth hormone producing gene from human beings to
it with the view of increasing its size and meat production. To improve the
amount and quality of the sheep's fur, two bacterial genes, CysE and CysM, have
been transferred to the genomes of sheep.

(c) In improvement of fishing: Transfer of the growth hormone gene of Salmon
fish, through genetic modification, to catfish, common carp, loitta fish, nilotica
can increase the growth rate of the fishes by 60 percent.

(d) In healthcare: Hepatitis b-virus vaccine is being produced from yeast
through genetic modification. From genetically modified E.coli bacteria and «
yeast, insulin is being commercially produced for the treatment of diabetes by 8

Biotechnology 307
using the gene, which produces insulin in the human body. The human growth
hormone and components of the stimulant for accelerated growth of
granulocytes macrophage colony are being produced from genetically modified
E.coli bacteria and yeast, and these are being used for dwarfism, viral disease,
cancer, AIDS etc.
(e) For environment protection: The areas of petroleum industry and refinery
and coal mining are being made free from pollution because this technology is
being used to make the environmental management easy and fast, such as
management of industrial wastes and sewage. Dr. M.K. Chakraborty, by
performing research on genetic engineering, has developed a variety of
Pseudomonas bacteria which is able to disintegrate oil and hydrocarbon in any
environment.
@) Individual Activity

Activity: Draw a poster on the use of biotechnology and genetic engineering,

and present it to the class.
@) Individual Activity

Activity: Prepare a report on the scope of biotechnology and genetic
engineering in Bangladesh.
(Exercise
Short answer questions
1. How is culture medium prepared?
2. What is tissue culture?
3. What is explant?
4. What is genetic engineering?
3 5. What is transgenic?

308 Biology
Essay type questions
1. Mention the roles of tissue culture in plant reproduction and developing
improved varieties of plants.
2. Discuss the roles of genetic engineering in improving crops.
OS) Multiple choice questions
1. Which one is a special enzyme to cut DNA?
a. Ligase b. Restriction
c. Lactase d. Lipase
2. Biotechnology is applied to-
i. fermentation
ii. tissue culture
iii. develop transgenic organism
Which one of the following is corect?
a.i & ii b. i & iii
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
Read following stem and answer the questions 3 and 4.
Imtiaz found a very good variety of woodapple visiting his friend’s house. To
produce the plantlets with the same characteristics, he brought some lateral buds of
the plant, and produced them in the university lab of the Botany department.
1. What is the process that Imtiaz followed in the lab?
a. transfer of gene b. application of hormone
c. use of enzyme d. tissue culture
2. Which one shows the consecutive steps of Imtiaz’s activities?
a. preparation of culture media — inoculation of explant > development of plantlets >
development of roots — transfer to natural environment
b. preparation of culture media > development of plantlets + development of roots >
inoculation of explant > transfer to natural environment
c. selection of mother plant — preparation of culture media —> inoculation of explant >
development of plantlets > transfer to natural environment
d. selection of mother plant — preparation of culture media — development of x
callus > development of callus > transfer to natural environment 3

Biotechnology 309
Creative questions
In the garden belonging to a genetic engineer Dr. Hayder, the lemon plants are dying
rapidly from disease though the lemon harvest is high. He finds that there are some
lemon trees of the same species, which live for long time although they do not produce
high yield. From these two varieties of lemon, he developed a new, high yielding
and disease resistant variety. He produced the plantlets not using a traditional process
but by a special process in his lab.
1. What is biotechnology?
2. What is GMO?
3. Explain the technique followed by Dr. Hayder for the development of lemon variety.
4. Explain the reasons for developing plantlets through the special process by Dr. Hayder.
The End

99

~

R

TUS:
rere
Academic Year
9-10 Biology
a
alate fire Fatecst ebar wort afSara s effecaicrs Gay Ur CeBTaA CrotcT
sos Faa-4 (Cort BF, 28 SOT AEA) CHT Pay
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh

