4
“Accounting
ses Nine-Ten
J t-
, a . A PZ _ ——
"f ™ —— = .

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a textbook for classes nine-ten from the academic year-2013
e
Accounting
Classes Nine-Ten
Written by
Dr. Dhiman Kumar Chowdhury
Md. Shawkat Ali
Mohammed Mizanur Rahman
Edited by
Professor Mamtaz Uddin Ahmed FCMA
Translated by
A.H.M. Yousuf
Mohammed Mizanur Rahman
Kakali Chowdhury
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel commercial Area, Dhaka.
[All rights reserved by the Publisher]
First Publication —: September, 2012
Revised Edition November, 2014
Revised Edition f November, 2017
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh
For free distribution by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh.
Printed by :

Preface
The aim of secondary education is to make the learners fit for entry into higher
education by flourishing their latent talents and prospects with a view to building the
nation with the spirit of the Language Movement and the Liberation War. To make the
learners skilled and competent citizens of the country based on the economic, social,
cultural and environmental settings is also an important issue of secondary education.
The textbooks of secondary level have been written and compiled according to the
revised curriculum 2012 in accordance with the aims and objectives of National
Education Policy-2010.Contents and presentations of the textbooks have been
bselected according to the moral and humanistic values of Bengali tradition and
culture and the spirit of Liberation War 1971 ensuring equal dignity for all
irrespective of caste and creed of different religions and sex.
The present government is committed to ensure the successful implementation of
Vision 2021. Honorable Prime Minister, Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina expressed her firm determination to make the country free
from illiteracy and instructed the concerned authority to give free textbooks to every
student of the country. National Curriculum and Textbook Board started to distribute
textbooks free of cost since 2010 according to her instruction.
The textbook Accounting has been developed for classes Nine-Ten in line with the new
curriculum in the backdrop of changed at the beginning of the twenty-first century containing the
massive changes in learners’ attitude and demand.
Considering the challenges and commitments of 21" century and following the revised
curriculum the textbook has been written. Recently the rational evaluation and tryout program
has been completed to make correction and revision of the textbook. I hope the outcomes of the
program will be reflected in this revised edition. We will continue our effort to make the next
edition of this book more beautiful, decent and free from any types of errors.
I thank sincerely all for their intellectual labor who were involved in the process of
revision, writing, editing, art and design of the textbook.
Prof. Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

Contents
es
es
(For [Cinedtiene Tams |S
te [ie |
ee
wen [ema nS
etme |
te | Fmisiemen | T
ives | Cote, Cote fn an aig Pie 1210_
se

Chapter One
Introduction to Accounting
Economic events are visible in personal, institutional in fact in every sphere of
the society. The mumber of these events is many and diversified. Without the
proper technique and its application, it is impossible to know the overull impact
of these events. Accounting is the process that deals with the overall result and
impact of those economic events. Various stakeholders both internal as well as
external are keenly interested to know about the information of accounts.
Therefore, accounting takes initiatives to record and analyze those transactions
and report those to its stakeholders.
Sa vb ; =. !
% f At ‘i Lt uw
: * 2 an ay
‘ a m,-d : —_ |
= = b < J,
eee a SS
Environment and Accounting
At the end of this chapter, we will be able to
e Generate idea about accounting
e Describe the objectives of accounting
¢ Describe the necessity and importance of accounting
¢ Narrate the history and evolution of accounting
« Identify the users of accounting users
e Explain the roles of accounting in creating sense of value and
accountability
« Be interested in keeping accounts in daily, personal, family as well as in
institutional activities
Class-$-10, Accounting, Foeme-1

2 Accounting
Concept of Accounting

Accounting is the process by studying which the various financial activities of a
person or an institution i.e. expenses paid, receive income, purchase and sale of
assets, buying and selling of goods, receive from debtors and pay to creditors
etc. are correctly recorded in different books of accounts and determine their
actual result after a certain period. In accounting the economic transactions of a
business are recorded, classified, and summarized. So, the financial position of
a business can be ascertained which will lead towards taking proper decisions.
The knowledge of accounting can be used to prepare different types of
statements and reports to identify the financial condition of a firm. Therefore,
accounting is called the ‘language of business.’ Accounting is that knowledge
which helps us to record, classify and summarize the financial transactions that
is eventually helpful to determine the overall financial condition of a person or
an institution

Activity: Prepare a probable list of financial functions of an institution.

Objectives and necessity of accounting:

1, Without proper recording of transactions, it is not possible to know the
financial condition of a firm. Therefore, the foremost objective of
accounting is to record the transactions properly into the books of
accounts.

2. One of the main objectives of accounting is to ascertain financial condition
and result. It is possible to locate the motion of a business through
identifying the profit and loss. Recording all the incomes and expenses
properly the profit and loss of a firm can be obtained.

3. The pen picture of financial condition can be seen by calculating the assets,
liabilities, and owners equity of a firm.

4, Reducing cost can optimize the objective of a business. Accounting helps
to record the expenses properly and thus helps reducing cost.

5. Accounting has no alternatives in controlling the fraud and forgery of a
business firm. With proper recording of accounts, we can resist and control
fraud and forgery.

6. Helps in informing financial condition to interested group and thus takes
correct decision.

7. Financial information of the previous year helps in taking proper steps by =
making comparative study. Rg

Introduction to Accounting 3

8. Determines the source of internal and external flow of money of various

service oriented nonprofit organizations like schools, colleges,
hospitals, clubs and societies and ascertain their accounts balance.

9. Govt. accumulates through collecting VAT, duties and taxes and
contributes to different regular and development areas. The role of
accounting is great in managing smooth functions of govt. Besides, the
books of accounts and related documents are useful to a firm in many
ways i.e. for bank or taking loan from money lending organization, fixing
the sales price of a product, identifying future activities etc. The necessity
of accounting is very much essential for keeping a fine, disciplined and a
thrifty/frugal life. Without keeping accounts properly, the pros and cons
of an organization can never be identified. Keeping records properly
ensures cost control and wastage of a firm and thus attain financial
solvency.

The origin and evolution of accounting:
From the history of civilization people used to keep records of different
important events on the bark of trees, by drawing lines on stones in caves. Then
they started living in groups and developed social attitudes. After that they
involved themselves in agricultural activities. Later they learnt keeping accounts
of stocks by making marks on the walls at home and making knots with the help
of rope. Gradually the number of population increased, society erupted,
exchange system developed, currency was introduced, and trade and commerce
were initiated. Purchase-sales, income-expenses and other transactions started
being recoreded mathematically. In 1494, an Italian Mathematician wrote a book
entitled 'Summa de arithmetica, geometria, proportioni et proportionalita’ (The
Collected Knowledge of Arithmetic, Geometry, Proportion and Proportionality)
and explained the basic principles of book keeping through the double entry
system in it.
With the passage of time, progress also occurred in science, technology and in
business and as such accounting developed. The stature of business grew from
small to large. The use of accounting is visible/ applied in personal and
xe familial life along with commercial, non-commercial, govt. and non-govt.,
® profitable and in non-profitable organizations.

4 Accounting
The development of accounting is related to the development of science and
technology. Now a days accounts are kept in computers rather manually. It saves
time and labour as well as helps organization taking desired decision.
Activity: How does science and technology improve accounting?
Users of accounting information:
geese
(sess)
en ern)
(ae)
Accounting is known as an information system. Thinking about the internal and
external users of accounting, reports and records of transactions are kept and
statements are published.
Internal Users
1. Owners and managers: Accountants prepare books of accounts and
other necessary documents, The owner, as well as the manager, tries to
identify profit and loss and financial condition from this statement. So,
future course of action can be ascertained.
External

1. Loan/ credit providers: Before granting loans to the recipient
organization, the credit providers analyze its financial conditions whether
it might be able to pay back the loan or not.

2. Govt.: Concerned authority of the govt. might look into the accounts and
check whether organizations pay their rates, taxes, and VAT and for taking
necessary measures.

3. Creditors: Before allowing credit sales, the creditors always want to
ensure that the recipients are in a financial state of paying back the due .
amount. This can only be possible by seeing the records of accounts. 3

Introduction to Accounting 5

4, Workers and officers: Workers and officers of organizations take the

assistance of the financial statements to know and have their benefits

from the profit of the organization. Besides, auditors, investors,

consumers and other concerned persons also use accounting
information.
information.

Relation of accounting system with society and environment:

Accounting is not merely used for obtaining profit.

Apart from making profit, it also contributes towards iW

society and environment so that it is not affected by a) Vf

that. From the following illustrations, some i a

contributions of accounting towards society and =

environment can be determined:

1. Organizations will contribute towards the resistantce - +*[|- 1 -y

of environment pollution and accountant will keep its ° <= > 4

records. This record will tell us about the ;

consciousness and contribution of that owner towards - a

the society and environment. Especially the oil

refinery companies contribute generously towards

environment from being polluted.

2. Smoke emitted from industry and factories is injurious to human and
environment. The owner and the accountant should spend a lot of money for
protecting the environment issues. For this, government’s rules and
regulations must be followed.

3. While producing a product hygenic raw materials are used, less electricity is
consumed, the sound of machines must be at a tolerable limit, and garbage
should be dumped in proper places. To ensure these some expenses are to be
made. Besides allocating this fund, an accountant must also make proper
records of those expenses.

4. Every Business organization has to spend some money as a part of social
commitment, such as providing scholarships among poor and meritorious

s$ students. For this, accounts are to be kept for proper fund allocation.
nN

6 Accounting
Activity: Prepare a probable list of expenses of a firm that are beneficial to
the society as well as to the environment.

Role of accounting in creating sense of value and accountability:

Value is the combination of long-term beliefs, thought, concept, and perception

that unite a specific standard that helps people accepting the right and ignoring

the wrong. Accounting helps creating value perception in the following manner:

1. Honesty and responsibility: If accounting methods are followed
properly while keeping accounts, corruption, fraud, and
misappropriation of assets could be kept under control thus ensuring
clarity in keeping accounts.

2. Debt repayment consciousness: Accounting plays a vital role in
removing the mentality of becoming a defaulter of loan repayment.
Therefore, it instills value perception of not becoming a defaulter.

3, Creating religious sense of value: Proper use of God-gifted resources
and reducing unnecessary cost are part of religious value. If accounts
are kept properly, the concept of, “cut your coat according to your cloth”
can be hence practiced in both individual as well as institutional life.

4, To be responsible towards society and state: The main sources of
income of govt. are VAT, customs, excise and income tax etc. By
utilizing the concept of accounting, accounts are recorded properly
hence, the dodging of tax pay tendency reduces.

5, To Prevent fraud and forgery: If proper accounts are kept the chances
of fraud and forgery among the officers and the staff reduces at a
substantial amount. As such, they become cautious of misappropriation
of funds and reduce anomalies.

Accounting in accountability:

If a specific responsibility is assigned to a single person, he will only remain

responsible for that job. Remaining responsible to third party means

accountability. The role of accounting is described in keeping this accountability
into action:

a) Internal accountability of the firm: In a modern decentralized system,
people are empowered to deal with their income, expense, and investment
so that they may focus and concentrate in accumulating results to their =
higher authority for answering their various queries. =m

Introduction to Accounting 7
b) Accountability towards owners, creditors, and investors: People involved
in bookkeeping and management of a firm must make sure that the prepared
statement gives a clear pen picture of the invested amount; the profit earned is in
line with the invested profit. If found otherwise regarding economic
accountability there can be a case of great anarchy in every economic and
non-economic affair.
c) Accountability towards Govt.: Concerned authorities of the Govt. have legal
right to see whether govt. rules are being followed properly or not in industry.
They need to see whether govt. tax, VAT, and duties are being paid accordingly.
Keeping books of accounts properly ensures such accountability.
Exercise

Multiple Choice Questions
1. Accounting -
a) Describes relationship with one another in society
b) Describes about production systems
c) Keeps accounts of Goods purchase and sales
d) Recording; Classifying and Explaining of all financial transactions
2. How can the desired result be achieved of Business organization?

a) By purchasing Assets b) By taking correct decision

c) By controlling Expenses d) By purchasing Goods
3. Internal users of accounting information in a business

(i) Owner

(ii) Manager

(iii) Loan providing Bank

Which one is correct?

a)i & ii b) i & iii

c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
4. Science & Technology —
a) Reduce Accounting b)Makes Accounting expensive
c) Restrict the movement of Accounting d) Improve Accounting
5. In which name does Accounting appraise?

e, 4) Accounting systems b) Information systems
Sc) Auditing systems d) Statement systems

8 Accounting
6. Expected profit of an organization can be achieved by —
a) Increasing Assets b) Decreasing Liabilities
c) Controlling Expenditures d) Increasing Expenditure
7. Example of service providing non-profit organization -
(i) Education institute
(ii) Advertising institute
(iii) Social organisation
Which one is correct?
a)i & ii b) i & iii
c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
8. Principal objective of Accounting is -
i) Determination of financial result
ii) Control expenditure
iii) Ascertainment of financial position
Which one is correct?
a)i & ii b) i & iii
c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
2
q

Chapter Two
Transaction
From the primitive ages, people felt the necessity of keeping accounts. In those
days people used to exchange objects among them to meet their daily needs. The
event that brings change to the financial position among people is known as
transaction. Therefore, it is seen that not all events are transactions. To get the
real pen picture of the organization only the financial events are treated as
transactions.
}
Sa~ — we
———_, ~ Sa
—
Documents of Transactions

After studying the chapter, we will be able to

e Have an idea about transactions

e Identify the nature of transactions

e Explain accounting equation

e Discuss the impact of transactions over accounting equation

e Prepare and explain the list of documents about the sources of transactions

e Prepare essential documents related to transactions
Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-2

10 Accounting
Concept of Transaction
In modern society for recording accounts, transaction is very important. Many
events occur in business. However, not all these events can be recorded in the
book of accounts. Only the events that are measurable in terms of money or
something that brought changes financial position are to be treated as
transactions. For example, suppose Mr. Simanto bought an almirah for 5000
taka, again got himself injured coming from the shop. Both these incidents are
events. Only the first one is related to financial change and should be treated as
transaction but the later has no relation to the financial matter and such should
not be recorded as transaction.
Literally, the meaning of the word transaction is to 'receive' and ‘payment’ that
means give and take. There are two types of transactions such as: (1) External
Transaction and (2) Internal Transaction.
In External Transaction-any financial event affects two parties or two
organisations. For Example, Babul stores purchase goods from any supplier or
monthly rent paid to land lord by Business.
Without the cash or credit, purchase or sales there can be other exchange of
services that lead to transaction. For example, salary paid to Mrs. Mahbuba for
her job or received 3,000 taka because of rent. This is also a transaction. Again,
invisible events can also be a transaction. For example, for the assets used for a
long time, the depreciated amount can also be a case of transaction.
Exchange of money or any event which can be measured by money or service
that reflects on the financial condition of a firm will be treated as transaction.
Apparently if any exchange of product or service that brings a financial change
will be known as transaction.

Explain.
Features / Nature of Transaction:
So far, we have learnt that every transaction is an event but not every event is a
transaction. By analyzing the concept of a transaction, we will get the following ,,
features of it: s

Transaction il

a) Measurable in terms of money: One of the important features of a
transaction is that it has to be measurable in terms of money or else it could
not be treated as a transaction. For example, the death of the manager of a
firm is a loss to the firm but is not measurable in terms of money. However,
goods destroyed by fire worth 20,000 taka is a loss to the firm and will be:
treated as a transaction,

b) Changes of financial condition: If any event brings any financial changes:
to a firm, it will be treated as a transaction. For example: Somebody bought
furniture with cash 5000 taka. Here the furniture of the business has been.
increased by 5000 taka at the same time cash 5000 taka has also been
decreased. Since this event has brought about a change in the financial.
position of the business, it will be treated as a transaction. Again, if an order
of buying furniture worth 5000 taka is placed; it will not be treated as a
transaction as it has not brought any financial changes in the business, yet.

c) Dual entity: Every transaction must include two parties. That is one party
will receive benefits while the other will ensure the same. For example,
salaries paid to the workers taka 5000. Here one party is the ‘salary expense:
account’ while the other one is ‘cash account’,

d) Complete and independent: Another important feature of transaction is.
that each transaction is completely separate and independent from the other.
For example Tk 10,000 is received from a customer after 7 days of _ selling
goods on credit. Here goods sold on credit is a transaction while 7 days later
the payment received is a separate transaction.

e) Visibility: Transactions can be both visible and invisible. For example,
some furniture is purchased worth 10,000 taka. It is a visible transaction.
Again, the depreciation of furniture worth 1000 taka is an invisible
transaction.

f) Historical event: The financial matters that have taken place previously are
known as historical transactions. If any future events change the financial
position of the business, it will also be treated as a transaction. For example,
reserve for bad debts, reserve for discount etc.

g) Impact over accounting equation: The Accounting equation is affected by
each transaction. Transaction causes change to different elements of
accounting equation. "Asset= Liabilities + Owner's Equity" is the
accounting equation. Therefore, any event is justified through accounting

= equation whether it is a transaction or not.
La)

12 Accounting,
Identifying transaction:
Which events are transactions and which are not is explained by the
following examples:
Following transactions have being occured in Sohel Enterprize during January 2017:
1. Started business with tk. 50,000.
2. Purchased goods with cash tk.15,000.
3. Paid to creditors tk. 10,000.
4. Anorder placed for purchasing goods worth tk.8,000.
5. Paid advertisement expense tk. 2,000.
6. Mr. Mamun has been appointed as manager in business for a monthly
salary tk.7,000.
7. Withdrawn from business for personal use tk. 3,000 by the owner.
8. Tk.500 has beenstolen from owner’s personal fund.
9. Acontract signed to purchase goods from Hashem Brother’s worth
tk.10,000 per month.
10. Sold goods to Hanif traders on account tk.10,000.
Whether these events are transaction or not is explained with reason-
Solution:
a ell Since cash brought in as capital it has brought a financial change and
includes two parties involved in it- one the capital of the owner and the
other is the cash .
Transaction Value of product is measurable in terms of money. Purchase of goods is
an expense to the business, while the payment has decreased the cash
amount .
Ba hen Fe teh
cash of the business, so financial condition has been affected.
Nota Transaction | Placing order for the purchase of goods does not mean actual purchase.
The buying and selling of the goods have not been taken place, so it is
not a transaction.
ee
paid for it has brought a financial change.
change to the business and does not include any cash flow either.
7% Transaction The owner has taken a benefit by withdrawing amount from the
business, so the cash of the business has been affected. os
Ss
a”

Transaction 13

8. | Nota Transaction | Loss of personal savings is not related to the business; the loss belongs
to the owner alone. So the cash of the business is not affected.

9. Not a Transaction Has been agreed to purchase but actual purchase has not taken place
and the payment of which is neither made. So no financial changes occur
in the business

10. Transaction By selling goods on credit to Hanif, the business has given him a
benefit, which is an income to the business. It has brought a financial
change.

Accounting Equation:
In a particular time, the total asset of an organization should be equal to the sum
of owner's equity and external liabilities. The equation that represents this
fundamental concept is known as the accounting equation. Accounting scholars
have only identified those as transaction that affect the elements of accounting
equation (Asset=Liability + Equity). Therefore, the events that make changes in
assets, liabilities, and equity are considered as transaction.
Accounting Equation mentioned below:
m7 \ (Liabilities)
A=L+E | Here, A= Assets
L= Liabilities
E= Equity
Asset: Asset means the economic resources that belong to a business that is
invested for making profit. For example, furniture, buildings, machineries of a
business.
Liability: Liability means the financial rigidity that has to be paid up after a
certain period of time. That is, it is the claim of the third party over the total
assets of the business.
=
S

14 Accounting
Equity: If the claim of the third party is deducted from the total assets of the
business, the rest will be known as equity. That is the claim of the owner over
the entire assets of the business is known as equity. Four elements affect equity.
These are:
* Investment of owner
% Revenues
* Drawings
“ Expenses
Shown by the picture -
Capital cree
Invest — =
a Equity
never A eee
Extending Accounting Equation, we get -
Assets = Liabilities + Capital + Revenues - Expenses - Drawings | Where,
Means, A=Assets
A=L+(C+R-Ex-D) L=Liabilities
C=Capital
R=Revenues
Ex=Expenses
D=Drawings
If an event is to be a transaction, it has to make any one of the following
changes:
1. If total asset increases, total liabilities or owner’s equity will also increases.
2. If total asset decreases, total liabilities or owner’s equity will also decreases.
3. If one asset increases, the other asset will decrease.
4. If owner’s equity increases, total liabilities will decrease.
5. Ifowner’s equity decreases, total liabilities will increase.
The impact of transactions over accounting equation is shown in the chart: 3

Transaction 15
1. (a) Started business with tk.5,000
A (Assets) |=| L (Liabilities) | E (Equity)
Both Assets (cash) and Equity (capital) increased.
1. (b) Purchase machinery on credit tk.5,000
A (Assets) | = | L (Liabilities) E (Equity)
[iy [aie || me | Se
Both Assets (machine) and Liabilities (creditors) Increased.
2. (a) Paid to creditors tk.3,000
ee ee
coe [many [ie || cnt | St
(300) | | f=] 000) |
Both Assets (cash) and Liabilities (creditors) decreased.
2. (b) Salaries paid in cash tk.2,000
ee Cc
en [ae Pre | | ons | me
(2,00) | | C=] | 000)
Both Assets (cash) and Equity (expense) decreased.
3. Furniture purchased in cash tk. 1,000
| A Assets) |= | L (Liabilities) | __E (Equity)
Teas [ny [rie | | cmtms | S|
(i000) | | tooo f=] |
= Assets (cash) decreased and another Asset (furniture) increased
cat

16 Accounting.
4. Business loan tk.5,000 paid off by the owner personally
| A Assets) | = | L (Liabilities)
. Capital+Revenues-
ct [atin [ree | | ton | Sb
pT | Tt} 5,000)_ | 5,000
Liabilities (loan) decreased and Equity (capital) increased.
5. Goods purchase on credit tk.7,000
Assets) ‘= | L Liabilitiesy | _E Equity
, P . Capital+Revenues-
eat [ty [rons | | cote | S|
a [=| 7,000 | (7,000)
Liabilities (creditors) increased and Equity (expense) decreased.
The impact of transactions over accounting equation is shown in
the chart:
“Hasan & Associates’ started legal practitioner business on January 1, 2017.
The transactions of the first month were as follows:

Jan 1 Invested tk.50,000 in business as Capital.

Jan 2 Paid the rent for the month of January tk.3000

Jan 7 Office machine purchased on credit worth tk.15,000

Jan 10 _ Legal services given to the clients for cash tk.6,000

Jan 15 _ Paid salary to the office staff tk.2,000

Jan 20 __ Loan taken from the bank tk.20,000.

Jan 24 _ Legal services provided to the clients on credit tk.7,000.

Jan 29 Outstanding amount for machine purchased has been paid tk. 10,000
Following accounts are identified by analysing transactions of ‘Hasan &
Associates’ for the month of January 2017.

1. Cash Account

2. Capital Account

3. Rent Account

4. Office Machinery Account /Service Equipment Account

5. Accounts Payable/ Machine Supplier Account

6. Service Revenue Account

7. Debtors Account / Accounts Receivable

8. Salaries Account &
9. Bank Loan Account s

Transaction 17
Hasan & Associates
Effects of transactions over Accounting Equation is shown for January 2017:
ee
eal CS = oe Clea
, vi ayahle -
Fi a) a ee Co
Da) 6
Jan: 2 (3,000 3,000) pense
hat ee ee
Balance 47,000 47,000)
sare [Sooo || oe | ve
Belance 53,000 53,000
pes com] | eT Lh | pe |
ee el Pe
EN bad el Bee
. 7,000 7,000 Revenue
Balance 71,000] 7,000 15,000 20,000 15,000 | $8,000
(10,000) | 10,000)
Balance 61,000 | 7,000 15,000 20,000 5,000 | 58,000
tow om
Activity: Show the effects of the following transactions in Accounting Equation.
Nargis Akter has started a tailoring business named ‘Nargis Tailors’ on
March 1, 2017. Transactions of the first month are mentioned below:
March I Invested tk.20,000 in Business as capital.
. 3 Shop rent tk.5000 paid for the month of March.
* 9 Bought sewing machine by cash tk.15,000.
" 14 Stitching wages realized tk. 2,000.
“= dF Amount spent for publicity of the shop tk.1,000.
- Receivable from customer for stitching wages tk. 1,500.
= 2 Repair of sewing machine tk. 300.
= 90 Bill of 22" march realized tk.1,200.
‘Class-9-10, Accounting, Forme-3

18 Accounting
Sources of business transactions and related documents:
In support of each transaction, one or many documentary evidence is seen.
These carry the evidence of transactions. For example, any businessperson can
make several transactions on a single day. Goods sold, goods purchased, return
of purchased goods, return of sold goods, depositing money or withdrawing the
same in a bank are such transactions may occur regularly in a business. In
addition, these events are actually the main source of transactions. Transactions
made throughout the calendar year are impossible to be memorized. Therefore,
the transactions are to be properly recorded in the books of accounts. Whenever
an accountant tends to record these transactions, these documents are prepared.
These documents are the vouchers, cash memos, bills, debit notes, credit notes,
VAT invoice etc. The explanation, specimen copy, and use of these documents
are described here.
1, Invoice: Invoice is a documentary proof of goods purchase & sales. When a
sells representative sales goods, he delivers a written document mentioning the
full details of the goods in it. This written document is called invoice. Buyer's
name & address, quantity of goods, description of goods, value of goods and
terms of payment etc are mentioned in the invoice. Seller Consider it as an
outward Invoice and buyer as inward Invoice. On behalf of this invoice, a buyer
prepares Purchase Journal and an seller prepares Sales Journal.
Invoice No- 05728 berating Date: 10 March 2017
Adanen Dost Pate Sie
_SINo. | ___ Description Of Goods _| Rate(Taka) | _ Qty. __| Amount (Taka) _|
Nazir Shail Rice 40,000

Cee

‘Taka(In Words); Thirty Eight Thousand Taka

Sales Terms: 2/10, Net 30

N.B. Errors & Omissions Excepted Seller's Signature

Note: The amount which is reduced from the purchase price is known as trade discount.
2. Voucher: The documentary evidence, which is used for transactions, is
known as a voucher, For example, the seller gives a voucher to its buyer for
goods sold tk.5,000. Again, a property owner gives a voucher to its tenants after
receiving rent tk. 2,000.

es
§

Transaction 19

Voucher is of two types. They are:

a) Debit Voucher

b) Credit Voucher
a) Debit Voucher: Debit voucher is used for goods purchase and different types
of expenses. It is recorded in the credit or payments side of the cash book or cash
register attaching an invoice, a cash memo with a consecutive serial number.

Sample of Debit Voucher
Ali & Haider
Andor Killa, Chittagong
Date cesectecceeteceeteeeen cee
Debit Voucher No.-----------------—-- Receiver’s Name -----------------
Head of Account ----------—-—---—-—— Diddiceteennesnsccencnaniniinatsincias
a

Taka(In Words):

Cashier's Sign. Accountant's Sign. Manager's Sign. Receiver’s Sign.
b) Credit Voucher: The voucher, which is used for sale of goods and income
received, is called a credit voucher. After attaching Invoice, cash memo etc. with
the credit voucher, it is recorded with a consecutive serial number on the debit
side (Receipts side) of the cash book.

Sample of Credit Voucher
Zahir & Brothers
Fultola, Khulna
Date oooeece nnn nnennn anne eee
Credit Voucher No.-------------------- Receiver’s Name ---------------
Head of Account ---------------------- Address---------------------------
|_No. | Description of Income | Amount (TK.)
a ee
‘Taka(In Words):
Cashier’s Sign. Accountant's Sign. Manager’s Sign. Receiver’s Sign.
2
&

20 Accounting
3. Cash Memo: A cash memo is given at the time of cash sale. The seller usually
gives a cash memo to its buyer. The name and the address of the shop are
generally printed on top of the cash memo. Mentioning the name of sold goods,
quantity, rate, total value, net value, commission etc a seller hands over the cash
memo to a buyer with his signature. The cash memo is generally prepared in
triplicate.
Sample of Cash Memo
Alam General Stores
Voucher No 56 35, New Market, Dhaka Date: 1 January 2017
Buyer’s Name: Shemanto & Bros.
Address: Chandona, Gazipur.
[SUNo.[ __ Deseriton [Rate [Gy | Amount (Ti)
teen nee
Less: Trade discount (5%) 250
PO
Taka(In Words): Four thousand seven fifty taka only.
Buyer's Signature Seller's Signature
N.B.: Sold goods can't be returned
4. Debit Note: When bought goods are returned to the seller due to inferior
quality or not being according to the letter of order, a note is prepared by the
buyer describing details i.e. quantity, rate and value and the causes of return of
the goods. The note is then sent to the seller along with the goods and the
supplier is informed of this note that his account has been debited with that
amount due to those returned goods. This note is called Debit Note. The buyer
usually prepares a Debit Note.
rr Sample of Debit note
Imran Brothers
Malitola, Bangshal
Debit Note No.-173 Date: 18 August 2017
Name: W.Syn Bp
Address: 37, Rainkhola, Mirpur-6, Dhaka.
Ref: Purchase / Invoice No. 1265 / 3 August 2017
|_SLNo | Description & Reason of returning goods | Amount (Taka) |
10 pes tom Jamdani Saree tk. 1,300 each returned. Please 13,000
deduct the price of 10 sharees from t
Lees: Tree discount “— 6,000
1
Taka(In Words); Twelve thousand taka. Purchase M s

Transaction 21
§. Credit Note: When the seller receives returned goods from the purchaser, he
sends a document to the purchaser stating the description of goods, its quantity,
its value etc and thereby informs the purchaser that his account has been
credited with the value of retumed goods. This document is called Credit Note,
Sample of Credit note
M/S, Shopna Enterprise
37, Rainkhola, Mirpur-6, Dhaka.
Date: 20 August 2017
Credit note no.-237
Name of Receiver: Imran Brothers
Address: Malitola, Bangshal
Ref: Debit note 173 / 18 August 2017
10 pes torn Jamdani Saree tk. 1,300 cach retumed. Your
account is credited with returned goods price 13,000
Less: Trade discount 1,000
2.000
Taka(in Words): Twelve thousand taka
Sales Manager
Activity: Prepare a debit voucher for goods purchase valued tk.25,000 using any
name & address.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions: s
1. Which one is not a trasaction for the business?
a) Goods bought from Jamal Traders on credit tk.2,000,
b) Goods sold to Palash Stores for tk.6,000.
c) Placed an order to buy goods worth tk.2,000 form Tania Enterprise.
d) Goods for tk.2,500 returned in from Polash Stores.
2. Events related to transactions are ------
i) May be visible
ii) May be invisible
iit) Never visible
% Which one is correct?
R a) i&ii bi &iii c) ti & iii d) i, it & iii

22 Accounting
3. Debit Note is used for
a) Goods bought on credit returned out ~—_—_b) Goods sold on credit returned in
c) Goods bought for cash returned out d) Goods sold for cash returned in
4. A=L+E in this equation E signifies -
a) Asset b) Owner’s Equity c) Liability d) Profit
From the following information answer question no 5, 6 and 7
Monir traders started business with 50,000 taka on January 1, 2017. Goods sold.
to Dipok amounting 10,000 taka, value of goods worth 3,000 taka was returned.
in, He personally contribute to a school taka 2,000 as donation.
5. Starting business with 50,000 taka, which element of accounting eqution
is going to be affected by this?
a) Asset b) Liability cc) Asset and liability d) Asset and Equity
6. Which note will be prepared for tk. 3,000 transaction by Monir traders?
a) Debit Note b) Credit Note c) Notes receivable d) Notes payable
7. Donating 2,000 taka to the school the business will affect in:
a) Asset will decrease
b) Capital will decrease
c) Goodwill will decrease
d) Nothing will happen
8. ‘Withdrawn for personal use’—for this transaction in the accounting equation-
i) Assets will decrease ii) Liabilities will decrease iii) Equity will decrease
Which one is correct?
a) i&ii bi iii c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
9, Which one is wrong? By transaction-----
i) Owner’s Equity increases if total asset decreases
ii) Total liability decreases if total asset increases
iii) If one asset increases, the other asset will also decrease
Which one is correct?
a) i&ii b)i&iii c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
10. Which one is correct? &
a)A=L-E b)E=A-L c)L=AtE d)A+L=E s

Transaction 23
Creative Questions:
1. ‘Rifat Enterprize’ is a business organisation. Following transactions
took place in that business in December 2017:
Dec. 1 Started business with tk. 5,00,000.
Dec.3 Opened a bank account depositing tk.50,000.
Dec.5 Goods purchased on credit tk. 25,000.
Dec.7 Goods sold in cash tk. 45,000.
Dec. 10 The owner has taken loan from bank for personal purpose tk. 40,000.
Dec. 15 Order placed for buying furniture tk. 45,000.
Dec. 20 Paid to Creditors tk. 15,000.
a) Calculate the total amount of those events, which are not transaction,
b) Identify the transactions from events explaining reason under equation
method.
c) Show the effects of the transaction on accounting equation in
tabular/statement format.
2. Following transactions took place in ‘Choyon Brothers’ in January 2017-
Jan. 1 Capital brought in Business tk. 75,000.
Jan. 2 A manager appointed with tk. 18,000.
Jan. 7 Sold goods on credit tk.25,000.
Jan. 10 Stationary purchased in cash tk.2,200.
Jan. 12 The owner paid his son’s tuition fees tk.2,000 personally,
Jan.20 Received tk.30,000 from Sumona Traders,
Jan.25 Paid tk.1,500 for advertisement.
a) Calculate the total amount of those events, which are not transaction.
b) Explain the reason of ‘Choyon Brothers’ transactions under equation.
method.
c) Show effect of the transaction of ‘Choyon Brothers’ on Accounting
Equation.
3. Ashfia started her legal practitioner business named ‘Legal Aid’ on 2” May
2017. The events of the first month were as follows:
May 2 Invested tk. 1,00,000 in her business.
~ May 4 Paid office rent tk.18,000.
S May 8 Service Equipment purchased on credit worth tk.40,000.

24 Accounting
May 12 _ Legal services provided to the clients for cash tk.30,000
May 16 __ Paid salary to the office staff tk. 10,000.
May 25 _ Loan taken from the bank tk. 1,00,000.
May 27 _ Legal services provided to the clients on credit tk.60,000.
May 30 Paid tk. 30,000 against credit purchase of Service Equipment.
a) Calculate the unpaid amount of Service Equipment.
b) Calculate the amount of Ashfia’s equity at the end of the month.
c) Show the effects of May’s transactions on accounting equation.
4. Salim Traders sold the following goods to Joya Traders on February 2017:
Feb | 115 Kg Sugar tk.55 per Kg for cash
Feb7 56 Kg Sugar tk.52 per Kg
Feb 15 35 Kg Mushur Dal tk.110 per Kg
Salim Traders allowed 10% Trade discount on total sales.
a) Calculate the total amount of sales of SalimTraders.
b) Prepare a Cash memo for the transaction of February 1.
c) Prepare an invoice for the transaction of February 15.
5. James Traders have started business on 01 January 2017 with cash
tk. 1, 20,000 & Furniture tk. 70,000. Following transactions happened during
the month:
Jan. 01 Opened a Bank Account in ‘Prime Bank’ by depositing tk. 50,000.
Jan. 04 Goods purchased tk. 45,000 from Belal Enterprise, cash paid tk.
20,000 & cheque issued tk. 15,000.
Jan. 06 Goods Sold tk. 80,000; cash tk. 30,000 & cheque tk. 25,000
received against the sale.
Jan. 09 Remaining tk. 10,000 paid to Belal Enterprise.
Jan. 18 Owner withdrew tk. 8000 from Bank for own purpose.
Jan. 28 Advertisement Expense paid tk. 8000.
a) Calculate the amount of opening capital for James Traders.
b) Considering the above transactions prove that, A=L+E. 2
c) Calculate the amount of Owner’s Equity for James Traders. a

Transaction 25
6. Sakib Al-Hasan opened a Restaurant named ‘Sakib Al-Hasan’ on 01 January
2017 with cash tk. 15,00,000 & Bank deposit tk. 7,20,000. Mentioned
transactions took place during the month:
January 05 Service provided to clients tk. 75,000.
January 09 Monthly rent tk. 40,000 paid by cheque.
January 11 Paid tk. 12,000 for advertisement.
January 16 Utility bill paid tk. 17,000.
January 21 Purchase of office supplies tk.17,000 on account.
January 28 Service provided to clients tk.1,75,000 on account.
January 30 Cheque received against the service provided on January 28.
January 31 Amount paid tk.10,000 against office supplies.
a) Calculate the unpaid amount for office supplies.
b) Calculate the total amount of expenses for the month January.
c) Show the effect of transactions on financial condition of business.
7. Following events occurred during the month January 2017 in the Business of
Borua Traders:
January 01 Cash purchase tk. 60,000.
January 12. Furniture purchased tk. 26,500 for office.
January 23. Goods sold on credit tk. 1, 25,000.
January 25 Office rent paid tk. 15,000.
January 28 —_ Deposited into Bank tk. 32,000.
January 30 Goods purchased on credit tk. 28,000.
a) Calculate the amount of purchase for the month of January.
b) Calculate the amount of cash transactions of Borua Traders during the
month,
c) Using the transactions of Borua Traders show that ‘A = L+E’ through
Accounting Equation.
Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-4

26 Accounting
8. Mr. Jahir has started a vehicle repairing business named ‘Jahir Workshop’ om
01 January 2017. Following transactions have occurred in his business:
January 01 ‘Mr. Jahir invested tk. 5, 00,000 in business.
January 16 Machine purchased tk. 65,000 for using in business.
January 21 Tk. 80,000 realized from repairing vehicle.
January 26 Rent of workshop paid tk. 21,000.
January 28 Salaries paid to employees tk. 25,000.
January 30 Owner’s personal vehicle repaired tk. 15,000.
a) Calculate the amount of capital of Mr. Jahir.
b) Calculate the amount of business expenses during January.
c) Show the effect of transactions on Accounting Equation.
2
q

Chapter Three
Double Entry System
Throughout the world, Double Entry System is established & known as
dependable, scientific, and complete system for keeping accounts in the
business, In double entry system each transaction that measured or measurable
in terms of money is expressed in dual entity. There is no alternative method of
Double Entry System to know the actual result and financial condition of
business,
At the end of this chapter
we will able to 7.
« Explain the dual entity ram
Seu — biel
e Discuss the concept & bisa —
features of double entry
em rs ew]
« Explain the advantages ° s
of double entry system
. 8. Financial
* Identify the two party Statements
involved in transaction
Le, Debit and Credit 1. 5. Prepare Trial
7 |
* Explain the various one
steps involved — in
Accounting Cycle Entry
¢ Identify the appropriate
book for transaction
s * Calculate the profit of business by taking an idea of Single Entry System

28 Accounting
Concept of Double Entry System:
The famous Mathematician Luca Pacioli described the perfect and proper
recording system of financial events in 1494. That system is known as Double
Entry System. Double entry system is considered as the only complete, reliable
and scientific system. There is a hint of dual entity concept for every transaction
in this system. There have been two or more accounts in every transaction.
These accounts are written in dual entity concept. One is Debit and the other is
Credit. Two parties of transaction i.e. Debit & Credit are recorded in accounts by
Double entry system. In this method, the same amount is written for both debit
and credit. Therefore, at any time of the year the total amount of debit is always
equal to the total amount of credit. The procedure, which is followed to record
dual entity of transactions for preparing accounts correctly is called Double
Entry System.
The concept has been explained with an example:
Salary paid to office staff tk.5,000.
For recording this transaction under double entry system, we need to identify
the two parties involved in it. Two accounts involved in it are:
a) Salary Account
b) Cash Account
Since salary is an expense to the business, expense has been increased and so
salary 5,000 taka will be debited. Again, cash goes out while salary is paid, so
cash or asset will decrease and cash account will be credited.
So, it is seen that the same amount has been debited both for salary and cash
account. This is the basic principle of Double Entry System.
Principles or Characteristics of Double Entry System:
The most reliable, scientific, complete and self-sufficient system of accounting
is the Double Entry System. In double entry system cach transaction measurable
in terms of money or money's worth is recorded in a twofold aspect and one
party is debited for taking the benefit while the other will be credited for
ensuring the same.
Principles or Characteristics of Double Entry System are as follows:
1, Dual Entity: In every transaction, there are at least two accounts. While
detecting debit and credit concerned accounts are to be identified first and
then their classification of account is settled. Then debit and credit x
ascertained by double entry system. a

Double Entry System 29

2. Debtor and creditor: In every transaction, benefit recipient is debtor
and benefit giver acts as the creditor.

3. Making Debit and credit: The benefit recipient is made debit while
the benefit giver is made credit.

4, Exchanged equal amount: In every transaction, the amount of debit
and credit will be equal.

5. Comprehensive result: Since in every transaction the debit and credit
are analyzed and recorded in equal amount, it is easy to detect the
comprehensive result. The total of debit side should be equal to the total
of credit side.

Advantages of Double Entry System:

The double entry system is complete, dependable, scientific, and self-dependent.

This accounts system has many benefits. For these advantage of double entry. In

large business organizations this method is popular for keeping accounts. These

benefits are described below:

1. Complete account: Since debit and credit of each transactions are

analyzed and recorded in equal amount, the complete account of any

transactions can be obtained.

2. Ascertain profit-loss: As the revenue income-expenditures are recorded

correctly and completely in this method, the net profit or loss is possible to

calculate, preparing comprehensive income statement after a particular time.

3. Verifying arithmetic accuracy: For each transaction equal amount will be

debited & credited. Therefore, the arithmetic accuracy can be tested on a certain

date by preparing a trial balance.

4. Ascertain financial position: Preparing financial statement on a certain date

the financial condition of a firm can be obtained.

5. Finding fault & forgery and means to prevent the same: If the accounts are

kept under the method, the faults and forgery can easily be detected and thus be

prevented.

6. Cost control: Under this method, excessive expenses can easily be

controlled.

,, 7+ Identifying total debts & credits: The owner can detect his her total dues
= and credits any time under this method, and take necessary steps.

30 Accounting
8. Ascertain proper amount of tax: If the accounts are kept under this
method, the various types of tax like income tax, import-export duty,

VAT etc become acceptable to concerned authorities.

9, Easy for applying: Each transaction is recorded scientifically
analyzing Debit and Credit in double entry system. Therefore, every
small & big organization can apply this method easily.

10. Universal acceptance: Double Entry System being scientific,
complete, faultless and dependable has been recognized as a universally
accepted system,

Procedure of Identifying Debit and Credit:
It is described earlier that in double entry systerm total debit amount is equal to
total credit amount . This concept is the base of Accounting equation. Primary
elements of accounting equation are-Asscts, Liabilities & Equity.
Therefore, it can be said that, we see following types of accounts in business:
t. Asset 2.Liability 3. Equity 4.Incomeand 5. Expense
Method of calculating debit credit for different accounts described below:
1. Asset: Due to transactions, asset may increase
or decrease. For example, purchase of furniture
increases asset and selling the same decreases
asset, Increase of an asset is debit while a
decrease of the same is credit.
2. Liability: Like asset, liability can also be
increased or decreased. For example, taking loan
from bank increases liability while paying
installment of it decreases. The relation of
liability is opposite to asset, Therefore, increase
of liability is credit while decrease of the same is
debit.
=
&

Double Entry System 31

3, Equity: For starting the business, the owner
brings capital. Here the owner's equity
increases. Again, if the owner withdraws cash
from the business, the owner's equity decreas-
es. Owner's equity is a kind of liability to the
business, Because according to the principle of
accounting the owner and the business have
separate identity. Therefore, like liability if
owner's Equity increases it is credit, but while
decreases to is debit.
4.Revenues or Income: The only objective of
business is to earn profit. Actually, profit is the
portion of revenuc, which is more than
expense. Therefore, we can say that revenue
increases owner's equity. Therefore, increase
of revenue is credit while the decreases of the
same is debit.

§, Expense: Expense is opposite to revenue,

Since revenue increases owner's equity, so
increase of expense is debit and decrease of
the same is credit,

Effects of Double Entry System in Transactions are described below with examples:
1, Mr. Hasan has started business bringing in tk, 50,000 as caprttal.
2. Furniture bought for business tk. 5,000
3. Employees salary paid off tk. 6,000
4. Goods Purchased tk. 20,000
5. Tk. 25,000 was deposited into Bank
6, Goods sold tk. 18,000
7, Cheque paid for advertisement tk. 7,000
8, Commission received tk. 3,000.

9. Interest received from bank tk.1,200.

10, Goods sold on credit tk. 15,000.

1]. Cheque paid for rent tk. 6,000
= 12. Tk. 8,000 has been withdrawn from bank for business.
™

32 Accounting
Debit and Credit account of above transactions identified with explanation:
(This is not a reputed table)
[ne [Accomstend | Tatn_| net of eae ty Sytem
As the cash (asset) increased in business, Cash A/c
Cash Account Debit | 50,000 | debited. Other side bringing cash to business by
Capital Account Credit 50,000 | owner, owner's equity increased. So, Capital A/c
credited
. ‘ For buying furniture, furniture named asset
| a a a increased & cash decreased. Therefore, Furniture
. Alc debited & Cash A/c credited.
. . For paying salary, expense of the business
Fe | papi a ae increased & cash decreased. So, Salary A/c debited
& Cash A/c credited
Purchaes A Debit 20,000 | For buying goods, expense of the business
Cash A Credit 20,000 increased & cash decreased. So, Purchase A/c
debited & Cash A/c credited
Bank A Debit 25,000 For depositing cash into bank deposited amount in
Cash A Credit 25,000 | bank increased & cash in hand decreased.
Therefore, Bank A/c debited & Cash A/c credited.
‘ For selling goods in cash, both income & cash of
a Sales wccmunt Credit. | 18.000 | the business increased. Therefore, Cash Alc debited
& Sales A/c credited.
For advertisement expense increased & for cheque
7 Advertisement A/c Debit 7,000 | issue Deposited amount in bank decreased.
Bank Account Credit 7,000 | Therefore, Advertisement A/c debited & Bank A/c
credited.
. For receiving commission income increased & cash
a Cash Account | Debit | 32000 | increased. Therefore, Cash Alc debited &
. Commission A/c credited.
. For interest allowing by bank deposited amount in
a Creait | 1200 | batik increased & income also increased. So, Bank
A/c debited & Bank interest A/c credited
For selling goods on credit, business gets the rights
Debtors Account Debit 15,000 | to receive money from debtors and income
Sales Account Credit 15,000 | increased. Therefore, Debtors A/c debited & Sales
A/c credited.
1 For paying rent, expense increased & giving
a ot eo med ae cheque bank deposit decreased. So, Rent A/c
debited & Bank A/c Credited.
Taking out cash from bank, cash in hand increased
| te ed — & bank deposit decreased. Therefore, Cash Alc
debited & Bank A/c credited.
7
&

Double Entry System 33
Activity: Calculate the debit & credit of the following transactions identifying
accounts in the book of M/S. Joya & Co. —
1, Mrs, Joya Mukharjee has made additional investment tk.20,000,
2. Computer purchase for office tk.25,000
3. Office rent paid in advance for three months tk.18,000
4. Sold to Rajon tk.25,000
5. Bank charged tk.1,500
6. Withdrawn from bank tk.6,000
7. Goods purchased on credit tk.15,000
8. Wages paid tk.3,000
9. Purchase return tk.2,000
10, Deposited into bank tk.10,000
Accounts kept under double entry system:
The main accounts, which are kept under double entry system, are shown below:
a) Journal: After transaction occurs then it is identified as debit and credit is
ascertained and then it is recorded in a book. This book is known as the
primary book of account or
Journal. Types of journal are- a:
1.Purchase Journal: Goods Tn
purchased on credit are recorded
in this journal.
2.Sales Journal: Goods sold on
credit are recorded in this journal.
3.Purchase Return Journal: In
purchase retum journal goods poe Led
purchased on credit, returned are (Pri Book Orginal Boo!
recorded in this journal. ) ¢ )
4.Sales Return Journal: In sales
return journal goods sold on credit, returned are recorded in this journal.
5. Cash Receipt Journal: Transactions that relates to cash receipt are recorded
in this journal.
6.Cash Payment Journal: Transactions relate to cash paid are recorded in
this journal
Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-5

34 Accounting

7. Journal Proper: Transaction which are not to be recorded in any of the

above journals are recorded in journal proper.

b) Ledger: The book where all the transactions of journal are included

by transferring individually to related accounts with appropriate title is called

Ledger.

Accounting Cycle:

According to ongoing concept, it [Second

is expected that the business will — [Tae

go on forever. The continuous nah

cycle of keeping accounts is \

é 9. Closing

known as Accounting cycle. 3. Journal |

1, Identifying Transactions: Accounting

Analyzing each event, Cp Pinssdal Cycle

transactions are indentified in the eae

first stage of Accounting cycle.

2. Analyzing Transactions: Bale bee)

In this stage, each transaction is y

6, Adjusting

analyzed and accounts are jap bees

identified. For example-

Machineries bought for Taka Accounting Cycle

5,000. Here two accounts are

involved, One Machinery Account and the other cash Account.

3. Journalizing: Analyzed accounts record into the primary Book of Accounts
as Debit and credit chronologically and the journalizing is done,

4. Transfer to Ledger: In this stage, transactions recorded in journal are
recorded into the separate heads of accounts. Different ledgers are prepared
for each heads of accounts and the balance of which is determined on a
certain date.

5, Preparing Trial Balance: Trial balance is prepared to testify whether the
transactions are recorded accurately to their concerned head of accounts and
with the balances of debit and credit of ledger, a trial balance is prepared.

6. Adjusting Entries: To identify the actual financial condition of a business =
the receivable income, accrued expense, expenses paid in advance and =

Double Entry System 35
unearned income these items of a particular accounting period are adjusted
through adjusting entries.

7. Prepare Worksheet: For the objective of preparing the financial statement
easier, an optional multi column statement is prepared. It is known as
worksheet.

8. Preparation of Financial Statement: With the financial statement,
the amount of profit-loss, assets, liability, and owner's equity of a business is
determined.

9. Closing Entry: The balance of the revenue income, revenue expense, and
drawings of a business need to be closed at the end of the year. The income
and expense of a business remain closed with the remaining asset, liability,
and owner's equity the next year starts. Therefore, trial balance after
accounting year or opening journal is prepared.

10. Post Closing Trial Balance or Opening Journal: Income, Expense &
Drawing accounts are being closed by closing entry. Next accounting period
starts with the remaining balance of Asset, Liability & Owner's Equity
accounts. Post closing trial balance or Opening journal is prepared for this.

The Continuity Concept of Accounts:
According to going concern concept, a business will go on for an indefinite
period, At the end of each accounting year, the functions are continued again
with same sequence for keeping accounts. Therefore, at the end of current
accounting period consecutively next accounting period starts and recording of
accounts starts newly. Therefore, it is observed that subject matters related to
accounts are continued each year consecutively. This is the continuity of
accounts.

It is mentionable that, according to accounting cycle, at the beginning of each

accounting period, all assets are being debited and all liabilities are being

credited which were shown in the last year's statement of financial position for
starting the journey to the new accounting period.

Single Entry System:

Single entry system is suitable for businesses, which are small, and the

transactions are limited. In this method in some transactions only one party,

s double in others while none is recorded in the remaining ones. Actually, single
entry system is not at all a scientific system. In this method, though some

36 Accounting
accounts related to asset and liability are kept but preservation for the class of
income and expense is never emphasized. The following formula /method are
applied for determining the profit and loss of the business.
Profit/Loss = {(Closing Capital +Drawings)-(Opening Capital+Additional Capital)}
Opening Capital = Total opening assets —Total opening liabilities
Closing Capital = Total closing assets —Total closing liabilities
The difference is considered as profit when the total amount of closing capital &
drawings is bigger than the total amount of opening & additional capital and as
loss when it is smaller.
Mrs. Shahela khatun is a small businessperson. Following information are
extracted from her accounts book.
01/01/2017 31/12/2017
Total Assets 1,20,000 1,50,000
Total Liabilities 35,000 55,000
In 2017 her additional capital tk.20,000 and total drawings tk.30,000
Solution:
Opening Capital = Total opening assets —Total opening liabilities
= (1,20,000 - 35,000) = 85,000
Closing Capital = Total closing assets —Total closing liabilities
= (1,50,000 - 55,000) = 95,000
Profit/Loss = {(Closing Capital + Drawings) - (Opening
Capital + Additional Capital)}
= {(95,000+30,000) - (85,000+20,000)}
= (1,25,000 - 1,05,000)
= 20,000
.. Amount of Profit = 20,000 Taka
Activity: Palash kumar pal is a businessperson of grocery shop. His capital was
tk.70,000 on | January 2017. His amount of drawings tk.15,000 and he didn’t bring
any additional capital in this year. On 31 December 2017 total assets & total
liabilities were tk.1, 20,000 & tk.30,000 respectively. Calculate the amount of Profit/
loss.
2
a

Double Entry System 37
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Why double entry system is more popular for keeping accounts?
a) Easy method b) Difficult and scientific method
c) Easy and incomplete method d) Complete and scientific method
2. The features of Double Entry System are-
i) It has two parties; Receiver and Giver
ii) Total amount of Debit will be equal to total amount of Credit
iii) Receiver is Debit and Giver is Credit.
Which one is correct?
a) i&ii b) i&iii
c) ui &iii d) i, ii & iii
Considering the following information answer questions no. 3, 4 & 5:
Total Assets and Total Libilities of Ruma Traders on 1 January 2017 were tk.1,80,000:
& tk.75,000 respectively.
On 31 December 2017:
Cash tk.80,000, Stock of goods tk.34,000, Debtors tk.96,000, Furniture tk.40,000,
Creditors tk.45,000, Bank Loan tk.50,000. Additional Capital brought in by the
owner at middle of the year tk.60,000 and owner withdraw cash from business
tk.35,000.
3. What is amount of opening capital of business?
a) 1,05,000 b) 1,55,000
c) 1,80,000 d) 2,50,000
4, What is the total amount of closing liabilities?
a) 75,000 b) 95,000
c) 1,55,000 d) 1,70,000
5. What is the amount of profit for the year 2017?
a) Profit 25,000 b) Profit 75,000
C) Profit 1,25,000 d) Profit 1,75,000
ba)
&

38 Accounting:
6. Generally, what type of accounts is not kept in Single entry system?
i) Asset
ii) liabilities
iii) Expense
Which one is correct in the following?
a) i&ii bb) i&iii
c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
7. Which one is correct?
a) Opening capital = opening total assets - closing total assets
b) Closing capital = opening total liabilitics + closing total liabilities
c) Opening capital = opening total assets - opening total liabilities
d) Closing capital = opening total assets + closing total assets
8. Which one is used a rough working for financial statement?
a) Trial balance b) Adjusting entries
c) Closing entries d) Worksheet
9. Which sequence is correct?
a) Trial balance, adjusting entries, worksheet, financial statement
b) Adjusting entries, trial balance, financial statement, worksheet
c) Worksheet, trial balance, adjusting entries, financial statement
d) Trial balance, worksheet, adjusting entries, financial statement
10. If opening capital is tk.70,000 and closing capital is tk.90,000, what is the
amount of profit or loss?
a) Profit tk.20,000 b) _ Loss tk.20,000
c) Loss tk.70,000 d) Profit tk.90,000
11. Which one is the principle of Double Entry System?
a) Purchase increases Debit, income decreases Credit
b) Expense increases Debit, income decreases Credit
c) Receiver is Debit and Giver is Credit
d) Receiver is Credit and Giver is Debit
x
&

Double Entry System 39
From the following information, answer the questions no. 12, 13, & 14
On 1 June 2017 Mr. Ishmam started a fast food shop named ‘Ishmam Foods.
‘with stock of goods of tk.55,000 at Baily Road in Dhaka. The following
transactions occurred in his business in that month:
June 05 Sold goods to Shahed tk.5,000;
June 12 Goods purchased tk.12,000;
June 20 Sold goods on credit tk.35,500;
June 23 Cash received from Rafi tk.5,400;
June 28 Goods returned to seller tk.3,400.
12. Which transactions will be recorded in the journal proper of Mr. Ishmam?
a) Sold goods in cash b) Sold goods on credit
c) Goods returned to seller d) Started with stock of goods
13. In which book the transactions occurred on June 05 and 20 will be recorded?
a) Purchase journal b) ~~ Purchase return journal
c) Sales journal d) — Sales return journal
14. Mr. Ismam will prepare on returning goods -
a) Debit note b) Credit note
c) Debit voucher d) Credit voucher

Creative Questions:

1. ‘Kobi & Chobi Traders’ kept the all of books under double entry system. On
December 2017 The following transactions occurred in his business:

Dec. 1 Cash brought in tk.15,00,000 into the business as capital.
Dec. 12 Clothes purchased on credit tk.25,00,000.
Dec. 23 Furniture purchased in cash tk.60,000
Dec. 24 Salary paid to Manager Shakilatk.8,000 (Vaucher no. 102)
Dec. 30 Commission received in cash tk. 8,500.
Dec. 31 Goods purchase by cheque tk.1,20,000 at 5% dicount.

a) What is the total amount of goods purchased on December?

b) Determine the Debit and Credit of the above transactions.

c) Prepare Voucher for the transaction of December 24.

2. Mr. Shahidul Islam in his business ‘Riad Enterprise’ does not keep the books
of accounts properly. On | January 2017 Total assets of his business was
tk.5,50,000 and Liabilities tk.1,70,000. He newly invested tk.50,000 in the
business in this year. In that year, he withdrew tk.40,000 from the business.

= On 31 December 2017 assets and liabilities of his business were:
"

40 Accounting

Cash tk.1,85,000; Furniture tk.1,80,000; Debtors tk. 1,30,000; Stock of goods
tk.90,000; Bank Loan tk.60,000and Creditors tk.55,000.

a) Determine the amount of opening capital of Riad Enterprise.

b) Determine the amount of closing capital of Riad Enterprise.

c) Determine the amount of profit or loss of Riad Enterprise in 2017.

3.On 1 March 2017 Abdur Rahman Enterprise started a business with Cash
tk.2,40,000; Machinery values of tk.56,000 and goods worth tk.21,000.
Other transactions of the month:

March 03 Goods purchased from Kashem Traders tk.34,000
March 06 Sold biscuits to Jahid stores tk.15,000
March 07 — Shop rent paid tk.16,500.
March 10 Sold goods in cash tk.75,000.
March 17 Goods purchased in cash tk.35,000.
March 19 — Sold cake tk.60,000.
March 21 ‘Flour purchased from Janata Traders tk.17,500.
March 28 Owner withdraw from the business tk.4,500 for own use
a) Calculate the amount of Total Sales.
b) Show the effect on accounting equation of the transactions that occurred
on 1, 3,7, &10.
¢) Determine the debit and credit form the transactions that occurred on 6, 17, 19,
& 28.

4. On I January, 2017 ‘Alam Service Center’ started a computer training centre
with Cash tk.5,00,000; Furniture worth tk.75,000 and Bank Loan tk.55,000.
The following transactions are available in that month:

January 02 Office rent tk. 22,000.

January 10 Paper purchased tk.5,000.

January 12 Computer repaired tk.32,000.

January 20 Wages paid tk.8,500.

January 25 Training allowance received by cheque tk.13,000. (Voucher no.503)

a) Calculate the amount of opening capital.

b) Identify Debit- Credit of above trasactions with reason.

c) Prepare a Credit voucher for the trasaction January 25.
7
R

Double Entry System 41
5. Mr. Khalek Shekh has started a business named ‘Piu Traders’ on | July 2017
with cash tk.1,20,000 & Goods worth tk.75,000 other transactions of this month
was as follows:
July 4 Furniture bought in cash tk. 66,000.
» § Order received to sale goods on credit tk. 85,000.
» 12 Goods purchase in cash tk. 30,000.
» 15 Anemployee got appointed with salary of tk.15,000.
» 20 Cash tk. 8,000 paid for buying necessary stationary for Bussiness.
» 25 Sold by cheque tk.80,000.
» 30 Withdrawn by owner tk.5,750.
a) Calculate the total amount of those event which are not transaction.
b) Calculate Debit-Credit with reason of the transaction for the month of
July of Piu Traders.
c) Calculate the amount of Equity at the end of July for Piu Traders.
6. Miss. Rokeya is the owner of ‘Panama Sons’, following events occurred on
Jaunary 2017:
Janauary 1 Goods Sold for Cash tk.5,50,000.
” 10 An order received from a buyer tk.1,20,000,
” 18 Goods bought for cash tk.80,000.
” 22 A bill prepared tk.10,000 to deliver goods as per order.
” 25 Owner brought in additional capital in business tk.90,000.
” 30 Cash tk.1,10,000 received from past dues.
a) Calculate the total amount of those events, which are not transaction,
b) Those events are transaction, write down the reason under
modern method.
c) Calculate Debit & Credit with reason for the transaction of ‘Panama
Sons’ under eqution method.
Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-6

Chapter Four
Capital and Revenue Transactions
Everybody expects that a business will continue for an indefinite period. The
features of all the transactions of a concern are analyzed to ascertain the result of
all of its business operations and financial position of a particular period, Some
transactions are such those benefits are achieved for a longer period, Thinking
about the concept transactions are divided into two types as Capital and
Revenue. The actual profit and loss and the condition of the financial matter
depend largely on dividing the transactions properly, So the object of accounting
is achieved through identifying the two types properly,
Transactions
Capital Revenuc
Receipt/ Expense Receipt/| | Paymen
Income Income | | Expense
At the end of this chapter, we will be able to
® Detect the differences between Capital and Revenue transaction
¢ Identifying the necessity of the difference between capital and revenue
transactions
¢ Apply Capital and Revenue expenditure while preparing financial statement
and calculating profit and loss =

Capital and Revenue Transactions 43
Concept of Capital and Revenue Transactions
All the transactions are divided into two types, Capital and Revenue. Capital
transactions give more benefits than Revenue transactions over the period.
Revenue transactions take place regularly while Capital is rare or irregular.
There are other aspect/features to differentiate these two types of transactions
from each other.
We have seen in transactions until now - Is it cash or accrual, visible or invisible
and other things. Transactions can be considered through following aspect -
ee
SS
eS eda
Activity: Considering the above situation divide the following transactions
into two types-
e Taking loan from the bank worth 10,000 taka
¢ Goods sold 5,000 taka
e Purchased an Almirah on credit worth 20,000 taka
e Salary paid to the workers 3,000 taka
e Sold old automobile worth 70,000 taka
e Interest received tk. 500 from the deposited amount in bank
The transactions that give long term benefit (More than a year), the amount of
which are bigger and not regular in occurrence are known as capital
transactions. On the other hand transactions that takes place regularly, the
amount of which is comparatively smaller and recurring in nature, are called
Revenue transactions.
eS
a

44 Accounting
Income Income Expense
Capital Receipts and Income
The receipts which are irregular, amount of which are bigger and the benefits of
which are more than a year, are known as Capital Receipts. In business capital,
loan taken from bank, selling of fixed asset (land, furniture, machineries etc) are
examples of Capital Incomes. However, Capital Receipts and Capital Incomes
seem to be synonymous but the difference is identical. Capital Income is a part
of Capital Receipt.
Capital Income does not occur regularly and its example is not many. For exam-
ple, After using an old machinery for several years is sold for 80,000 taka and
the current book value of which is fixed at 65,000 taka. Here the capitalistic
income is 15,000 taka (80,000-65,000). It is to be noted that capitalistic receipt
80,000 taka is not the actual Capitalistic income. If is noted that if any cost
incurred for this sale procedure is deducted for calculating capitalistic income.
Activity: Mr. Ratan bought a piece of land for 2,80,000 taka in 2015 and sold the
same in 2017 for 4,00,000 taka. Calculate his Capital Receipt and Capital
Capital Expenditure: — ——
All expenditure of non-recurring nature, the eo Sy
benefits of which are enjoyed by the business x” sean mt
for a long time is called Capital Expenditure. —_...
Fixed asset (land, furniture, machinery, may
motorcar etc) purchase, other expenditure relat- —
ed to the purchase of fixed asset (import, freight, = Cie
carriage, installation expense etc.) is known as : (2 ‘|
Capitalistic Expenditure. It is to be remembered lap) a
here that the expenses that increase . te

Capital and Revenue Transactions 45
the life or volume of asset will also be treated as Capital Expense. Example:
tk.10,000 is added to an existing old machinery to make it in a workable
condition will increase the life of the machinery. It can be said that the expenses,
which will ensure further utility over the period, will belong to Capital Income.
Revenue Receipts and Income:
All recurring receipts by way of usual incomes or profit of business, which are
used for meeting day-to-day expenses of the business, are called Revenue
Receipts. For example sale proceeds of goods, interest on money deposited in
bank, rent received, commission received are examples of Revenue Receipts.
However, these two sound similar but there are differences between the two. Not
all Revenue Receipts at a certain time is supposed to be treated as Revenue
Income. For example, rent received tk.50,000 in 2017 but tk.10,000 of which are
adjusted for 2018. Here Revenue Receipt is tk.50,000 but Revenue Income is
tk.40,000.

Activity: Give a tabular presentation of the difference between Capital Receipts

and Revenue Receipts.

Revenue Payments/Expenses:

The recurring expenses of an organization are to run the business and the utility
of which is expired within short time is called revenue expense. Purchase of
goods, rent paid, salary paid, purchase of stationery, advertisement expense etc.
are the examples of Revenue Expense. Revenue Expenses do not acquire wealth
rather they contribute for the maintenance of asset. However, Revenue payments
and expenses sound similar but there is a minor difference. Revenue Expense is
only a part of revenue payments. Often previous accounting period’s due and
next accounting period's advance are paid along with current year’s expenses.
The total amount paid together for current, previous, and next accounting period
is revenue payments, only the current portion will be considered as revenue
expense. If maintenance expense of fixed asset does not affect its lifetime, it will
be recorded as revenue expense.
There are some expenses that revenue in nature but benefit obtained from the
expense is not for a short term but for a long term of period. Brief idea about the

«, expense is mentioned here:

&

46 Accounting
To enhance the working power a new parts valued tk.10,000
for machine and paid tk.600 for wages
Capital Expenditure tk.10,000 Revenue Expenditure tk.600
Statement of Financial Position Statement of Comprehensive Income
(Assets) (Expense)

Activity: Give a tabular presentation of the difference between Capital
Expenditure and Revenue Expenditure.
Necessity for differentiating between Capital and Revenue Transactions
A businessperson needs to assess his economic and financial condition after a
certain period (generally in ycar). For this, at least three statements need to be
prepared - Statement of Comprehensive Income, Statement of Changes in
Equity, and Statement of Financial Position, From the Comprehensive Income
Statement we come to know the amount of profit and loss, from the Changes in
Equity Statement the amount of owner's interest to the business and from the
Statement of Financial Position we will be able to know about the asset and
liability of a business.

The impact of Capital and Revenue Transactions

Profit and loss of a business is ascertained preparing Comprehensive Income
Statement only based on Capital and Revenue Income and Expenses. On the
other hand, preparation of Statement of Financial Position based on Capital
Receipts and Capital Expenses asset, liability, and Owner's Equity are
ascertained. If these two types of transactions exchanges position in financial
statement, the actual profit/loss and asset, liability and owner's equity can never
be identified.

Activity: What trouble would face, if Capital Expense consider as Revenue| ,.
Expense? =

Capital and Revenue Transactions 47
Deferred Revenue Expenditures
Expenditure of revenue nature the benefit of which extends beyond the
accounting period in which it is incurred, is generally written off over a number
of years during which it is expected to benefit the business. The unwritten
portion of such an expenditure, which is carried forward to the subsequent years,
is called Deferred Revenue Expenditure. Expense of prior research for making a
new product, expenditure of a big amount for a special type of research, big
expenditure on an advertisement campaign, transfer cost of a business are some
of the examples of deferred revenue expenditures.
List of Capital and Revenue Accounts
T. Capital Capital Receipts | Will be used in Business for several
years & have to retum to owner.
2. Sale of Land, Building and old Machinery Do Irregular receipts
3. Loan Taken Do Will be used in Business for several
years and have to return.
4, Sale of goods Revenue Income Regular
5, Interest on Investment Revenue Income Do
6. Rent received of building Do Do
7. Dividend from Invest to Share Do Do
8. Commission received Do Do
9. Purchase of Land Capital Expenditure | Irregular & long term benefit
10. Registration Exp. Of Land Do Added with cost of Land
11. Building Do Irregular & long term benefit
12. Machinery Do Do
13. Research cost for new product Deferred revenue exp] Benefit continue several ye:
14, Transportation cost of Machine Do Do
15. Large amount spent for machine repair Do Irregular & Enhance the useful life
16. Purchase of Furniture Capital Expenditure} Irregular & long term benefit
17. Goods purchase Revenue Expense’ Recurring
18. Salaries & wages Do Do
19. Interest on Loan paid Do Do
20. House rent paid Do Do
21. Telephone & Electric Bill Do Do
22. Advertising Expense Do Do
24, Regular repairing of Machine Do Do
25. Depreciation on Building, Machine & Furniture Do Do
se | Activity: Make an example list of other Capital & Revenue Expenditures.
S
~

48 Accounting
Illustration:
Following information are extracted from the accounts book of Bengal
Engineering firm on 31 March 2017:
1. Rent tk.750
2. Electric expense tk.7,700 (tk.6,000 for new wire)
3. Transportation in cost tk.6,500 (tk.5,000 for new cement mixing machine)
4. Drilling machine purchased tk.4100.
Requirements:
What is the amount of capital & revenue expenditure?
Solution:
Capital Expenditure: Revenue Expenditure:
New electric wire cost tk.6,000 Rent tk.750
New mixing machine transport cost tk.5,000 Electric expense tk.1,700
Drilling machine tk.4,100 Transport cost tk.1,500
tk.15,100 tk.3,950
Exercise
Multiple-choice Questions
1, Which one is the Capital Expenditure?
a) Capital invested by the owner b) Selling expense for machine
c) Machine purchased d) Daily expenses to operate business
2. If capital expense is recorded as revenue expense then which calculation will
be wrong?
a) Bank balance b) Debtors
c) Creditors d) Net profit
3. Capital expenditure
i. Car purchased for sale
ii, Machine purchased for business use
iii. Road tax and insurance premium of delivery van
Which one is correct of the following?
a)i & ii b)i & iii
c) ii & ill d) i, ii & m1 S

Capital and Revenue Transactions 49
4. Sale of machine of machine merchandising business —
a) Capital receipt b) Capital income
c) Revenue income d) Revenue receipt
5. Ramjan Mia import goods for his business. Import duty of goods is —
a) Capital expenditure b) Revenue expenditure
c) Non-trading expenditure d) Revenue income
6. Shukomol Borua purchased a land for his business. He paid tk.5,000 for land’s
registration. This registration expenses is —
a) Revenue expenditure b) Capital expenditure
c) It can be both capital and revenue expenditure d) Deferred revenue expenditure
7. In comprehensive income statement we record -
i. Revenue Expenditure
ii. Revenue income
ili. Capital expenditure
Which one is correct of the following?
a) i & ii b) i & iii
c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
8. In statement of financial position we record
i, Capital receipt
ii. Revenue expenditure
iii. Deferred Revenue expenditure
Which one is correct of the following?
a)i &ii b) i & iii
c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
9. What type of transaction is Freight in?
a) Revenue b) Capital
c) Deferred revenue d) Operating
10. Deferred Revenue expenditure ----
i. Paid tk.1,00,000 toAdvertising firm for publicity of goods for 3 years:
ii. Paid rent in advance for 3 months tk.15,000
iii, Business transfer cost tk.25,000
Which one is correct of the following?
a)i & ii b) i & iii
c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-7

50 Accounting

Considering the following information answer the questions no. 11, 12 &13:

On 1 January 2017 Mr. Plabon Voumik purchased a machinery for his business

valued tk.40,000 and paid for its installation tk.5,000. He sold this machinery for

tk.25,000 in 2017, At this time remaining price of this machinery was tk.24,000
after deducting depreciation.
11. Amount spent tk.45,000 of Plabon Voumik considered as -
a. Capital receipt
b. Revenue expenditure
c. Deferred Revenue expenditure
d, Capital expenditure
12. What was the total amount of depreciation charged in 4 years?
a) tk.15,000 b) tk.16,000
c) tk.20,000 d) tk.21,000
13. The difference between selling price and present book value of machinery
a) Capital income b) Revenue income
c) Revenue receipt d) Capital receipt

Creative Questions:

1. The following transactions are from the business of “Borhan Enterprise’ in 2017:
Capital invested in the business 5,00,000
Machinery purchased 1,50,000
Loan taken from Bank 3,00,000
Goods purchased 10,00,000
Employee’s salary paid 3,80,000
Electricity and telephone bill paid 12,000
Depreciation on machinery 15,000
Received from investment 14,000
Rent paid (which includes tk.3,000 for 2018) 40,000
Commission received (which included tk.4,000 for 2016) 50,000
Goods sold 20,00,000
Withdrawn by owner for own use 5,000
a) Calculate the amount of capital receipt. ae
b) Calculate the total amount of revenue income & expenditure S

and revenue receipts & payments.

Capital and Revenue Transactions sl

c) Find out the amount of Equity of ‘Borhan Enterprise’ at the end of year?

2. On April 2017 The following business transactions occurredin ‘Raski Homes’:
April 01 Business transfer expense tk. 25,000 from Dhanmondi to Motijheel
April 02 Stationery purchased tk. 3,000.

April 04 New machine purchased tk. 1,60,000.
April 05 Carriage expenses for newly purchased machine tk.7,500.
April 07 New machine installation expense tk. 15,000.
April 10 Repairing expense of old computer tk.3,000.
April 12 New battery and tire purchased for office car tk. 40,000.
April 15 Research expenses for new goods tk.18,000.
a) Calculate the amount of deferred revenue expenditure?
b) Calculate the amount of capital expenditure & revenue expenditure.
c) Calculate the amount of capital receipt and capital income, If the machine
bought on April 4 sold for tk.1,95,000.
3. Mr. Najim operates a Restaurant named ‘Castle 3 Star’ at Uttara in Dhaka on
January 2017. Few transactions of his restaurant is mentioned below :
e Utensils purchased for tk.80,000.
e Decoration materials bought for restaurant tk.20,000.
e Publicity expense tk.3,000.
e Repairing expense of Delivery van tk.1,000.
e __ Bill realized for arranging a birthday party in restaurant tk.22,000.
¢ New compressor purchased for old refrigerator tk.8,000.
e Employee's salary paid tk.9,000.
e Received from customer tk.25,000 for providing service.
e Rent paid tk.50,000.
e  Almirah bought tk. 25,000.
a) What is the total amount of revenue income.
b) What is the total amount of revenue expenditure.
c) What is the total amount of capital expenditure,
&
&

52 Accounting
4. The following transactions are of ‘Raha & Bros.’ business on June 2017 :
Capital brought into the business tk. 2,50,000
Goods purchased tk. — 7,00,000
Discount received tk. 5,700
Electrical machine purchased tk.  4,00,000
Interest on investment received (50% for 2016) tk. 4,000
Profit on sale of furniture tk. 2,400
Refrigerator bought for business tk. 75,000
Import duty paid tk. 5,000
Bank loan taken tk. 7,50,000
Goods sold tk. 30,000
Insurance premium tk. 7,500
Apprenticeship premium (75% for last year) tk. 40,000
Sale of old computer tk. 10,000
Interest on loan paid tk. 5,000
a) Calculate the amount of capital expenditure.
b) Calculate the total amount of revenue income & expenditure,
c) Calculate the total amount of capital receipt and revenue receipt.
5. Two friends Probir & Supriya started a chain shop named ‘Aguan Depatmental
Store’ The following transactions are available in their business :
May 04 Goods purchased on credit tk.50,000
May 07 Decoration cost of shop tk.1,00,000
May 10 Carriage expense tk.1,500
May 12 Goods sold tk.18,000
May 15 Discount allowed tk.700
May 16 Goods sold on credit tk.22,000
May 20 _ A freezer purchased for shop tk.45,000
May 22 Electricity bill paid tk.1,200
May 25 Commission received tk.3,000
May 30 Dividend received tk.2,000
a) Determine the total amount of capital transactions from the above
information.
b) Determine the total amount of revenue expenditures of their shop.
c) Determine the total amount of revenue incomes of their shop. s

Chapter Five
Accounts
Financia] transactions change the financial position of the business. Cash
received as well as cash payment is done through transaction. For some
transaction income or expense may increase and decrease alternatively assets or
liabilities may also increase and decrease by transaction. Income, Expense,
Asset and Liability are not a particular type, there are different types of many
such items in business organization. In a particular table/chart the income, the
expense, the asset or the liability that is affected by transaction are recorded as
per double entry system and it calculates the gross & net amount of that
particular item, Accounts are prepared to know the continuous change and the
net amount of each item.
‘T’—Table
Account’s Title
Debit Account’s code no...... Credit
a
‘Moving Balance’— Table
Account’s Title Account’s code no...
Date | Particulars Debit Credit
Taka | Tala
Ending this chapter we will be able to
* explain the concept and features of accounts.
e keep accounts using different types of table
(‘T’- table & ‘moving balance’- table).
e classify accounts as per Accounting Equation.
e record Debit and Credit in related accounts as per Double Entry System.
=
a

54 Accounting
Concept of Accounts:
The main objective of Accounting is to calculate financial result and financial
position, It's required to record the transactions in disciplined & proper way to
achieve this objective. Because of transactions continuous increase - decrease
happen to assets, liabilities, incomes, expenses and to equity. It's needed to
record continuous increase - decrease and to know the net amount of each item
at an interval of specific time.
Event:
Mahi Traders in March 2017 sold goods tk. 15,000; sold old furniture for tk.
3,000 and loan taken from bank tk.5,000. He spent tk. 8,000 for house rent; tk.
6,000 for gas & electric bill; tk.3,500 for conveyance; and tk.2000 for salary
of employees.
All cash receipts and all cash payments are mentioned above of Mr. Shagor for
the month march 2017. How much cash balance will leave in hand? To
know the balance following way can be applied-
Total Receipts = (15,000+3,000+5,000) = tk.23,000
Total Payments= (8,000+5,000+1 ,000+500+3,000+2,000)= tk.19,500
Balance = (23,000-19,500) = tk.3,500
Accounting follows a particular table to present the above information -
Cash Account
Debit Credit
po Taka || Talka |
Sales 15,000 | House rent 8,000
Sale of furniture 3,000 | Gas & electric bill 6,000
Bank loan 5,000 | Conveyance 3,500
Salaries 2,000
Balance (Difference) 3,500
This type of table is kept for each type of assets, liabilities, revenues or incomes,
expenses & equity of business organization separately and the balance of each
one is calculated,
Activity: How is the above table of accounts look like and what special things) ..
ou are observing? =

Accounts 55
Account is such a table or statement where the changes & position of each
financial item are disclosed. Cash Account, Furniture Account, Bank Account,
Purchase Account, Sales Account, Salary Account, Rent Account etc.
Table of Accounts
Two types of accounts table is used in Accounting-
‘T’—Table
Account’s Title
Debit Account’s code no...... Credit
[Date | Particulars | UF. | Taka | Date | Particulars | JF] Taka |
‘Moving Balance’— Table
Account’s Title Account’s code no...
Debit | Cred
Taka | Taka [Debit [Credit]
a es es
Features of ‘T’- Table Features of ‘Moving Balance’- Table
= There will be a title of Account * There will be a title of Account
% The table will be divided into two parts * Should have a code number for
Debit & Credit each account
* Four columns both side total eight % One column each for date,
columns description & journal folio(J.F.)
~* Balance of accounts(Difference * Total four columns for amount
between total Debit & total Credit) (Taka)
should be calculated after an interval *% Debit & Credit amount column
of specific time period situated side by side
% Should have a code number for each % Balance of accounts is calculated
account after cach posting of transaction
Activity: Identify what are the differences between these two tables.
N: B: Balancing of accounts is described thoroughly in ‘Ledger’ chapter.
Classification of Accounts
We can classify accounts very easily by analyzing the Accounting Equation (A=L+E)
=| Liabilities ] + [Equity
3 or

56 Accounting
Capital brought in by the owner +
Assets | = Liabilities + Revenues — Expenses —
Withdrawn by the owner
By observing the above equation it possible to identify, that Accounts are five
types.
1. Assets 2. Liabilities 3. Equity 4. Revenues 5. Expenses
Relation of Transactions with Accounts
Capital Ae | Equity Money, goods, assets, and other services provided by the
“1. | Capita Al Equity owner to the business record in Capital Account
[Drawings Ak | Equity |Mone, Soads, assets and other services taken forown use by
2._| Drawings Alc | Equity the owner from the business record in Drawings Account
Cash Ak | Assets [2% received and cash payments by the transactions record
Ea Com Ak ud in Cash Account
ekek | dee | ee Se ee oe Be
4. | Bank At Assets the transactions record in Bank Account.
Goods purchase (anything bought for sale) on cash,
: a Expenses cheque, card, credit & bill and Goods stolen, destroyed,
used_& distributed record in Purchase Account.
(6. | SalesA& | Revenues Goods sale (anything bought for sale) on cash, cheque,
ard, credit & bill record in Sales account
7, | Fumiture | Assets | Chair, Table, Almirah, Show-case, File cabinet and other
: : fixed assets buy & sale record in Furniture Account.
8. | ey | Assets | Different machine purchase, installation, extension and
Machin sale record in Plant & Machinery Account
Return Ex Bought goods returned out record in Purchase return /
outwards A/c |-*PEMSES) Return outwards Account
Return Revenues| 50!d goods returned in record in Sales retum / Return
inwards A/c inwards Account
Goods purchased on account, goods returned out, paid
Creditors A/c |Liabilities| to creditors, discount received and acceptance of bill
record in Creditors Account
Goods sold on account, goods returned in, received from
Debtors A/c | Assets |debtors, discount allowed and acceptance taken of bill
record in Debtors Account
Bills Payable Liabiliti |Purchase through bill, bill acceptance to creditors, bill paid
Alc 1aD1NeS\ and nonpayment dishonored record in Bills payable Account!
Bis able A‘c| Assets [Sale through bill, bill acceptance by debtors, bill realized
14. Receivable A/c] ASSCtS | ang dishonored record in Bills Receivable Account.
Aseote At the end of accounting period amount of unsold goods
Stock of is determined, which is closing stock of goods for that date
goods A/c & and opening stock of goods for the 1" day of next <
Expenses accounting period. a

Accounts 57
Loan taken and repayments of loan for business fro
individual or organization record in Loan Account. Name of

Loan A/c Liabilities] individual or organization can be added. Like- Rakesh’s Loan|
A/c or Bank Loan A/c. If business provide loan ‘Loan paid
A/c’- should use.
If the idle money of the business invested to Share, savings
17. | Investment | Assets | certificate, prize bond etc. for short or long time and sale off
Alc these record in Investment Account.
Salary Expenses Salary paid or due to employee record in Salary Account. No
Alc account will be opened under the name of employee.
Purchase of paper, pencil, scale, file cover, pin, clip etc,
Stationary | Expenses] to operate the ee dart sm activities of business record it
Alc Stationary Account
Factory, office, showroom & other places rent paid & due
record in Rent Account. If business required, separate rent
— Expenses account can be opened for each type. i e office rent account,
hi factory rent account, sub tenant account etc.
. amag onward & ammage outward accounts are opened to
Carriage expense Expenses| Tecord goods bringing in and sending out expense at the time of
Ale buying and selling goods respectively.
Interest Account is to open for interest receive & payment and
Expenses receivable & accrued interest. Received or receivable interest
Interest & |" investment, on drawings, on loan paid, on bank deposit and
Ale Revenues] 0" other hand paid or payable interest on capital, on loan, on
bank overdraft accounts are opened
Nivaiteamal Advertisement Account open for any kind of promotional &
Expenses] publicity expense of the business. Poster, banner, radio,
Alc television, free distribution of goods is most of them.
Bad debts account is opened due to debtors’ death, bankruptcy
Bad debts | Expenses or for any other reason. It can be mentioned here that provision
Ale for bad debts account is opened for doubtful debts.
Allowing some rebate for realizing the receivable amount to
Dissent Expenses! debtors and receiving some rebate on paying the owed amount
& to creditors record in Discount Account. Allowing & receiving
Ale Revenues| “iscount is recorded in two separate accounts respectively
discount allowed and discount received account.
Depreciatio The value of fixed assets decreases for being used, the reduced

26 | Alc Expenses part records in Depreciation Account

‘ahilities| Separate accounts are opened for revenue expense due and

a) oy meer | revenue income accrued. For example, salaries due account,

, , Interest due on loan account, commission receivable account,
ncome A/c | Assets | interest receivable account etc.

Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-8

58 Accounting
Prepaid Assets |Prepaid expense Advance income accounts are opened to
Expense . .& _ {record respectively expenses paid before getting service and

iabilities| income realized before providing service. For example-

& prepaid insurance premium, prepaid rent account, advance

Advance apprenticeship premium account, advance sub-tenants account
Income etc. Advance income is considered as unearned income.

eo ee eee ere |

29. Repair Account |Expenses vehicle etc.) is generally recorded in Repair account

Office Equipment Office Equipment Account is opened to record purchase &
Account Assets |Sale of computer, AC, photocopier, printer etc & other
expenses related with purchase.
: The price of watch, stapler, calculator, paper weight etc. is
Office Supplies Assets |comparatively small but provides services for a long time.
Account Office Supplies Account is affected for these purchases,

N: B: Idea about some important accounts are shown in the above chart.

Group Work: Prepare a list of asset, liability, equity, revenue and expense
account divided into several groups.

Debit and Credit

We have observed Debit and Credit these two words in both 'T’ and 'Moving

Balance’ table. Account is not possible to prepare without identifying debit and

credit. So, part of this lesson is explained with the principle of identifying debit

and credit of different types of accounts.

We have mentioned the left side of the account debit and the right side credit.

These two words give direction to accounts. Debit word means left and Credit

word means right. That's why left side of the account is Debit and right side is

Credit- it's a convention of Accounting.

We have learnt in Double Entry System chapter that each transaction brings two

equal opposite changes. One change is Debit and other one is Credit.

At least two accounts are affected by each transaction, one's debit side affect so

the other's credit. Same side of two accounts will not be affected by transaction.

Means it will not debit & debit or credit & credit.

Both side of the Accounting Equation will be always equal after each transaction

and total debit amount of accounts will be equal to total credit amount of

accounts. This two theory help in ascertain debit & credit of accounts. ~
Ss
ne

Accounts 59
- +L Ed
Total Debit = Total Credit
|___Equity
Owner's equity increases by bringing in capital (cash or any other asset) &
earned incomes and on other hand owner's equity decreases by owner's drawings
(cash or any other asset) & expenses incurred. Mentionable here, cash or any
other assets brought in or taken out by owner should be recorded in accounts
separately, so that the total amount of these two can be known easily.
Summary to Calculate Debit and Credit
Debit Credit
* Assets increase * Assets decrease
* Liabilities decrease * Liabilities increase
* Equity decrease * Equity increase
* Revenue decrease * Revenue increase
* Expense increase * Expense decrease
Effect of transactions on accounts is shown with examples-
Both cash (assets) and equity increased by the transaction-
Cash account (Assets increase) Debit tk. 50,000
Capital account (Equity increase) Credit tk. 50,000
Furniture purchased tk.10,000
Furniture increased & cash decreased by the transaction-
Furniture account (Assets increase) Debit tk. 10,000
Cash account (Assets decrease) Credit tk. 10,000
0 bend by depositing tk.5,000
co Bank account (Assets increase) Debit tk. 5,000
s Cash account (Assets decrease) Credit tk. 5,000

60 Accounting
Goods sold for cash tk. 12,000
Cash account (Assets increase) Debit tk. 12,000
Sales account (Revenue increase) Credit tk. 12,000
Cash withdrawn tk.1,000 by the owner
Drawings account (Equity decrease) Debit tk. 1,000
Cash account (Assets decrease) Credit tk. 1,000
Activity: Using the following table determine Debit & Credit mentioning
accounts classification with reason of each transactions:
1. The owner brought in furniture personally tk.5,000
2. Goods purchase from Bimal Traders tk.7,000
3. Goods sold on credit tk.9,000
4. Goods returned to Bimal Traders tk.1,000
5. Sold out goods on credit returned in tk.2,000
6. Prepaid rent tk.3,000
7. Withdrawn from bank for owner tk.2,000
8. Loan has taken from Ramjan tk.6,000
9 Paid to Bimal Traders tk 3,000
10. Received from debtors tk.5,000
Classification
Fal
[* [Een "Cr [tey | sap [Baul inane
Cash account Cr. | Equi 5 000 Equity increase
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Total number of column in ‘T" table -
a) 6 b) 7 c) 8 d) 10
2. The correct equation may be —
i) Assets = Liabilities + Owner's Equity
ii) Assets - Owner's Equity = Liabilities
iii) Assets + Owner's Equity = Liabilities
Which one is correct of the following? a
a) i &ii b) i&iii c) ti &iii qd) i, ti & iii s

Accounts 61
3. The difference between total amount of debit and credit of an account is called —
a) Profit b) Loss c) Liability d) Balance
4. ‘Debtor’-what type of account?
a) Asset b) Liability c) Owner’s equity d) Revenue
5. Same types of account are —
i) Salary account ii) Sales account iii) Advertisement account
Which one is correct of the following?
a) i &ii b) i&iii c) ii &iii d) i, ti & iii
6. Concerned account related with transaction is credited, when-
i) Asset increases ii) Equity increases iii) Expense decreases
Which one is correct of the following?
a) i &ii b) i&iii c) ii &iii qd) i, ii & iii
7. Which one is prepared for knowing continuous change and net amount?
a) Account 6b) Journal c) Ledger d) Trial balance
8. If Share, Debenture or Bond bought useing the idle money of business, which
account will be kept?
a) Capital b) Drawings _—C) Investment d) Loan
9. Account balance is calculated in moving balance format
a) Atthe end of the week b) At the end of the month
c) After recording of each transaction d) At the end of the day
10. How many type of account are there as per accounting equation?
a)4 b)5 c)6 dj7
11. Which transaction will increase Equity?
i) Withdrawn from bank for owner tk.2,000 ii) Furniture purchased tk.5,000
iii) Sold goods on credit tk.8,000 iv) Bought goods for cash tk 2,000
Which one is correct of the following?
a) i &ii b) i&iii c) ii &iii qd) i, ii & iii
=
&

62 Accounting
Considering the following information, answer the questions no. 12 & 13:
On 31 May 2017 the following accounts balances are available in Noresh
Traders:

Furniture account tk.20,000; Cash account tk.30,000; Purchase account tk.10,000;
Sales account tk.25,000; Capital account tk.40,000 and Drawings account tk.5,000.
12. What is the total amount of assets of Noresh Traders?

a) tk.50,000 b) tk.60,000 cc) tk.65,000 dd) tk.75,000
13. What will be the net amount of Owner's equity?

a) tk.35,000 b) tk.50,000 c) tk.65,000 dd) tk.70,000
Considering the following information, answer the questions no. 14 & 15:
On | January 2017 Mr. Jahid started a business named ‘Jahid Traders’ with
cash tk. 2,00,000, Prize bond worth tk.20,000 and loan tk. 25,000.
on 31 January salary paid to employees tk 5,000 in cash
14. What is the amount of opening capital of Jahid Traders?

a) k.2,45,000 b) tk.2,20,000 c) tk.2,00,000 d)_ tk.1,80,000
15. Mention transaction of tk 5,000, effect on accounting equation —

i) A element will ii) ZL element will iii) E element will

decrease increase decrease
Which one is correct of the following?

a) iii b) i&iii c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
Creative Questions:
1. Following accounts balances are of ‘Shahin Enterpize’ on 31 December 2017:
Mortgage loan................... tk.1,00,000 Accounts Receivable............... tk.65,0000
Prepaid-rent............ssse0ssse00 tk.20,000 Accounts Payable...................... tk.40,000
INCOME 1OX.......c0eccesceeesereeeee K.15,000 Interest Receivable..................... tk.5,000
Bill payable....seccsesesssevseeseseee tK.30,000 Cash A/Cu.ccscssscssssscsssessssssesseseeeee t.25,000
Commssion Received in Advance tk.4,000, Goodwill tk.15,000, Unearned Sub-Rent co
tk.2,000, Bank Overdraft tk.8,500, Stationary due tk.3,000. 8

Accounts 63
a) Determine the total amount of Drawings from the mentioned
information.
b) Identifying assets calculate total amount of assets of Shahin
Enterprize.
c) Calculate total amount of liabilities from mentioned accounts.
2. Mr. Apu started a business named “Compose & Copy’ on | January 2017 with
cash tk.1,70,000 & 2 photocopy machine worth tk.75,000 cach. Other
transactions of business occurred during the month were-
Jan. 3 Open a Bank account depositing tk.50,000.
» 4 Tk. 15,000 paid to install a electric meter in shop.
» 7 Purchase of paper tk.2,000 for compose & photocopy.
» 8 Fan bought on credit tk.3,000
» 15 Tk.2,000 Spent for distributing leaflets in town for the publicity of shop.
» 24 Cash tk.8,000 received for question photocopy of a school.
» 30 Cheque tk.5,000 issued for paying shop rent.
a) Calculate the amount of opening capital from the above information.
b) Show the classifaction of accounts relate to the transcation dated January
1,3,7&15,
c) Determine Debit & Credit of the transcation dated January 4,8,24 & 30.
3. Few transcations of ‘M/S Padma Steel’ wholeseller of Rod & Cement during March
2017:
March 2 1,000 bag cement bought for tk. 4,00,000.
” 6 New Scale bought for tk. 40,000.
» 9 Cheque received tk. 2,00,000 as earlier dues.
» 15 Withdrawn from Bank tk. 1,50,000.
» 18 200 bag cement sold for tk. 1,00,000 to Reza traders.
» 20 Truck rent tk. 25,000 paid to bring 100 ton rod.
» 26 10 bag cement returned from Reza traders.
» 28 A Motor Van bought for tk. 2,20,000 for bringing-sending Rod & Cement:
a) Calculate the amount of Expenses account from the above information.
b) Determine the Debit & Credits of transcation occured from March 2 to 15
mentioning.
c) Determine Debit & Credits with reason of transcations occured from
= March18 to 28
~

Chapter Six
Journal
After the identification of financial and non-financial events, it is necessary to
record the financial transactions in the books of accounts identifying Debit and
Credit parties. Transactions have differences in nature; the classification of
journal is made considering the nature & features of transactions. A transaction
should be recorded in such types of journal, where it is appropriate. If the
evidence of transaction is justified during recording, the acceptability of
recorded accounts increases enormously.
losing Journal
Classification of Journal

At the end of this chapter, we will be able to

e identify and importance of journal in case of opening entries.

e classify journal.

e provide general journal Entry.

© prepare purchase and sales journal through invoice, purchase return =

and sales return journal through debit and credit note. s

Journal 65
Concept of Journal
After the transactions occur, we have to record the detail of that as quickly as
possible. The detail of the transaction is recorded first in journal primarily.
Analyzing the debit and credit side of a transaction it is written chronologically
with explanation in a journal. Later on the journal is acted as the subsidiary book
for the principal book Ledger. Therefore, the journal is called the primary book
of accounts.
Keeping of journal is not compulsory but for the benefit of keeping records, it is
required to be kept. If transactions are kept in a journal, the chance of happening
omission of errors reduces significantly.
Activity: Tell the features of journal based on the above discussion.
Importance of Journal
The book of accounts of an institution must be clear and faultless. The financial
result and the financial position of business are calculated based on this account.
For achieving these principal objectives of accounting, the role of journal is
described-
Recording transactions; Many transactions take place in an organization,
Transferring those immediately to the ledger may not be possible. The
transactions if recorded in a journal then transferring those later on in a
ledger become easier.
Knowing the total number and quantity of transactions: It is not
possible from ledger to know how many transactions took place on a certain
day, in a week or in a month. Since transactions are recorded
chronologically in a journal, on a certain date, week or month the total
number of transaction can be ascertained. It's also possible to know the total
amount of transactions in different times.
Application of Dual Entity: In double entry system transactions are
recorded into concerned Debit & Credit accounts together. So, the
application of dual entity can be confirmed from journal.
Explanation of Transaction: If any question arises from transaction, its
explanation can be obtained from journal. Because after recording the
transaction into the journal, its reasons and explanation are also provided.
Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-9

66 Accounting
Reduce error & faults: [f Transactions are recorded in journal before
recording to ledger, the faults and being omitted from ledger become less
likely to occur.

Future Reference: [n journal, transactions are arranged systematically in a
chronological manner. In future, it can be used as a proof or evidence.
Helping aid to principal book: Since journal act as a subsidiary book to
ledger, so preparation of ledger becomes easier, clear and faultless.

Specimen of General Journal:

| Particulars / Account Titles & Debit Credit
Date Explanation L. F. Taka Taka
ee ee ee
Activity: Drawing the above table ask the students to tell the nature/features of this.

Date: In this column, the date when transaction occurs i.e. year, month and day

must be mentioned, Journal must be kept continuously according to the

occurrence of the transaction chronologically as they take place.

Particulars: In this column the debit & credit accounts/ parties related to the

transactions are mentioned, Always the debit party at first and then the credit

party are recorded. Besides, a brief explanation is also provided.

Ledger Folio; Debited and credited accounts related to transaction will be

written later permanently in Ledger, the page number of which is mentioned in

this Column. So the transaction can easily be identified from the ledger.

Debit and Credit: The amount of Debit and Credit is posted in debit and credit

column respectively. Each column should be equal in terms of amount. Journal

if recorded in separate pages the total of which is to be ascertained of both the
columns and thereafter in the next page must be written in respective columns.

After recording each journal a line should be drawn at the description column =

Journal 67
Classification of Journal ne
Among the transactions of
P | ___ Sales Journal
business based on nature and
a | Purchase Return Journal |
characteristics lot of differences |
are seen. Transactions are to sone
be recorded according to L_Cavh Reset Jearoe!_
their nature, Calssification o' mol me
play a subsidiary role to
keeping ledger accounts and — |
to preparing financial report. op ee —
So journal are classified \ [Clots eurzal__]
under the following manner- +. I
Special Journal
Almost all the transactions that take place ina business are recorded in a special
journal.
1, Purchase Journal: All the goods purchased on credit for business
are recorded in this journal.
2. Sales Journal; All the credit goods sales of a business are recorded in
this journal.
3. Purchase Return Journal: Goods purchased on credit but returned
are recorded in this journal,
4. Sales Return Journal: Goods sold on credit but returned are recorded in
this journal,
5. Cash Receipt Journal: The transactions that include cash receipts
{including goods sold for cash) are recorded in cash receipt journal.
6. Cash Payment journal: The transactions that include cash payments
(including goods purchased) are recorded in cash payment journal.
Factors to be considered for General Journal:
According to double entry system each financial transaction includes at least
two parties. One party is debit and the other one is credit. We identify both the
parties with journal. A transaction should always consist of a debit and credit is
not applicable. Based on transactions there can be more than one debits or
credits items, But it should be watched specially that the total amount of debit
should be equal to the total amount of credit. Here, it is to be remembered that
., Only identifying two parties is not thereby enough, besides the proper title of
= each heads of accounts is also important, If it is wrongly done,the real financial

68 Accounting
picture of the business will never be disclosed. In the accounts chapter the idea
related to concerned accounts have been discussed.
(a) No accounts will be opened under the name goods, materials, cheque etc.
Transaction | Journal Entry
Sale Account Credit
Bank Account Credit
(b) If name of the seller & buyer respectively for goods purchase & goods sale
are mentioned, it will be considered as credit transaction. But besides name- cash,
cheque, bank etc. words attached will not be considered as credit.
Purchase from Hasan Traders Purchase Account Debit
Creditors(Hasan Traders) A/c Credit
Goods sold to Khaled for cash Cash Account Debit
Sales Account Credit
(c) Goods bought & sold on credit is mentioned but the name of seller & buyer
is not mentioned than for purchase Creditors account and for sale Debtors
account will be recorded,
Leen
Creditors Account Credit
Sales Account Credit
(d) For purchase return and sales return- consider that the purchase & sale had
made earlier on credit.
a a oe
Debtors Account Credit
Purchased goods returned Creditors Account Debit
Purchase Returns Account Credit
(e) Buying & selling assets the words new, old, purchase, sale etc. can not be
used, Such as Furniture purchase account, Old furniture sales account, New office
equipment account etc. named accounts can’t be opened.
Cash Account Credit
Machinery Account _Credit | &

Journal 69
(f) There will be no accounts under the name of individual or institute for income
& expenses generally. Though the income is accrued and expense is due.
ransaction
Salary paid to employee Jamil Salary Account Debit
Cash Account Credit
=
Moni Stationeries Stationery Due Account Credit
Commission receivable from Topu Commission Receivable A/C Debit
Traders Commission Revenue A/C Credit
(g) Amount of the goods decreases because of goods is used personally or for
business, distributed freely for advertisement, stolen, destroyed etc., so for all
these situation Purchase account will be credited.
| —sTrransaction = | CCSCSCSCSousrmaal Entry
Goods withdrawn for personal use Drawings Account Debit
Purchase Account Credit
Purchase Account Credit
(h) Withdrawn from business means owner’s drawing. Withdrawn from bank
is considered for business. If it is mentioned for owner, will be recorded in —
Drawings account.
Cash Account Credit
Bank Account Credit
(i) Goods, cash, any asset stolen or destroyed will be recorded in Sundry loss account.
Cash Account Credit
Goods destroyed by fire Sundry Loss / Loss on fire A/c Debit
Purchase Account Credit
ba
&

70 Accounting:
(j) Bank account will be always affected by bank interest allowed or charged
and charges of bank.
Transaction | Journal Entry
Interest allowed by Bank Bank Account Debit
Bank Interest Account _Credit
Bank charged for expenses Bank Charge Account Debit
Bank Account Credit
(k) If the value of the fixed assets decreases because of using or for any other
reason, “Accumulated Depreciation account — respective assets” -named
account will be credited in place of being credit the respective assets account.
Accumulated Depreciation (Furniture) A/c Cr.
(1) Cheque received from any source, Bank account will be debited. Because
bearer or open cheque is never handed over to organization, Account Payee
cheque is provided"
sold Sales Account Credit
=e
deposited into bank immediatel: Debtors Account Credit
(m) Any service got from owner or Provided to owner Capital account credit
and Drawings account debit respectively.
Transaction | Journal Entry
Salary of the employee paid by the | Salary Account Debit
owner personall Capital Account Credit
Business Cash Account Credit
(n) Discount allowed and received at settlement of receivable and payable
respectively debtors to creditors account will be affected.
. 9,000 paid in full settlement | Creditors Account Debit 10,000
of tk. 10,000 to Creditors. Discount received A/C Credit 1,000
Cash Account Credit 9,000
Tk.6,500 received from Debtors in | Cash Account Debit 6,500
full settlement of tk.7,000 Discount allowed Account Debit 500) ..
Debtors Account Credit__7,000) §

Journal 71
Activity: How many parts are there in the General Journal?
Journal Proper: Meaning of general journal and journal proper is same. The
transactions which are not recorded in Special Journal are include in Journal
Proper.
1. Rectifying Journal: If any mistake occurs on recording transactions, it
cannot be made scrabble. The mistake is rectified by giving a journal entry. The
entry which is given for the rectification of error is known as rectifying journal.
Furniture purchase tk.10000, wrongly purchase account debited with tk. 10,000,
Debit Credit
Date Particulars / Account Titles & Explanation —L. F. Taka Taka
2017 | Furniture Account Debit 10,000
Dec. 31 Purchase Account Credit 10,000
(Wrongly purchase account was debited in
place of furniture account, now rectified
2.Adjusting Journal: Financial statements are prepared to determine the
financial position of business. Unrecorded and unadjusted items (accrued and
advance expense, unearned and receivable income, depreciation, reserve etc)
that are included at preparing the financial statements is known as adjusting
entries,
In 2017 rent paid tk.10,000; before preparing financial statements it disclosed
that prepaid rent tk.2,000 included in rent. Adjusting Journal will be in this
regard-
Debit Credit
2017 Prepaid Rent Account Debit
Dec. 31 Rent Account Credit 2,000
Prepaid rent adjusted with rent account
Note; Prepaid expense subtracted from respective expense, since it’s an asset.
So Expense decreased and Assets increased
3. Closing Journal: Revenue incomes and expenses of a particular year will not
affect the next year's accounts, So, during the preparation of financial statement
revenue income and expenses should be closed. We have learnt in accounts
chapter that the balances of income denote credit while the balances of expense
me denote debit balance. Beside, Drawings account is also closed by closing
§ journal.

2 Accounting
Balance of Revenue income & expenditure accounts in 2017 of a business
was- Purchase tk. 50,000; Sales tk. 80,000; Salaries tk.10,000; tk. Rent 5,000.
Debit Credit
2017 | Sales Account Debit 80,000
Dec. 31 Income Statement Credit 80,000
(Sales account balance closed by
transferring to Income Statement
Income Statement Debit 65,000
Purchase Account Credit $0,000
Salary Account Credit 10,000
Rent Account Credit 5,000
(Balance of Purchase Account, Salary
Account and Rent Account closed by
transferring to Income Statement)
4. Opening Journal: Business institution is a continuous process. Assets,
liabilities and owner's equity of the last year are brought to beginning of the next
year, for which opening journal is made.
On 31 December 2016, Cash Account tk.50,000, Furniture Account tk.30,000,
Debtors Account tk.20,000, Creditors Account tk.15,000 and Capital Account
tk,85,000
Particulars / Account Titles & Debit | Credit
Date Explanation L.F. Taka | Taka
2017 | Cash Account Debit 50,000
Jan. 01 | Furniture Account Debit 30,000
Debtors Account Debit 20,000
Creditors Account Credit 15,000
Capital Account Credit 85,000
(Business begin in2017 with Assets,
Liabilities & Equity of 2016)
5. Other Journal: Besides transactions of special journal & four types of
transactions mention in journal proper, there are other transactions also, such
as- assets buy-sell on credit, discount allowed & discount received, distribution
of goods etc. These transactions also record in journal proper.
2
a

Journal 3
Discount & Classification of Discount
Generally, when goods is possible to buy in lower price than the predetermind price,
the price that paid less is Discount. This type of discount is both paid &
received in business.
=
Discount Discount
Purchase Sales Discount
Trade Discount: Seller determines the selling price of goods. When seller sells
his goods in a lower price than the predetermined selling price, it considered as
Trade discount. This discount is sales discount for seller and purchase discount
for buyer. Neither buyer nor seller keeps this discount in their accounts.
Cash Discount: Buying-Selling in business takes place frequently on credit, The
rebate that is provided by seller to buyer to settle the debts between them quickly
is Cash discount. This discount is discount paid / allowed for seller & discount
received for buyer. Both record this discount in their book of accounts.
Activity: Compare Trade discount with Cash discount.
Example-1
Mr. Nila Chowdhury is the owner of Nila Enterprise, During the month of March
2017, the following transactions took place.
March 1 Purchased goods tk. 9,000.

‘i 2 Purchased furniture tk.12,000.

s 3. Sold goods to Bahar tk.15,000.

és 7 Deposited in the Bank tk, 8,000.

4 9 Purchased goods on credit tk. 5,000

= 12 Created provision for bad debts tk.2,000,

= 15 Bad debts written off tk.1,000.

rs 18 Purchased stationary tk. 1,000.

*s 30 Salaries paid to the employees tk.7,000.
Ciass-9-10, Accounting, Forma-10

4 Accounting
General Journal of Nila Enterprise
2017
March 1 | Purchase Account Debit 9,000
Cash Account Credit | 9,000
Goods purchase in cash |
- 2 Furniture Account Debit 12,000
Cash Account Credit 12,000
(For furniture purchased for cash |
ws 3 Debtors(Bahar) Account Debit 15,000
Sales Account Credit 15,000
or goods sold to Bahar
~ 7 Bank Account Debit 8,000
Cash Account Credit 8,000
(Cash deposited in the Bank)
” 9 Purchase Account Debit 5,000
Creditors Account Credit 5,000
(For goods purchased on
credit)
Ps 12 | Bad debts Account Debit 2,000
Provision for Bad debts Account Credit ; 2,000
(For created provision for bad debts)
ss 15 | Provision for Bad debts Account Debit 1,000
Debtors Account Credit 1,000
(For written off bad debts)
is 18 | Stationary Account Debit 1,000
Cash Account Credit 1,000
(For Stationary purchased for cash)
~ 30 | Salary Account Debit 7,000
Cash Account Credit 7,000
(For salaries paid in cash)
Tota |__| 80,000 | 80,000 |
oo
S
N

Journal 75
Example-2
On Ist July 2017 Showkat Traders started a business named ‘Showkat Traders’
with cash of tk. 50,000 and goods of tk. 20,000 as capital. His transactions for
the month were-
July 2 Opened a bank account with Janata Bank by depositing tk.20, 000
es 7 Purchased computer for business tk.22, 000.
zs 9 — Sold goods to Rumi & Co. and received cheque tk. 10,000.
i 10 Goods tk 15,000 bought from Babul Traders at 10% discount
” 12 Office rent paid in advance tk. 4,000,
‘ 15 Purchased goods returned to Babul tk. 1,000. (Less discount)
i 20 Tk.3,000 spent for publicity of business.
rn 23 Issued cheque to Babul tk. 5,000.
- 25 Mr. Showkat’s personal expenses paid from the business tk. 2,000.
a 30 Salary of Raihan is unpaid tk.3,500.
General Journal of Showkat’s Enterprise
* L. Debit Credit
es
2017
July 1 Cash Account Debit 50,000
Purchase Account Debit 20,000
Capital Account Credit 70,000
(For cash and goods brought in as capital.)
we 2 Bank Account Debit 20,000
Cash Account Credit 20,000
(Opened a Bank account depositing cash) |
= 7 | Office equipment Account Debit 22,000
Cash Account Credit 22,000
(For purchased computer for cash) |
ww 9 Bank Account Debit 10,000
Sales Account Credit 10,000
(Sold goods to Rumi & Con. by cheque)
s 10 | Purchase Account Debit 13,500
Creditors Account (BabulTraders) Credit 13,500
© (For goods purchased on credit
8 at 10% Discount

76 Accounting
7 12 | Prepaid Rent Account Debit 4,000
Cash Account Credit 4,000
Office rent paid in advance
- 15 | Creditors Account (Babul) Debit 1,000
Purchase retum Account Credit 1,000
‘or goods returned to Babul Traders
Pm 20 | Advertisement Account Debit 3,000
Cash Account Credit 3,000
= 23. ~ Creditors Account (Babul) Debit 5,000
Bank Account Credit 5,000
Issued cheque to Babul
» 25 Drawings Account Debit 2,000
Cash Account Credit 2,000
(Personal expenses paid from the business)
. 30 | Salary Account Debit 3,500
Accrued Salary Account Credit 3,500
of Raihan is npaid)
a
Journal of Service Providing Organization
On 1 March 2017 Mr. Pijush Kumar started a theatre business named “Kumar
Theatre’ at Baily Road. On 1 March he invested tk. 5,00,000 in business.
Transactions on March of his business were-
March 2 3 months rent of the theater paid in advance tk.90,000
= 4 Publicity expense of the theater tk. 15,000
" 6 Purchased chair and table for the theater tk. 30,000
m a Cost of making & decorating stage tk.50,000
” 12 Entertainment expense for artist & technician tk.2,000
‘ie 15 Sale of tickets for showing drama tk.80,000.
‘ 18 Honorarium paid to the artist tk.25,000.
‘a 25 Electricity bill due tk. 3,000.
" 28 Salaries paid to the theater employees tk.12,000.
Solution
General Journal of Kumar Theatre
, F Debit Credit
om | mowers [cr] Oe | SE |
017 | Cash Account Debit 5,00,000
March | Capital Account Credit $,00,000 | x
‘or cash brought in as capital. &

Journal 77
[Date [Account Tiles & Explanation | LF, | Debit Taka [Credit Taka]
2017
March 2) Prepaid Rent Account Debit 90,000
Cash Account Credit 90,000 —
(For office rent paid in advance.) | |
» 4 Advertisement Account Debit 15,000
Cash Account Credit 15,000
For advertisement expense paid | |
» 6 Fumiture Account Debit 30,000
Cash Account Credit 30,000
(For furniture purchased for cash.)
» 7) Stage & Decorate expense Account Debit 50,000
Cash Account Credit 50,000
(For making stage & it's decoration paid.)
Cash Account Credit 2,000
‘of entertaining artist paid.
» 15] Cash Account Debit 80,000
For selling ticket of drama.
» 18) Honorarium expense Account Debit 25,000
Cash Account Credit 25,000
(For paying honorarium to artist)
» 25 | Electricity expense Account Debit 3,000
‘of electricity bill unpaid
» 28 | Salaries expense Account Debit 12,000
Cash Account Credit 12,000
(Salaries paid to the theater employees)
rar [0005507 000
Activity:
Following transactions took place in M/S Sachin & Co, during April 2017 .
April 1 Cheque received from debtor tk, 8,000.
” 3 Took loan from Maruf tk. 20,000
“5 Purchase Return tk. 500.
” 8 +Sold old furniture tk.2,000,
"10 Bad debts written off tk. 1,000.
3 “12 Notes payable tk.3,000 paid by bank.
Le

8 Accounting
‘ 15 Purchased chair and table tk.7000
2 18 Interest on investment tk.1000
» 20 Commission receivable tk.600
” 22 Withdrawn from Bank tk.4000
PS 25 Paid creditor by cheque tk. 6500 and received discount tk. 500
» 30 Charged depreciation of furniture tk. 800
Record the above transactions in the General Journal Book.
Purchase Journal: Whatever purchased in business with the intention of sale is
goods. These goods can be bought through both for cash and credit. Goods those
are bought on credit are recorded in Purchase Journal. Purchase journal is prepared
based on invoice. A purchase Journal based on Invoice is prepared below-
larolee Ho: 1608 Shaudagar Agency Date: 2 March 2017
513, Badam Toli
Shodorghat, Dhaka
Buyer's Name: Raha stores
Address: 23/2, Kathal Bagan, Dhaka.
| S/No. | Description Of Goods | Rute(Taka) | Qty. | Amount (Taka) |
Nazir Shail Rice 1,000 KG 40,000
Less: Trade Discount (5%) 2,000
Taka (Inwords) ; Thirty Fight Thousand Taka
Sales Terms; 2/10, Net 30
N.B. Errors & Omissions Excepted Seller's Signature
Raha Store's Purchase Journal
= aaa | eee oe] ee a
Creditors Account Credit
2017
Mar, 2 | Shaudagar Agency 2/10, net 30 v 38,000
» 10 | Nargis Agency M$, net 20 v 23,000
(Name of Nargis agency newly entered)
Sales Terms: If the sales term is like this - 2/10, Net 30. It means, if the buyer is
able to pay the dues within 10 days gets 2% cash discount. If failed then dues
have to be paid within 30 days of course. =
™

Journal 79
Sales Journal: Goods sold on account is recorded in Sales Journal. Sales Journal is
also prepared based on invoice. Specimen of Sales Journal mentioned below-
Shaudagar Agency's Sales Journal
: rs Account Debit
2017
March 12 | Rehana Stores v 32,000
N.B. The part of transferring to Ledger from Purchase & Sales Journal is mentioned
in the ‘Ledger’ chapter.
Carraige, Packing and insurance expenses are related to goods purchase and sale.
Bearer of the charges should be determined.Buyer have to pay the charges if these
are included in the invoice. Total amount of invoice price is recorded both in
purchase journal and sales Journal.
Activity: Shahjahan Traders is a Wholeseller of Kawran Bazar, Dhaka. During the
month of November 2017 following transactions took place in his business-
Nov. | Sold to Mili Stores, Dhaka- 50 Kg. of at tk.100 per Kg. Trade
discount allowed 2%. Invoice No.8. Condition : 3/10, net 20
» 5 Sold to Jony Traders- 500 Pound of Tea at tk.200 per Pound. Trade
discount allowed 5%. Invoice No- 533. Condition : 3/15, net 30
» 8 Sold to Ratan Stores- 100 Pound of Tea at tk. 220 per Pound .Trade
discount allowed 3%, Invoice No.- 254.
» 12 Sold to Zafar Brothers- 120 liters of Soya bean oil at tk. 300 per liter
-Trade discount allowed 4%. Invoice No.- 534.
» 15 Sold to Shikdar and Sons- 100 bags of flour at tk. 2000 per bag.
Trade discount allowed 3%. Invoice No.- 255.
» 20 Sold to Rotna Traders - 50 packet of powder milk at tk. 350 per
packet. Trade discount allowed 2%. Invoice No.- 535.
Prepare Purchase Journal and Sales Journal from above information.
Purchase Return Journal: If the delivered goods are not as per order, below
standard or data expired, bought goods are returned to the seller. The buyer
«, Sends prepared Debit Note to seller for returning goods and prepares Purchase
8 Journal.

80 Accounting
Imran Brothers
Debit Note No.-173 Malitola, Bangshal Date: 18 August 2017
Address: 37, Rainkhola, Mirpur-6, Dhaka.
Ref: Purchase / Invoice No. 1265 / 3 August 2017
[ SLNo | Description & Reason of returning goods | Amount (Taka) _]
10 pe. Torn Jamdani Saree tk.1,300 each returned. Please
deduct the price of 10 sharees from our account 13,000
Less: Trade discount 1,000
Taka (Inwords): Twelve thousand taka
N.B, Errors & Omissions Excepted Purchase Manager
Imran Brother's Purchase Return Journal
P Debit Creditors Account Debit
| Pre | Account ebied | eno. | Sour | Puce Raum Ac Cra
2017
Aug. 18 | M/s Shopna Enterprise 173 v 12,000
» 23 | Mamun Traders 185 v 7,000
» 29 | Nahid Stores 193 ¥ 5,000
24,000
Transaction of date 23 and 29 newly entered.
Sales Return Journal: Receiving returned goods along with debit note from
buyer, seller confirms buyer preparing credit note that his account is credited.
Seller send credit note to buyer and prepares Sales Journal for having the goods
returned to him.
M/S. Shopna Enterprise :
Credit note no.-237 37, Rainkhola, Mirpur-6, Dhak Date: 20 August 2017
Name of Receiver: Imran Brothers
Address: Malitola, Bangshal
Ref: Debit note 173 / 18 August 2017
Sl. No Description & Reason of returning goods Amount (Taka)
10 pe. Torn Jamdani Saree tk.1,300 each returned. Your 13000
account is credited with returned goods price 13,000
Less: Trade discount 1,000
Taka (Inwords) : Twelve thousand taka
N.B. Errors & Omissions Excepted Sales Manager S

Journal 81
M/S. Shopna Enterprise’s Sales Return Journal
; Credit Sales Retum Account Dr.
[ma | temarcniet | ene, | S| Dass Ge
2017
Aug. 20 Imran Brothers 237 v 12,000
» 25 | Sagar Trades 240 v 9,000
» 30 Rupa Traders 243 v 5,500
Transactions dated 25and 30 newly entered
Activity: The following returns happened on April 2017 in Fatema Stores-
April3 10 packets powder milk tk.250 each retuned from Ratul Traders, as they
were date expired. Trade discount 3%, Credit note no.-165
» 9 40 Kg. detergent at tk.50 per kg returned to Jaman & Sons due to inferior
quality. Trade discount 2%, Debit note no.-187.
» 17 15 pounds tea at tk.170 per pound returned to Latif Stores, since it was not
according to sample. Debit note no.-188.
» 24 6 dozens soap at tk.180 per dozen returned from Rashed & Bros.due to excess
deliver. Trade discount 4%. Credit note no.-166
Record to Purchase return & Sales return journal.
N. B. Example and procedure to prepare Cash Receipts & Cash Payments
Journal described in Chapter 8.
Exercise
Multiple-choice Questions
1. Journal is called in Accounts-
i) Primary book
ii) Subsidiary book
iii) Permanent book
Which one is correct of the following?
a)i&ii bikiii ci iii d) i, it & iii
2. It is known from journal ---
i) Total number of transactions
ii) Total amount of money
iii) Reason of transaction
Which one is correct of the following?
ai &ii bi&iii ci iii d) i, ti & iti
Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-11

82 Accounting
3. Which one is recorded in Journal proper ?
a) Purchase journal b) Sales journal
c) Adjusting journal d) Cash journal
4. Which one is recorded in Purchase journal?
a) All goods purchases b) All goods purchase in cash
c) Assets purchase only d) Goods purchase on credit only
5. Which one is the documentary evidence of Sales return journal?
a) Debit note b) Credit note c) Debit voucher  d) Credit voucher
6. Which entry is used for closing the incomes and expenses account?
a) Opening __b) Transfer c) Adjusting d) Closing
7. Which one will be debited for buying Office equipment ?
a) Staples b) Computer _c) Paper weight d) Almirah
8. Salary due to employee Shakil. Which one is the correct journal entry?
a) Shakil account Debit b) Salary account Debit
Salary account Credit Shakil account Credit
c) Salary account Debit d) Outstanding Salary A/c —_— Debit
Outstanding Salary A/c Credit Salary account Credit
Read the following passage and answer question No. 9, 10, 11 & 12:
On Ist October 2017 Mrs. Sabina Yasmin started a business with tk.2,00,000
from selling her own land and bank loan tk.1,00,000 in the name of her business
named Sabina Enterprise . On Sth October furniture purchased in cash
tk.40,000. On 10th October sold goods to Masud for tk.30,000. On 15th
October bought goods returned tk.5,000.
9. What is the amount of opening capital of Sabina Enterprise?
a) tk.1,00,000 b) tk.2,00,000
c) tk.3,00,000 d) tk.3,40,000
10. The transaction of Sth October will be recorded in which primary book?
a) Purchase journal b) Cash payment journal
c) Journal proper d) General journal
11. Which one is the correct journal of October 10th ?
a) Masud account Debit tk.30,000 b)Cash account Debit tk.30,000
Sales account Credit tk.30,000 Sales account Credit tk.30,000
c)Cash account Debit tk.30,000 d) Masud account Debit tk.30,000 .,
Masud account Credit tk.30,000 Cash account Credit tk.30,000 §

Journal 83
12. Which one is the documentary evidence of transaction 15th ?
a) Debit voucher b) Debit note
c) Credit voucher d) Credit note
Creative Questions:
1.Few transactions of Readymade Clothes Trader 'Afroja Fashion’ during
December 2017 mentioned under :
Dec. 01 500pes Trousers tk. 300 each bought from Mahmud Fashion at 5%
discount and Carriage expense paid tk.1,000. Invoice no. 78,
Terms- 2/5, net 15.
Dec. 03 Sold Trouser for cash tk.35,000.
Dec. 08 100pcs of Trouser returned to Mahmud Fashion as they were
defective.
Dec. 10 Repair of old furniture tk.S00
Dec. 15 200pcs of Shirt at tk.400 per pair purchased from Nazrul Store.
Discount 10%, Terms- 2/7, net 30.
Dec. 20 Paid to Mahmud Fashion tk.40,000.
a) Calculate the price of returned goods from the above information .
b) Prepare a Purchase journal of Afroja Fashion from the above
transactions.
c) Pass the general journal entries from the above transactions except
purchase journal entries.
2. On May, 2017 The following transactions occurred in the business of
Bahauddin & Sons :
May 02 Withdrew from bank for business tk.15,000
May 03 Sold goods to Romij Brothers tk.10,000 allowing 5% discount.
Invoice no.173. Carriage expense tk.1,000 included in Invoice.
May 05 Rent paid in advance tk.3,000.
May 08 Goods purchased by cheque tk.7,000.
May 10 Sold goods to Shahadat & Co. tk.9,000 allowing 5% discount.
Invoice no.174. Packing charge tk.500
May 15 Cash withdraw tk.1,000
a) What is the amount of discount on sales of Bahauddin & Sons for the
month of May?
b) Prepare a Sales journal from the above transactions.
BS c) Give entry to the above transactions in general journal except sales
. journal transactions.

84 Accounting
3. Following transactions occurred in Chowdhury Hardware during January
2017 :

Jan. 01 Started business with cash tk.2,50,000 and Furniture worth tk.65,000.

Jan. 05 Sold 250 fit G.I. pipe tk. 192 per fit to Suborna Traders allowing 5%

discount. Invoice no.205.Packing charge tk. 500.

Jan. 08 Goods purchased from Rajon Traders by cheque tk.41,500.

Jan. 15 Pen & Paper bought for business use tk.200

Jan. 18 Carriage expense for Almirah which bought for business tk. 1,500.

Jan. 28 Goods withdraw for personal needs tk.800.

a) What is the amount of opening capital of Chowdhury Hardware?
b) Prepare an Invoice for the transaction dated January 5.
c) Record the transactions occurred on January 8, 15, 18 and 28 to
General journal.
4. Following transactions occurred in Khan Computer's during July 2017 :
July 05 8pcs Computers purchased from Mahi Computers at tk.36,000 cach.
Trade discount @ 6%. Invoice no.509. Carriage expenses tk.1,500.
July 15 6pcs Computers purchased from Raju Computers at tk.40,000 each.
Invoice no.311, trade discount @ 5 %, packing expenses tk.500.
July 20 3pcs computers returned to Raju Computers due to inferior quality.
Debit note no. 501.
a) What is the total amount of incidental expenses of Khan Computers
to purchase in July.
b) Prepare a Debit note considering the above transactions of July.
c) Prepare a Purchase journal of Khan Computers from the above
transactions.

5. Following assets & liabilities of ‘M/S Alfa Traders’ on 1 January 2017 were:
Cash Account tk.40,000, Furniture tk.1,00,000, Investment tk.50,000,
Creditors tk.10,000 & Capital tk.1,80,000 on 31 December 2017 following
matters were considered in business:

1) Total salaries paid tk.1,20,000, out of which tk.20,000 paid in
advance,
2) Rent paid tk. 50,000 & outstanding tk.10,000.
3) Interest receivable from Investment tk.5,000. -
4) Charge depreciation on Furniture tk.10,000. S

Journal 85
a) Give opening Journal entry from the above information.
b) Show necessary adjusting entries at the end of year.
c) Give closing entry in Journal proper of M/S Alfa Traders.
6. Few transactions of ‘Niharika Pharmacy’ in July 2017 are as follows:
July 1 Tk. 30,000 paid for new trade licence fees.
” § Purchased 20 carton defective medicine of tk. 500 per carton returned
to Shadhona pharmacy Debit note no.111.
” 10 01 Computer worth tk.40,000 bought for keeping accounts of business.
” 15 100 packet expired Vitamin capsule of tk.300 per packet returned from
chandana Medicare. Discount 5%, Credit note no. 222.
* 20 500 bag saline @tk. 120 not being in accordance with order returned
to Priyonti pharma. Trade Discount 5%. Debit note no. 333.
”30 Sold goods to Niramoy Drugs worth tk. 25,000 at 10% discount
returned for poor quality. Credit note no. 444.
a) Prepare General Journal for transactions dated July 1 & 10.
b) Prepare Purchase Return Journal of Niharika Pharmacy.
c) Prepare Sales Return Journal of Niharika Pharmacy considering
above information.
=
&

Chapter Seven
Ledger

After the recording of transactions primarily it's necessary to transfer these to the
concerned heads of account following the classification of accounts. Throughout
the year at different times goods are bought and sold both on cash and credit.
Without accumulating credit purchase from purchase journal and cash purchase
from cash book total purchase can never be obtained. Ledger assembles the
scattered purchase, sales and other income and expenses and helps in
ascertaining total purchase, total sales and other total income & expenses.
Similarly, the results of the transaction releated to assets, liabilities and equity
of business organisation are transfarred to related accounts maintained under
ledger. To know about the balances of accounts and to testify their arithmetic
accuracy along with having a primary idea about the total condition of the busi-
ness are included in this chapter.

(Sab) commcntater

Relation between Control and Subsidiary Ledger

At the end of this chapter, we will be able to

e explain the idea and importance of ledger as a permanent book

e classify the types of ledger

© detect the differences between Journal & Ledger

e identify the balances by preparing accounts through ‘T’ and

‘Moving balance’-format
e analyze the significance of debit & credit balance of ledgers.
%
§

Ledger 87
Concept of ledger

Different types of accounts like assets, liabilities, owner's equity, incomes,
expenses and accounts of profit-loss are kept in business organization. These
accounts together are called ledger. Generally, in a running business
organisation opening debit or credit balance of accounts related with assets,
liabilities & equity are remain. Results of transactions occurred in a specific
period of time are transferred to related accounts of ledger properly. Balance of
each account is calculated at end of accounting period. In this process, amount
of income, expense, profits & loss are calculated of a business organisation for
that period and amount of assets, liabilities & owners equity can be known on a
specific date.

Features:

e Each account is given a title

e¢ ‘Moving Balance’ and ‘T’ format are followed to prepare ledger

e Balance of each accounts are identified individually

e In preparing ledger journal acts as a helping book. Journal folio

no. is mentioned at the time of recording to Ledger.

e Verify the arithmetical accuracy of accounting activity.

e Trial Balance is prepared with the account balance from Ledgers.
ee ss 2 eee
* Cash A/c Creditors A/c |* Capital Aic—[* Salles A/c * Purchase A/c
¢Fumiture Alc ——_|eLoan Ale * Drawings Ale |? Rent Received Ae), sstaries Alc

ommission

* Prepaid Expense A/c|eUnearned meseeve AS |, Discount * Depreciation Alc

* Stock of Goods A/c| Revenue A/c Received A/c le: Rélvereacenee: Alo

— © Apprenticeship | Insurance A/c

Building Alc Premium A/c > Rent Afe
i ae © Rates & Tax A/c
* Bad Debts A/c

Importance of Ledger

Since transactions are properly arranged in a sequence to accounts, users can

easily access their desired information from the ledger. It's possible to get idea

about the total amount of assets, liabilities, income and expenses of a business

from the ledger. For the purpose of preparing trial balance, the balances of ledger

are used and as such arithmetical accuracy is confirmed. The necessity and
se importance of ledger is amplified by saying that ‘Ledger is the king of all books
® of accounts’.

88 Accounting
Difference between Journal and Ledger
Journal and ledger both are two steps of accounting cycle. Ledger by
comparison is more important and useful than journal. Keeping journal is
optional while compulsory for the case of ledger. Apart from the arithmetical
accuracy of accounts the ledger reflects the financial results and condition of a
business. There are differences between the tables of a journal and a ledger. Ina
journal only the debit and credit side of transaction is identified where as in a
ledger balance of each accounts are identified by comparing total debits and total
credits. For preparing the ledger properly and accurately journal acts as a
supplementary book.
Activity: (Group work) Show the differences betwen Journal and Ledger.
Includes in Ledger or Posting
Transaction: Jan. 1, 2017 Goods purchase for cash tk.5,000
Journal Entry:
Purchase Account Debit 5,000
Cash Account Credit 5,000
Posting to Ledger:
Debit Purchase Account Credit
Date | Particulars | J/F | Taka | Date | Particulars | /F | Taka
Debit Cash Account Credit

_Date | Particulars | VF | Taka | Date | Particulars | J/F

—————> sani | Purchase Account ___|_ 5,000 |
Looking at the posting, as purchase account is debited in journal, it is posted to
the debit side of the purchase ledger, but in the particulars column the opposite
credited head name i.e. Cash account is mentioned. On the other hand, Cash
accounts is credit so it has been posted to credit side of Cash accunt but the
particulars column is represented in the name of debit side account i.e. Purchase
account. With these it is identifiable that purchase account is debited by which |
account, and cash account is credited by which account. 3

Ledger 89
Therefore, the debit side posting of an account in a ledger will be recorded in the
name of its subsequent account into the particular column vice versa.
Balancing of Accounts
During the time of preparing a ledger, the first step is posting and the next step
is balancing. In general terms the word balancing means what remains. For
example: 5 kg of rice purchased and 3 kg of which have been consumed so the
remaining is 2 kg. Ascertaining the balance of an account is almost like this. The
difference between the posted amount in debit and credit side of the accounts is
known as balancing.
Cash account balance is calculated after being posted of the following
two transactions -
2017
March 3 Goods Sold Tk. 20,000
March 10 Furniture Purchased T1Tk.15,000
Journal Entry
Date | Particulars | LF | Debit Taka | Credit Taka |
2017
Mar. 3 | Cash Account Dr. 20,000
Sales Account Cr. 20,000
Cash Account Cr. 15,000
*T’ Table
Debit Cash Account Credit
| Date | Particulars | J/F | Taka | Date | Particulars | J/F | Taka |
2017 2017
Mar.3 | Sales Account 20,000 | Mar.10 | Furniture Account 15,000
» 31 | Balance C/D 5,000
Apr. 1 | Balance B/D 5,000
e The debit and credit side summation must be equal. So, the amount
which is higher must be recorded on either sides of the accounts, In the
above account the debit side indicate the higher amount and hence has
been written tk.20,000 on both debit and credit sides.
¢* Underneath the summation of each side the accounts must be closed by
drawing two parallel lines.
Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-12

" Accounting

e Generally at the end of a specific time the difference between the debit and
credit side is ascertained. The difference is then headed by balance C\D i.e.
carried down putting in the lower side for making both side equal. The
above account is for the month of March, so the difference is calculated at
the end 31st March.

¢ Balance C/D at the end of a particular period will be posted to the
opposite side of the account mentioning Balance B/D i.e. brought down at
the begining of a next period.

e The balance represents the higher amount it indicates. For example the
above cash account indicates debit balance, so on April 01 Balance B/D is
written on the debit side of Cash account and the ledger of April has been
opened,

Carried Forward
[BF ___| Brought Forward
Activity:
Debit Cash Account Credit
| Date | Particuiars | J | Taka | Date | Particulars | JF | Tabs |
2017 2017
May2 | Capital Account 30,000 | May3 | Purchase Account 8,000
» 5. | Sales Account 10,000 | ,, 7 | Fumiture Account 4,000
» 9 | Debtors Account $,000 | ,, 25 | Salaries Account 3,000
Calculate the balance of above account.
‘Moving Balance’ - Table
Cash Account Code No. of Account...
jolie Debit | Credit | Balance
ee ee
2017
March 3 | Sales Account 20,000 20,000
March10 | Furniture Account 5,000 =

Ledger a
e The balance of accounts is ascertained any time. The balance is calculated
just after cach posting.
e There are seperate columns for showing the balance in the moving
balance method.
Accounts Posting Balance of Accounts
Debit Posting Debit Balance +
Credit Posting Debit Balance -
Credit Posting Credit Balance +
Debit Posting Credit Balance -
« The total of debit and credit posting is not ascertained. This summation
has no use,
Activity:
Bank Account Code No.of Account...
Debit | Credit
Taka | Taka [Debit | Ged
2017
July 1 | Sales Account 8,000
» 3. | Sales Account 6,000
» 8 | Purchase Account 3,000
» 10 | Drawings Account 1,000
» 20 | Rent Account 2,000
Calculate the balance of above account.
C/D or C’F is ascertained at the end of a certain time. This balance is again
recorded as B/F or B/D to the opposite side at the begining of the next month.
Whenever the debit posting equals the credit posting the balance becomes Zero
and ¢/d or b/d is not required to be written. This type of account is known as the
balanced it,
ameee NE General/ Normal Balance of Accounts
Classification of Accounts
Credit Balance
Pp Equity Credit Balance
te | CRevenue | SCC Balance _
8 | ____ Expense | Debit Balance

oa Accounting
Preparing of Ledger from General Journal
On | March 2017 Mr. Shahin started a business named ‘Shahin Trader’ with
capital of tk.1,00,000. Transactions for the month were -
March. 2 Furniture purchased tk.20,000.
»» 3 Goods purchased on credit tk.30,000.
» 5 Goods sold tk. 25,000
» 8 Purchase returned tk. 2,000.
» 12  Tk.10,000 paid to creditor.
» 18 A bank account opened by depositing tk.15,000.
» 22 Goods sold and received a cheque tk.8,000.
» 25 Goods Purchased from Shafiq by cheque tk. 6,000.
» 28 Salaries paid to the employees tk.5,000.
Journalize the above transactions and Calculate the balance by transferring
to concerned Ledger accounts.
Solution:
General Journal of Shahin Trader
Date | Particulars | L/F | Debit Taka | Credit Taka _
2017 | Cash Account Dr. | - 1,00,000
March 1| Capital Account Cr. | - 1,00,000
(For cash bought in as capital.)
ws 2 Furniture Account Dr. 20,000
Cash Account Cr. 20,000
(Furniture Purchased for cash)
a 3 Purchase Account Dr. 30,000
Creditors Account Cr. 30,000
(Goods bought on credit.)
= 5 Cash Account Dr. 25,000
Sales Account Cr. 25,000
(For goods sold for cash.)
« & Creditor Account Dr. 2,000
Purchase Return Account Cr. 2,000 | x
(For returning bought goods) | | &

Ledger 93
| Date | Particulars | L/F | Debit Taka | Credit Taka
w= 12 Creditor Account Dr. 10,000
Cash Account Cr. 10,000
(Paid cash to the creditor )
» 18 Bank Account Dr. 15,000
Cash Account Cr. 15,000
(Being account opened with bank.) |
» 22 | Bank Account Dr. 8,000
Sales Account c. 8,000
(For Sold goods by cheque) |
a Purchase Account Dr. 6,000
Bank Account Cr. 6,000
(Purchased from Shafiq by cheque ) |
» 28 | Salaries Account Dr. 5,000
Cash Account Ce 5,000
(Salaries paid to the employees)
List of accounts
1, Cash Account 4, Purchase Account 7. Purchase Return Account
2. Capital Account 5. Creditor Account 8. Bank Account
3. Furniture Account 6. Purchase Account 9. Salaries Account
*T’ Format
Debit Cash Account Credit
| Date | Particulars |J/F| Taka | Date | Particulars | J/F | Taka |
2017 2017
March 1 | Capital A/c 1,00,000 | March 2 | Fumiture A/c 20,000
je 5 | Sales A/c 25,000 » 12 | Creditors A/c 10,000
» 18 | Bank Account 15,000
» 28 | Salaries A/c 5,000
» 31 | Balance C/D 75,000
April 1 Balance B/D 75,000
=
5

94 Accounting
Debit Capital Account Credit
| Date | Particulars [VF | Taka | Date | Particulars | VF | Take _|
2017 2017
March 31 | Balance C/D 1,00,000 | March 1 | Cash Account 1,00,000
1,00,000 1,00,000
April 1 | Balance B/D 1,00,000
Debit Furniture Account Credit
|__Date | Particulars | J/F | Taka | Date | Particulars | J/F | Taka _|
2017 2017
March 2 | Cash Account 20,000 | March 31 | Balance C/D 20,000
20,000 20,000
April 1 | Balance B/D 20,000
Debit Purchase Account Credit
|_ Date | Particulars | J/F| Taka | Date | Particulars | J/F | Taka _|
2017 2017
March 3 | Creditors Account 30,000 | March 31 | Balance C/D 36,000
» 25 | Bank Account 6,000
36,000 36,000
April 1 | Balance B/D 36,000
"Debit Creditors Account Credit
2017 2017
March 8 | Purchase Return A/c 2,000 March 3. Purchase Account 30,000
» 12 | Cash Account 10,000
» 3) | Balance C/D 18,000
30,000 30,000
April 1 Balance B/D 18,000
S
&

Ledger 95
Debit Sales Account Credit
|__Date | Particulars_| J/F| Taka | Date | Particulars | J/F | Taka _|

2017 2017
March 5 | Cash Account 25,000
March 31 _— Balance C/D » 22 | Bank A/c 8,000
33,000
April 1 | Balance B/D 33,000
Debit Purchase Return Account Credit
| Date | Particulars | J/F | Taka | Date | Particulars | J/F | Taka _
2017 2017
March 31 | Balance C/D 2,000 March 8 | Creditors A/c 2,000
2,000 | | [2000
April 1 | Balance B/D 2,000
Debit Bank Account Credit
|__Date _| Particulars | J/F | Taka | Date | Particulars | J/F | Taka
2017 2017
March 18 | Cash Account 15,000 | March 25 | Purchase A/c 6,000
» 22 | Sales A/c 8,000 » 31 | Balance C/D 17,000
23,000
April 1 | Balance B/D 17,000
Debit Salaries Account Credit
Date | Particulars | J/F | Taka | Date | Particulars | J/F | Taka _|
2017 2017
March 28 | Cash Account 5,000 March31 Balance C/D 5,000
5,000 5,000
April 1 | Balance B/D 5,000
=
a

%6 Accounting
‘Moving Balance’- Format
Cash Account Code No. of Account...
Date Particulars J/F Debit Taka Credit Taka Debt | Credit
2017
March 1 Capital Account 10,000 10,000
» 2 Fumiture Account 20,000 80,000
» § Purchase Account 25,000 1,05,000
* 12 Creditors Account 10,000 95,000
» 18 Bank Account 15,000 80,000
» 28 Salaries Account 5,000 75,000
Capital Account Code No. of Account...
a cia Credit Taka peg" Grd —
2017
Mich 1 CathAcoomn || | tomo | tomo
Furniture Account Code No of Account...
2017
March 2 | Cash Account 20,000 20,000
Purchase Account Code No. of Account.....
Date Particulars J/F Debit Taka Credit Taka —Debit_| Credit
2017
March 3 | Creditor Account 30,000 30,000
» 25 | Bank Account 6,000 36,000
Creditors Account Code No of Account....
Dae
[Particulars | /F | Debit Taka | Credit Taka | 51 Crea —]
2017
March 3 | Purchase Account 30,000 30,000
» 8 | Purchase Retum 2,000 28,000
on
» 12 | Cash Account 10,000 18,000 s

Ledger 597
Sales Account Code No of Ae
pa Paras [| Debi Tae | Ci Tala FBG
2017
March 5 Cash Account 25,000 25,000
» 22 Bank Account 8,000 33,000
Bank Account Code No of Account...
2017
March 18 Cash Account 15,000 15,000
» 22. Sales Account 8,000 23,000
» 25 Purchase Account 6,000 17,000
Purchase Retura Account Code No of Account...
Date Parcuiars | WF | Debit Taka | Credit Taka pag Cri
2017
March 8 Creditors Account 2,000
Salaries Account Code No. of Account...
2017
March 28 Cash Account 5,000 5,000
Post the following Transactions into the ledger account and balance the
accounts of Rumana Enterprise.
2017
August 1 Sold goods on credit tk.15,000
» 2. Loan has taken of tk.30,000
» 6 Deposited in the Bank tk.10,000
» 8 Purchased goods returned tk.2,000
» 12 Cash tk.6,000 received from debtor
» |S Withdrawn cash from Bank for personal use tk.1,000

98 Accounting
» 20 Goods purchased by cheque tk.4,000
» 25 Goods sold tk.12,000.

Divide into two groups, one follow ‘T’ and other ‘Moving Balance’ method.
Match the balances with one another.
General Ledger:
Cash Account, Capital Account, Purchase Account, Sales Account, Furniture
Account, Debtors Account, Creditors Account etc. are General Ledger. There are
several Debtors & Creditors in a business. Among the all-general ledgers, only
the Debtors & Creditors accounts are also known as Control Account. Because
both debtors & creditors account are the summation of all debtors & all
creditors.

Subsidiary Ledger:
Individual account is opened for each debtor and each creditor outside general
ledger. Thus, the individual amount due from debtor & due to creditors can be
ascertained easily. The account that is prepared for each debtor & creditors are
called Subsidiary Ledger.

CeentCont Lai
aleBaal lel lea) suteiciry veces: “bal la@e] (ual laa
Relation between Control and Subsidiary Ledger
Special Journal & Related Ledger Preparation
We have got the idea about all Special Journals in the chapter- ‘Journal’. Here
the procedure of preparing General and Subsidiary ledgers from special
journals are shown -
ba
§

Ledger 99
Purchase Journal and Related Ledgers
Momotaj Enterprise’s
Purchase Journal
Account Credited Condition Purchase A/c Dr.
Creditors A/c Cr.
2017
June 3 | Rajib stores 2/10, net 30 173 17,600 —
» 10 | Rakhi Traders 10, net 20 174 12,300 =r
» 25 | Haider Enterprise | 3/5, net 15 175 10,500
40,400
General Ledger
Purchase Account Code No Cs Account...
June 30_| Creditors A/c 40,400 40,400
Creditors Account Code Re of Account...
Particulars | JF [Debit Taka Credit Takal Balance]
~~ lars | BF [Debit Teka [Credit Toke) — el Code]
sines0 |Purtuse ve | | | aooo|_ | ana
Subsidiary Ledger
Rajib Stores Code No of Account...
Date Particulars | J/F Debit Taka Credit Taka|___— Balance
2017
ime} |rwcwene | | | no | | no
Rakhi Traders Code No of Account...
Date Particulars  J/F Debit Taka Credit Taka
June 10 Puciuseve | | | 12300) ——|_ 12300)
Haider Enterprise Code No of Account.....
i i i | __—s&Balance |
— Particulars J/F \Debit Taka Credit Taka ee
June 25 Purchase A/c 10 wl | 10,500 ;
se The posting is made to the subsidiary ledger from special journal everyday
® and to the general ledger at the end of week/ month.

100 Accounting
Sales Journal and Related ledgers
Shahjahan and Sons’ Sales Journal
Bil ell 1
Sales Account Cr.
2017
Aug. 3 | Kajol Enterprise 335 25,560 1
» 10 | Monika Enterprise 336 17,240 an
» 25 | Bimol Brothers 337 13,300
46,000
General Ledger
Sales Account Code No of Account...
“ Particulars © J/F Debit (Credit T: =
17
Aug. 31 |CredisAle | |__| s6o00| | _6,000,
Debtors Account Code No of Account.....
Date | Particulars WF )Debit TakalCredit Takal — Balance —-—
J
Aug. 3
Subsidiary Ledger
Kajol Enterprise Code No of hevonst...
| Date Particulars J/F Debit Taka Credit Taka op Palanes
[up [Ses Accom | | 254001 | 540
Aug. 3 _| Sales Account
Monika Enterprise Code No of Accomm...
Date Particulars JF Debit Taka Credit Taka pep ee a
2017
Aug 10 | Sues Accom | | 1720 |p|
Bimol Brothers _Code No of poet
Date Particulars JF Debit Taka Credit Taka — : ' d =
2017
| Aig 25 Sales Account 30| 3300)
x
a

Ledger 101
Purchase returns Journal and related ledger
Bakshi Electronic Store’s Purchase Return Journal
oe [ome [DE] eee ae |
Note No. Purchase Return A/c Cr.
2017
Jan. 3 Sayed and Brothers 57 13,910
a Bakkar and Sons 58 17,240
« @ Babu Enterprise 59 7,450
38,600
General Ledger
Purchase Return Account
Code No of Account...
Taka Taka ["Debit__| Credit _|
Jan. 31 | Creditors Account 38,600 38,600
Creditors Account Code No of Account...
Date Particulars JF Debit Credit
Teka Taka |" Debit_| Credit
2017
inst [puctowtewnne | | see] | seo
Subsidiary Ledger
Sayed and Brothers
Code No of Account.....
Date Particulars JE Debit Credit Balance
Take | Teka |" Debt
2017
sat | purcaseneumae | | 3910] | i390]
Bakkar and Sons
Code No of Account.....
Date Pariculars UF [Debit | Credit
Taka Taka [| Debit__[ Credit __|
= Jan. 12 | Purchase Return A/c 17,240 17,240
5
‘Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-13

102 Accounting
Babu Enterprise
Code No of Account...
Date Particulars JF Debit Credit Balance
Taka Taka | Debit | __ Credit
2017
jan 23 PurhuseRetwmAe | | _7450|_——|_—_740 |
Sales Return Journal and Related ledgers
Alom Trader's Sales Return Journal
Oa Riel Kel ed ==
Debtors Account Cr.
2017
May 2 Rashed and Co. 10,350
» 215 Parvez Stores 8,650
» 27 Runa Enterprise 4,500
| 23,500
General Ledger
Sales Return Account Code No of Account.....
Dute Particulars  ”* Debit Taka Credit Taka
2017
[stays | Debwors Accom | | —25500| | assoo|
Debtors Account Code No of Account...
Date Particulars JF Debit Taka Credit Taka
_Debit | Credit _|
2017
Salesreumae | | | _—_assw| | _—_23500,
Subsidiary Ledger
: ; ; Rashed and Co. Code No of Account...
Date Particulars JF | Debit Credit
Taka | Taka [“Debit_[Credit_|
May 2 | Sales Return A/c
7 ___ Parvez Store Code No of Account.....
Date Particulars JE Debit Credit | Balance
Taka __Taka [Debit | Credit_|
2017
|Mavts [Setrroumac | | | ago] | gaan |
nn

Ledger 103
i i i Balance
Date Particulars J/F Debit Taka | Credit Taka cer 35 Hance
2017
‘siay27 | solesReumac | | asoo| | _asa0
Verifying arithmetical accuracy by Ledger balances
Equal amount of debit and credit is posted for each transaction. Being equal of
total debit & total credit balance indicate the arithmetical accuracy of accounts
On July 01, 2017 Mr. Rakib started a business named ‘Rakib Traders’ with cash
tk.30,000 and goods worth tk.15, 000. Other transactions were-
July 2 Sold goods for cash tk.20,000.
- 3 Furniture Purchased tk. 5,000.
- 5  Tk.3000 deposited i to Bank.
‘* 10 Goods purchased tk.7,000.
= 15 Withdrawn tk.1,000.
» 20. Salaries Paid to the employees tk. 2000.
Table of Accounts
1. Cash Account 4. Sales Account 7. Drawings Account
2. Purchase Account 5. Furmiture Account 8. Salaries Account
3. Capital Account 6. Bank Account
General Ledger
Cash Account Code No of Account.....
_ ee
2017
July 1 Capital Account 30,000 30,000
wx 2 Sales Account 20,000 50,000
« 3 Furniture Account 5,000 45,000
_ 2 Bank Account 3,000 42,000
» 10 Purchase Account 7,000 35,000
15 Drawings Account 1,000 34,000
5

104 Accounting
Purchase Account Code No of Account.....
Debit Taka Credit Taka Groth
2017
» 10 | Cash Account 7,000 22,000
Capital Account Code No of Account.....
fate | Particulars | J/F | Debit Taka Credit Taka[___—__ Balance
ebii ed
2017
July1 | Cash Account 30,000
Purchase Account 15,000 45,000
Sales Account Code No of Account...
| Dae | Parcs [AF | Debit Taka | Chott Taka sa Cred —
Debit Cred
july? | CashAccomt | | 2900
July2 _| Cash Account 20,000 20,000
Furniture Account Code No of Account..
— Particulars | JF | Debit Taka Credit Taka |_ Balance]
Debit Credit
=! | som! | som
July3___ Cash Account 5,000 5,000
Drawings Account Code No of Account..
Particulars J/F Debit Taka | Credit Takal__ Balance __
miyts |CadhAccum | | 1a] | s00|
July 15_| Cash Account 1,000 1,000
Bank Account Code No of Account.....
" Particulars VF | Debit Taka | Credit Taka Ballance
1
» 20 | Salaries A/c 000 1,000
Salaries Account Code No of Account...
; Debit Taka Credit Takal_ Balance]
| oo | ‘ Debit Credit
1
[ uly20 [Bank Accom | | 2000| | 2000] |
Ns

Ledger 105
Arithmetical accuracy of accounts can be verified with the balances of ledger
by preparing Trial Balance. Trial Balance is prepared with balances of above
ledgers. Trial balance
31 July 2017
Account Name L/F  DebitTaka Credit Taka
1 Bank Account 34,000
2 Purchase Account 22,000
3 Capital Account -- 45,000
= Sales Account -- 20,000
5 Furniture Account 5,000
6 Drawings Account 1,000
7 Bank Account 1,000
8 Salaries Account 2,000
800 | 0
As the total debit balance tk. 65,000 is equal to total credit balance, it is easy
to say accounts recorded correctly.
N. B. Detail discussion on Trial Balance have mentioned in the chapter 9.
Exercise
Multiple-choice Questions
1. From which one we can have idea of total income, expenses, assets & liabilities of
business?
a) General Journal b) Special Journal
c) General Ledger d) Subsidiary Ledger
2. What ledger is prepared separately for Debtors & Creditors ?
a) General Ledger b) United Ledger
c) Subsidiary Ledger d) Control Ledger
3. Account’s Ledger is-
i) Primary book _ii) Final book iii) Permanent book
Which one is correct of the following?
aji&ii bi &iii ¢) ii & iii d) i, ii & ii
4. Which balance does always indicate by expense account ?
a)Debit b)Credit — c) Opening —_d) Closing
Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-14

106 Accounting
5. By following the moving balance method to prepare ledger —
i) Possible to know the total amount of debit posting
ii) Possible to know the total amount of credit posting
iii) Balance of account can be known regularly
Which one is correct of the following?
a)i &ii b)i & iii c)ii& iii d)i, ii & iii
6. If total debit side of a account is greater than the total of credit side,
Which balance will be disclosed ?
a) Income b) Liabilities c) Debit  d) Credit
7. What does C/D used in ledger mean?
a) Carried forward b) Carried down
c) Come to down d) Come from back
8. Debit balance of ledger indicates-
i) Asset ii) Expense iii) Income
Which one is correct of the following?
ai &ii bikiii c)i iii d)i, ii &iii
9. Subsidiary ledger relate to-
i) Debtor account ii) Creditors account _ iii) Bank account
Which one is correct of the following?
ai &ii bi&iii c)iii d)i,ii &iii
10. For preparing ledger-
i) Analyzing transaction compulsory
ii) Journalizing compulsory .
iii) Journalizing helpful
Which one is correct of the following?
ai &ii bikiii c)\ikiii d)i, i &iii
11. Which one is prepared with ledger balances?
a) Cash book b) Accounts receivable
c) Accounts payable d) Trial balance
2
a

Ledger 107
Considering the following, answer the question no. 12,13 and 14:
Cash Account Account code no....
Date | Accountde [ur | Oe | ee pee cea
2017
June 01 | Balance B/D 10,000
June 13 | Furniture A/c 2,000
June 18 | Purchase A/c
June 30 | Sales A/c 8,000
12. Which one is the general journal for June 13?
a) Furniture account Debit b) Furniture account Debit
Cash account Credit Purchase account Credit
c) Cash account Debit d) Furniture account Debit
Furniture account Credit Sales account Credit
13. What is the closing balance of Cash account?
a) tk.10,000 = b) tk.12,000 —__c) tk.15,000 d) tk.18,000
14. What is revealed from the account of the cash transaction in June, that is
i) Total cash received tk.10,000
ii) Total cash payment tk.5,000
iii) Closing cash in hand tk.5,000
Which one is correct of the following?
a)i&ii b) iii chit iti = d) i, ii & iii
Creative Questions:
1. Few transactions of 'Niramoy Pharma' situated in Shahabag of Dhaka
during January 2017 mentioned below :
January 1 Started business with Cash tk.55,000, Computer tk.50,000 and
Saleable Medicine worth tk.30,000.
January 3 Medicine bought from Jahan Drugs tk.80,000.
January 7 Sale of old Printer machine for tk.3,200
January 18 Expired medicine returned to Jahan Drugs tk.6,000
co January 27 Sold medicine in cash tk.1,40,000
S
La)

108 Accounting
a) Calculate opening capital considering mentioned information..
b) Give Journal entries for the transactions from January 3 to 27.
c) Prepare Cash Account, Office Equipment Account, Purchase Account
& Creditors Account using above transactions.
1. Arman Traders is a wholesaler business organization of grocery goods.
Few transactions of September 2017 are mentioned below-
Sep. 01 Purchased from Farhaan Brothers; 50 bales minicate rice at tk.2,500
each bale (50 kg. rice in a bale). Trade discount @3%. Invoice no. 123.
Sep. 05 Purchased from Irfaan Traders; 200 kg. pulses at tk.105 per kg.
Trade discount 5%. Invoice no.432.
Sep. 12 5 bales rice returned to Farhaan Brothers due to inferior quality.
Sep. 18 20 kg. pulses returned to Irfaan Traders for not being sample.
a) Prepare a purchase Journal from the above transactions.
b) Prepare the general ledger accounts considering the above
transactions.
c) Prepare the subsidiary ledger accounts considering the above
transactions.
3. The following account collected from Masud Enterprise's accounts book:
Cash Account
Debit Account code no... Credit
| Date | Particulars |W/F| Taka | Date | Particulars | VF | Taka _|
2017 2017
Jan. 01 | Balance B/D 20,000 | Jan. 02 | Bank account 22,000
Jan. 17 | Sales account 17,000 | Jan. 15 | Salary account 3,000
Jan. 20 | Drawings account 1,000
a) Determine the balance of cash account of Masud Enterprise.
b) Show the journal entries for the month of January 2017 considering
the above account of Masud Enterprise.
c) Prepare Sales account, Bank account, Salary account, and Drawings
account following moving balance method.
a
g

Ledger 109
4. Mr. Borua is a businessman. He has a nursery named ‘Borua Nursery’ at
Ashuliya of Savar. He produces different types of sapling of flowers, fruits,
and medicated trees. On July 2017 the following transactions occurred in
his business :
July 05 Trees and seeds purchased from Rahim & Sons tk.25,000.
July 10 Sold to Rashed & Co in cash tk.37,000.
July 19 Trees returned tk.2,500.
July 30 Salary paid to employee tk.4,500.
July 31 Advertisement expense tk.1,500.
a) Record the transactions of Borua Nursery dated July 05 and 10 in Journal.
b) Determine the balance of Rahim & Sons account and Cash account using
‘T’ ledger format.
c) Prepare Purchase account, Sales account, Salary account and
Advertisement account using ‘Moving Balance’ ledger format.
=
&

Chapter Eight
Cash Book
Business and cash are closely related to each other. In every sphere of business,
cash is essentially required. Buying and selling of assets & goods, collection &
payments of debts, receipts of income & payments of expenses including all
other activities the supply of cash and its proper management is significantly
important. Cashbook is prepared based on the nature and size of the business,
considering the size and safety of the business, bank plays a supporting role
during cash transactions. It is essentially needed to know the transactions done
through bank and the bank balance.
sm x. a Ae” | a ee
YON EMS Cx 0 tit
VA Ay wile SR oy ie
Wa Ye ‘Ate oe “ ———
AOS FFE,
4 XG Ney: 2
v
Picture : Different types of Cash
At the end of this chapter, we will be able to-
e explain the concept of cash book and its importance
@ prepare various types of cashbook and draw balance
© prepare contra entry
e cash receipt journal and cash payment journal
¢ record cash discounts
« transfer the balances of cashbook to ledger properly
e have idea about bank statement
e understand the reason behind the differences between the balances of
bank statement and cash book §

Cash Book tl
Concept of Cash Book:

Everyday numerous transactions take place in business. We can categorize
transactions based on a fixed criterion. The criterion is cash. Either there is an
involvement of cash with transactions or not. The book where cash received &
paid transactions are recorded together is called cash book. Cash book is the
primary book of accounts, one of the major branches of journal.

e Goods sold for cash tk.20,000

¢ Goods purchased in cash tk. 10,000

e Furniture purchased in cash tk.5,000

e Received cash from debtors tk.12,000

e Withdrawn cash from business by the owner tk.3,000

e Employees salary paid in cash tk.5,000

e The amount of bill paid in cash tk.4,000.

Features:
Cash is the operating power of business. Without the proper management of
cash the normal activities of business are hampered-

* For preparing cash book a particular table/proforma is followed. All
the receipts are recorded in the debit side while the payments in the
credit side.

*® Though the cash book is known as the primary book of accounts, it acts
asa permanent book.

e It can be ascertained from the cash book that how much cash have
been received and paid against different sources in a particular period.

* tis possible to know the cash balance by identifying the difference
between cash received & cash paid.

* The chances of cash stolen, forgery, wastage and mistake in
recording reduce significantly.

© Itis possible to have full control over cash reserve,

Importance of Cash Book

The proper recording of cash transactions helps maintaining the movement of

the business as well as helpful in taking proper decision. We can know the total
» Amount of cash receipts and payments, cash balance of a particular time, amount
3 of total cash purchase and sale. Whether the amount of cash is sufficient to

2 Accounting
purchase asset, to pay creditors and regular expenses of the business or not. If
not then cash book helps in ascertaining the probable means to collect. It is
possible to identify and rectify the mistakes and anomalies by comparing the
cash balance with the actual cash in hand. Preparing particular type of cash
book, it is also possible to know the bank transactions and bank balance.
Activity: What kind of other benefits can we get through preparing cash book?
Classification of Cash Book
Various types of cash books are seen in the business. The right type of
book is selected depending on the nature and size of the business. Cash books
being used for a long time are of four types.
1. Single Column Cash Book
2. Double Column Cash Book
3. Treble Column Cash Book
4. Petty Cash Book
Now a days some organizations are preparing following journal to calculate
cash receipts and cash payments separately instead of traditional cash book:
1. Cash Receipt Journal
2. Cash Payment Journal
Students need to have a clear concept about each of the cash book. So each class
and its preparation are described below:
Single Column Cash Book
Comparatively business of small size prepares single column cash book.
Organizations that don't deal with bank rather prefer cash transactions, keep
single column cash book. Since transactions through bank are safe, the number
of these organizations and keeping accounts under single column cash book is
gradually decreasing.
Format of Single Column Cash Book
Debit Credit
, Vv. | L/ | Amount Vv. | L/ | Amount
owe | revs fon ff San foe] Pome fe Lf Te
Note: V. No. - Voucher Number and L/F — Ledger Folio. 3

Cash Book m3
The format of a single column cash book is like the- 'T' format of a ledger. The
table is divided into Debit and Credit where the receipts are recorded into the
debit side while the payments are recorded into the credit side. Single column
cash book is prepared with 10 columns where debit and credit sides have 5
columns each, Single column cash book always denotes debit balance because
the payments cannot be more than the receipts but can be equal. The procedure
of determining the balance is similar to the procedure of ‘T’ format of a ledger.
During the settlement of debts and credits if any discount is allowed or received
it is recorded in journal proper not in a single column cash book.
Preparing Single Column Cash Book
Transactions of Sharif Traders during June 2017 are the following-
June 1 Opening cash in hand tk. 2,500
° 2 Additional capital brought in tk. 10,000.
” 4 Purchased goods tn cash tk.7,000.
" 6 Goods sold to Jamal for cash tk.8,000.
- 10 Took loan from Alam tk.15,000
- 15 Rent paid in advance tk.4,000
- 20 Received from debtor tk.6,000
= 22 Withdrawn cash by the proprietor tk.1,000
- 25 Equipment purchased tk.9,000
= 30 Salary paid to Mamun tk.3,000
Prepare a Single Column Cash Book from the above transactions -
ce Sharif Traders’s Single Column Cash Book een
po | twee tte] me | oe | em [|
~ 2 | Capital Ac 10,000 |, 15 | Prepaid remt Ajc 4.000
~ 6 | Sales Ave 4000 | ,, 22 | Denwings Aic 1,000
. 10 | Alam’s loan A‘c 13,000 |, 25 | Equipmenes Ave 9,000
= 20 | Debtors A‘c 6000]. 30 | Salaries A’c 3,000
- Balace CD 17,500
Jul |_| Balance WD PTS | —
Activity: On Ist June 2017 Abu Taleb Sarker started a business named Taleb
Enterprise with a capital of Tk.20,000. His transactions for the month were -
June 1 —- Furniture purchased tk.5,000
» 3. Goods purchased on credit tk.8,000
» 4 Goods sold to Azad for cash tk.6,000
‘Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-1$

114 Accounting
June 7 Goods purchased tk.4,000

» 9 Cash paid to creditor tk.3,000

» ll Advertisement expenses paid tk.2,000

» 16 Stationary purchased tk.500,

» 26 Commission received tk.1,000

» 28 Goods sold tk.7,000

Prepare a Single Column Cash Book from the following transactions.
Double Column Cash Book
Organizations that deal with both cash as well as bank transactions prepare
double column cash book. The double column cash book is more applicable and
provide much information compared to a single column cash book. Apart from
receipts and payments done in cash, the increase or decrease of cash in bank as
well as bank balance can be obtained from a double column cash book.
Format of Double Column Cash Book
Debit Credit
= eee

column cash book.

If transactions increase the cash of bank, it is to be recorded into the bank
column of debit side while decrease of the same will be recorded into the bank
column of the credit side. If cheque received for goods sold or from debtors, it
will be treated as a crossed cheque because a cheque issued in favour of the
business is never treated as a bearer or an open cheque. Bank column can exhibit
either debit or credit balance. Debit balance indicates bank deposit and credit
balance indicates bank overdraft Before preparing a double column cashbook,
we need to know the following things:
Contra Entry
The transactions that influence both the cash as well as the bank account are
known as contra entry. Cash and bank both denote asset. So for a fixed 2
transaction if one account is debited the other account must be credited. =

Cash Book ns
After giving posting to the both sides of Cash book the letter - 'C' may be written
beside the name of both accounts to indentify.
Rules related to record transactions in double and treble column cash book.
Cash deposited into the Bank
Debit Credit
: Vv. | L | Cash | Bank Vv. | L | Cash | Bank
owe] resis | no | | te | ma] me Poms || |e |
| [cme | TL fakery | [| |
Withdrawn cash from Bank for business purpose
Debit Credit
; Vv. | L | Cash | Bank Vv. | L | Cash | Bank
ome nese [|e ae |e Pome | Le || re
| [Bokaro] | | * {  [ festaeol | | | |
Deposited cheque Dishonored
Debit Credit
Pot ETT TT fee
Issued cheque dishonored
Debit Credit
fom | mre [lee a] om | ome le |
2 AD OD
Interest allowed by the bank
Debit Credit
joe] mee [lee] em] mm [le |
sLimer | tt te} | tT
Ss received Ac v
™

116 Accounting
Interest & Charges charged by the Bank
Debit Credit
‘ L | Cash v. | L | Cash | Bank
ome | mie |e |S | Pam] rome LS | | S|
Bank Interest paid A/c ¥
Bank Charge A/c v
Preparing Double Column Cash Book
During the month of November 2017 the following transactions took place in
Chowdhury & Sons:
Nov. 1 Cash in hand tk.5,000 and Cash at Bank tk. 3000.
* 2 Goods purchased by cheque tk. 2000.
| Received cheque from debtor tk. 6000.
" 6 Purchased IPS for office tk. 5000,
- 8 Old furniture sold tk. 9000.
: 12. Cheque received from Rajib on selling of goods tk.7,000.
ad 15 Withdrawn cash from Bank for personal use tk. 2000.
» 20 Drawings from Bank tk.5,000.
"23. Received from Mehzabin tk. 3000
~ 25 Cash paid to Anwar tk. 3000
» 28 Interest allowed by Bank tk. 300
"30 Bank charged tk. 200
Prepare a Double Column Cash Book from the above transactions.
Solution
Chowdury & Sons Double Column Cash Book
Deda Credit
PO | twee [rele] ee | om | mem tele | | |
0
sort | favor AD No.2 | rete At EE
» 4 | Debtors Alc 6000 |. 6 | Office Equipment Alc 5,000
» 8 | Feemiture Ae 9,000 15 | Drawings Alc 2,000
» 12 | Sales Ale 700 |, 20 | Casbac(C) 5,000
» 20 | Bank A&(C) 5,000 » B | AmwarAe 3,000
» 2B | Mebjabin Alc 3,000 30 | Bask charge Alc 200
» 2% | Bank interest 300. |, 30 | Balance C/D 14,000 | 7,100
rm oli
a9

Cash Book 7
Activity: Nargis & Bros.is a retailer. During the month of November
2017 following transactions took place-

Nov. 1 Cash in hand tk. 7,000 and cash at Bank tk. 5,000.

a 2 Goods purchased by cheque tk. 4,000.

ms a Received a cheque from sale of goods tk.6,000

” 7 Withdraw from Bank tk.3,000.

> 10 Cash from Bills receivable received by Bank tk.2,000.

= 13 Cheque received from debtor Sayed tk.8,000.

= 20 Purchased furniture in cash tk.3,000 and tk. 2,000 in cheque,
i 26 Withdraw by the proprietor tk.1,500.

P 30 Bank allowed Interest tk. 500.

Record the transactions in the double column Cash Book and calculate
the amount of cash & bank balance at the last date of the month.

Treble Column Cash Book
Treble column cash book is prepared for transactions with cash and bank along
with mitigating debts and credits. We can know about cash balance, bank
balance, total discount allowed and total discount received. For collecting the
amount of goods sold on credit quickly, the seller allows the buyer such kind of
discount, This discount is known as cash discount. Discount received is an
income for the buyer while discount allowed is an expense for the seller.

Format of Treble Column Cash Book

Debit Credit

PAPEL Pere

There are total fourteen columns where debit and credit sides having 7 columns

each in both side of a treble column cash book. Cash and bank columns are just

like the double column cash book for recording and ascertaining balances. The

discount columns on either sides of a cash book are recorded separately, but the
% difference is not obtained. Discount during the time of buying and selling, that
® is trade discount is not at all recorded.

118 Accounting
Preparing Treble Column Cash Book
During the month of March 2017 following transactions took place in Salina
Traders:
March 1 Cash in hand tk.18,000; Bank overdraft tk. 3,000
- 3 Deposited in the Bank tk. 5,000.
- 6 Received cash tk.6,800 from Sayem in full settlement of debt
tk. 7,000.
- 10 A cheque received from Sumi and discount allowed tk. 100.
” 14 Withdrawn cash from business for personal use tk.500.
ia 16 Goods sold for cash tk. 12,000.
- 18 Goods purchased of tk. 8,000 at a discount of 5%.
- 20 Bank paid the amount of notes payable tk.2,000.
- 24 Cheque received from Arif tk.6,500 and discount allowed
tk.500
A 30 Interest charged by the Bank tk.400
From the above information, prepare a Treble Column Cash Book.
=
a

Cash Book H9
Ocean
a
ae{ 8]
ee
Es ee
<3
z <3] .
rE fijdiaal
FS moo estegea
a: mE peu ke KS
*Hae] 8 BLE
cee
4#/ 8 &
pe
eet
2 cS
F ELIE i
= a- 7m Oo eS -

120 Accounting
Activity: Record the following transactions during July 2017 in Amob Trader's
Treble Column Cash Book.

July 1 Cash in Hand tk. 4,000 & Cash at Bank tk. 5,000

" 4 Withdraw from Bank tk. 3,000,

"  § Received tk.2,800 from Rotan stores and allowed discount tk. 200.

“ 7 Goods purchased from Tazul Islam for cash tk. 6,000 at a discount of 10%,
" 12 Ata discount of 5%, the debt of tk. 4,000 is fully settled,

“ 15 Cheque received from selling of goods tk, 8,000

" 20 Tk. 7,200 received from Salehin in full settlement of his debt tk. 7,500.
“ 28 Salaries paid in cash tk. 2,000 and cheque tk. 1,000,

" 30 Rent Obtain from tenant tk. 2,000,

Illustration-01

Transactions of M/S Quamrul Traders in May 2017 were-

May 2 Cash in Hand tk. 9,300

‘ 3 Received from Shamim tk, 2,000.

ve 4 Withdraw from business for personal requirement tk. 3,500.

is 6 Repair cost paid for old Furniture tk. 1,500.

‘5 10 Purchased from Zakir for cash tk. 4,000.

‘ 16 Interest received of investment tk, 500,

ms 20 Goods sold tk.6,000.

” 25, Salary paid tk.3,000,

= 28 Realized tk.1,200 against Bills receivable & paid tk. 800 for
Bills payable.

Prepare Single Colum Cash Book from the above transactions.

Solution M/S Quamrul Trader’s Single Column Cash Book
Debit Credit

ee ee ce ed
Nay2 | Batance BD Nays | Drawings Al
« 3) | Shamim Ave 200), 6 Repair Ale 1,500
» = §6 | Eoterest of investment sm}, 10 Purchase A‘c 4,000
» 20 | SalesAte 6.000 |, 25 | Salaries Ac 3,000
oi ae Note receivable Alc 1200 |, 2 Note payable A/c #00

» 3) | Balance CD 6,200
June 1_| Balance BD | 6200 | |

Cash Book 121
Double Colum Cash Book
Illustration-02
Prepare Double Column Cash book of Jahid & Sons in April 2017-
April 1 Cash in hand tk. 12,000 and Bank overdraft tk. 3500
* 2 Tk.4,000 deposited to Bank.
» $ Goods sold and received cash tk. 2,500 and cheque tk. 1,500.
"8 Goods bought from Rajib for tk. 3,000 paying tk. 2,000.
- 14. Withdraw from business for personal use tk.1,000.
» 19 Issued cheque to Razib tk. 1,000
” 23 ~— Received from Mamun tk. 5,000
” 24 Paid to Musum tk. 5,000
» 25 Bank charge debited tk.300.
Solution:
Jahid & Sons’ Double Column Cash Book
Debit Credit
[Pe | neers | te | Se | | | remem | Le | Se | |
“RUE 2:
Cash Ave (C) 4000 |, 2 | Bank Alc (C) 4,000
Sales A/c 2,500 1,500 | ,, 8 | Purchase A/c 2,000
Mazmun Ale $,000 » M4 | Drawings Ac 1,000
» 19 | Rajib Ale 1,000
» 2 | Masum Ale $,000
25 | Bank charge A/c 300
» 30 | Balaxe CD 7,500 700
119.500 | __$.500 | [19,00 | _$.500 |
tus sd [700 | 100 _| | |
Treble Column Cash Book
Illustration - 03
Prepare a Treble Column Cash Book of Ali & Bros.from the following
transactions for March 2017:
March 1 Cash in hand Tk. 9,300 and Bank Credit balance tk. 2,700.
» § Ashraf Traders deposited cash in the Bank tk. 5,000.
» 7 Withdraw cash from bank for personal use tk. 2,000.
» 9 Received a cheque from Arafat Traders tk.6,300 in full settlement of tk.6,500.
» 13 Goods purchased for cash tk.2,000 and by cheque tk.1,000,
» 19 Paid creditor a cheque of tk.2,000 and discount received tk. 200.
» 21 Proprietor deposited into bank personally tk.10,000.
» 24 Cheque received on Feb. 9 dishonored by the bank.
» 27 Salaries paid tk.3,000 and rent paid by the cheque tk.6,000,
» 28 Bank Interest charged tk. 400
Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-16

122 Accounting
TOLL.
a ee
eep ke
A
af
tlaigilesl
al! itil;
g]h Mccetsats
& sg" SSARKRAR

“tne ae
sele
Ce) a
ES
Ce)
2
RF j

Cash Book 123

Cash Receipt Journal

All cash & cash equivalent received in transactions record in Cash Receipt

Journal to know the total cash inflow of a specific period of time. Cash

equivalent means cash & any cheque or ATM card used in transaction. The Cash

Receipts Journal is made in such a way that it’s easy to understand each source

of cash received.

Cash Receipt Journal
Account Cash | Discount | Sales | Debtors Sones
Credited Debit | Debit | Credit | Credit Credit

a ss es es es

Date : The date when receiving of cash will occur.

Account Credited : When debts will be received from the debtors, then the
name(s) of the debtor(s), and when there will be income
from irregular source(s) the name(s) of that item(s) will be:
recorded.

Debit:

1. Cash : In this column, the total amount of cash receipts (Cash
or cheque) will be recorded.

2. Discount : If discount is allowed receiving from debtors, the amount
of discount will be recorded in this column.

Credit:

1. Sales : Goods if sold in cash are recorded in this column.

2. Debtors : The total amount of cash received from debtors &
discount allowed, its summation is recorded in this column.

3. Other Accounts : Except from goods sold in cash and received from debtors
the other receipts are recorded in this column.

Preparing Cash Receipt Journal

The following receipts are occurred in May 2017 in Shahjahan & Co.

May 3 Goods sold for cash tk.10,000.

» 5 Cash received from Shafiq Traders tk.3,000.

» 10 Brought extra capital of tk.5,000.
o ” 15 Received tk. 3,800 from Zaman & Sons in full settlement of his debt of tk. 4,000
& » 20 Sold old furniture tk.1,000

124 Accounting
Shahjahan & Company’s Cash Receipt Journal
| Gece [| ss [eae] oa | a Pa
Credited Debit Debit Credit Credit Credit
2017
May 3 10,000 10,000

» 5 |Shafiq Traders 3,000 3,000

» 10 |Capital 5,000 5,000

» 15 | Zaman & Sons 3,800 4,000

» 20 | Furniture 1,000 1,000

| | CT 22,800 | 200 | 10,000 | 7,000 | 6,000 _|
Observing the above cash receipt journal, the total Debit amount (22,800 +
200)=23,000 and the total Credit amount (10,000 + 7,000 + 6,000)=23,000.
These two totals have to be equaled always.
Cash Payment Journal
All cash & cash equivalent payment in transactions record in Cash Receipt
Journal to know the total cash inflow of a specific period of time.
Cash Payment Journal (Format)
Cheque | Debit Purchase | Creditor | O'S | Discount | Cash
No. Account Debit Debit Debit Credit | Credit
a ee ee ee ee
Date : The date on which transaction will occur is recorded.
Cheque No : If payment is made through cheque then cheque
no. is recorded in this column.
Debit Account Item : If creditor is paid its name and while payment made to
other party, their names will be recorded in this column.
Debit:

1, Purchase : Goods purchased in cash are recorded in this column.

2. Creditors : Payments made to creditors and discount received
from them its sum is recorded in this column.

3. Other Accounts : Except goods purchase in cash and payments made
to creditors, the other items that relates to cash
payments are recorded in this column.

Credit:

1. Discount received : During the time of payments made to creditors, the

amount of discount received is recorded in this column.

2. Cash : All cash or cheque payments are recorded in this column.

Ls)
g

Cash Book 5
Withdrawn from bank for business and money deposited into bank from
business, both these transactions will not be recorded in cash receipt and cash
payment journal because these transaction keep cash liquidity unchanged. Bank
interest allowed will be recorded in cash receipt journal and interest on bank
overdraft and bank charges in cash payment journal.
Preparing Cash Payment Journal
Following cash payment transactions are of Moushumi Enterprise for July 2017:
July 2. Goods purchased for cash tk, 5,000.
» 5 Paid to Milon Traders tk. 3,000 by cheque no.68943
» 8 Furniture Purchased tk. 4,000.
» 15 Interest paid on loan tk, 500.
» 20 Tk. 2,800 paid to Runa and received discount tk. 200.
Moushumi Enterprise’s Cash Payment Journal
me S| cae [P| Moa | So” |e | Tea | oc
2017
~ 5 | 689432 | Milon Traders 3,000 3,000
- Furnchare 4,000
ails interest ap loan 500
» 20 Runa 3,000 2,800
fp T5900 |g 00 | 500 | 00,300 |
As like the Cash receipt journal, total debit & total credit amount of Cash
payment journal will be always equal. In the above Cash payment journal Total
Debit (4,500 + 6,000 + 5,000)=15,500 and Total Credit (200 + 15,300)=15,500.
Activity : Prepare Cash Payment Journal from the following transactions
of Sohrab Traders for October 2017
Oct. 1 Goods Purchased by cash tk. 9, 000
» 4 Paid Khalid and sons tk. 6,500
» 7 Stationary purchased tk. 500
” 10 Paid Rasel tk.5,300 and received discount tk.200
” 16 Purchased goods from Safi enterprise tk.14,000
” 26 Salaries paid to the employees tk.4,500
% ” 30 Withdraw cash tk. 2,000 by the owner
=» 30 Rent received from tenant tk.2,000.

126 Accounting
Total Cash Receipt & Total Cash Payment transfer of Ledger:
By preparing Cash Receipt Journal and Cash Payment Journal we come to know
the total amount of cash receipts and cash payments. Cash Book is prepared for
ascertaining the cash balance of a certain time. Opening cash balance of a certain
time is added to the cash receipts while the cash payments are deducted from it
to ascertain the closing cash balance.
Cash Receipt Journal
Account Credited . ; - ‘
OS | Asomentt | Same | Da | Da Gait | ee | Mt
2017
May 2 | Khadija Stores 20,000 20,000
» 7 | Shawon Traders 7,500 500 8,000
» 10 | Int. on Investment 1,000 1,000
» 19 | Shaymol 8,000 8,000
» 26 | Jamal 6,000 6,000
0 501,000 [285000 | 000
Cash Payment Journal
Account Purchase | Accounts . Discount | Cash
| Dae [On| Deane (S| Pee | ae | a | "eae | cr |
2017
May 2 Fumiture 4,000 4,000
» 3 Purchase 5,000 5,000
ae Masum Stores 3,800 3,500
» 25 Salaries 2,000 2,000
« 2 Drawings 1,000 1,000
| 5,000 | 3,800 | 7,000 | 300 | 15,5004
SS |
Cash Account Code no. Stace
Date Particulars
2017
May 1 Balance b/d 7,500
» 31 Total Credit Accounts 42,500 50,000
» 31 Total Debit Accounts 15,500 34,500
=
&

Cash Book 127
Bank Account related Transactions
Innumerable transactions take place in today's business. Transactions made
through cash are very risky. Transactions mitigated through bank are very safe.
For making transactions through bank at first, a bank account needs to be
opened. A person or firm who opens a bank account is known as a depositor.
Bank Statement
The statement that is made by bank mentioning the full details of its
depositor is known as bank statement. Nowadays this statement is done by
computer, Money or cheque deposited into bank, money withdrawn from bank
or payment made through bank, bank interest or bank charge including all other
information are available chronologically in a bank statement. Apart from
recording in a bank statement, a depositor also keeps records of all transactions
related to bank in a cash book and identifies balances. The balance of a bank
statement and the bank balance of a cash book should be understandably equal.
However, as always, this balance may not be equal, and then bank reconciliation
statement is required to be prepared.
Bank Reconciliation Statement
The statement that is prepared for identifying the differences between the
balance of bank statement and bank column of cash book is known as bank
reconciliation statement.
The reasons for differences between the balance of bank statement and
the bank column of cash book
¢ For collection of cheque through bank, if it is not collected in due time
there will be a case of difference between the balances.
e A cheque issued for clearing of debts, if not produced before the bank
in due time there will be differences.
e If bank on behalf of its client make any payment or receive any
collection without informing the client, there will be differences.
ss
aR

128 Accounting
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1, Despite being the primary book of account , which one works like a
permanent book?
a) Journal b) Ledger
c) Cash Book c) Trial Balance
2. Will be recorded in cash book-
i) Capital brought in tk.50,000
ii) Sold to Janata Traders tk.20,000
iii) Stationery goods purchased tk.1,000
Which one is correct of the following?
a)i & ii b)i & iii c) ii & iti d) i, ii & iii
3- Which one will be recorded in single column cash book?
a) Goods purchased by cheque tk. 4,000 __b) Furniture purchased tk. 6,000
c) Goods drew tk.1,000 d) Goods returned tk. 500
4. Which balance does single column cash book always disclose?
a) Debit b) Credit
c) Bank deposite d) Bank overdraft
5. Received a cheque for selling goods, what type of cheque is this?
a) Bearer cheque b) Order cheque
c) Crossed cheque d) Opened cheque
6. Which letter is used while writting contra entry?
a)B b) Cc
ce) K d) F
7. Contra entry is ---
i) Cash deposited to bank
ii) Debtor directly deposited into bank
iii) Drew from the bank for business needs
Which one is correct of the following?
a)i & ii b)i & iii c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
8. Which discount is recorded in the treble column cash book?
a) Purchase discount b) Discount allowed oo
c) Sales discount d) Trade discount s

Cash Book 129
9. Will be recorded in cash receipt journal -
i) Goods purchased in cash
ii) Goods Sold in cash
iii) Bank Interest allowed
Which one is correct of the following?
a)i & ii b)i & iii c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
10. Which one records in the cash payment journal?
a) Sale of furniture b) Debts realised
c) Loan paid d) Goods sold
11. The institution that opened an account into the Bank, what is that called?
a) Banker b) Depositor
c) Receipent d) Investor
12. Accounts that are affected by the Contra entry-
i) Capital account
ii) Cash account
iii) Bank account
Which one is correct of the following?
a)i & ii b)i & iii c) ii & iii d) ii & iii
Read the following passage and answer the questions no. 13 and 14:
On July 10, 2017 Salauddin & Sons deposited tk.10,000 into bank account; paid
to Samina Stores by cheque tk.11,500 in full settlement of her claim tk.12,000;
received a cheque from Mahbub Traders tk.14,000 in full settlement of his debt
tk.15,000.
13. Which cash book is suitable for recording the transactions of 10" July 2014?
a) Single column b) Double column
c) Treble column d) Cash receipt journal
14. What is the amount of contra entry of Salauddin & Sons?
a) tk.10,000 b) tk. 12,000
c) tk.14,000 d) tk. 15,000
Read the following passage and answer the questions no. 14 and 15:
Owner of Habib Enterprise records all kinds of cash receipts and cash payments
in the cash book. On 10 March, 2017- Goods purchased tk.20,000 and paid in
cash tk.15,000. On 28 March, 2017- received from Robi tk.9,500 in full
settlement of his debt tk.10,000.
Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-17

130 Accounting
15. What is the actual amount of debt of Habib Enterpise?
a) tk.35,000 b) tk.20,000
c) tk.15,000 d) tk.5,000
16. In which Cash book should we record the transesction of March 28?
a) Single Column b) Double Column
c) Treble Column d) Petty
Creative Questions:
1. On May, 2017 the following transactions occurred in the ‘M/S Deblila
Clothes’ at Islampur in Dhaka:
May 1 Opening cash in hand tk. 60,000.
” 4 200 Yards clothes sold at tk. 150 to Topu Traders, Comilla in Cash
allowing 5% discount.
” 10 Clothes purchased from ‘Shahi Clothes’ Pabna tk. 80,000.
* 13 Received from Sajal Traders tk. 40,000.
” 15 Shop Rent paid in advance tk. 30,000.
"20 Clothes worth tk. 2,000 taken for owner’s daughter.
* 25 Eletricity bill paid for the month of April tk. 2,500.
a) Give General Journal Entries for Non-Cash Transaction.
b) Prepare a Cash Memo for the transaction dated May. 4.
¢) Prepare a single column Cash Book from the mentioned transactions.
2. Some transactions in June 2017 are as follows of ‘Bonder Traders’
Chittagong:
June 1 Business started with cash tk. 1,20,000 and by depositing in Bank
tk.2,00,000.
” 3 Buying goods tk.1,00,000 from Janata Traders paid tk.20,000 in cash
& tk.30,000 by cheque.
” 5 Aphotocopies machine purchased for business use values of tk.
75,000.
” 9 Withdrew from Bank: for personal use tk. 5,000 and for business use
tk. 10,000.
” 15 Paid tk. 3,000 for Carrying cost and Installation cost of photo copier
Machine.
” 18 Bills Receivable tk. 25,000 realised and Bills Payable tk. 15,000
paid by Bank. s
ne

Cash Book 131
” 22 Cheque received from Patenga stores tk. 13,000 and Discount
allowed tk. 1,000.
” 26 Allowing 10% discount paid tk.20,000 in cash & tk.25,000 by
issueing cheque to Jamuna Traders.
* 30 Bank interest allowed tk. 500 and charged tk. 1,000.
a) Determine the cost of office Equipment of ‘Bonder Traders’.
b) Prepare a double column cash Book with the transactions occurred
on June | to JunelS.
c) Prepare a Treble column cash Book with the transactions occurred
on June 18 to June 30 considering the opening cash in hand
tk.1,20,000 and Bank Balance tk.60,000.
3. On March, 2017 Transactions of Modern Stores, Rajshahi are as follows:
March 1 Cash Fund tk. 57,500.
i 2 Goods purchased: in cash tk. 10,000 & by cheque tk. 15,000.
” 5 Goods sold tk. 45,000, 60% by cheque and remaining amount in cash.
» 10 Cash tk. 4,000 and Goods tk.1,000 Withdrawn for personal needs
= 11 Loan taken from bank tk. 50,000.
» 14 Paid by cheque (no.03254) to Sadman tk. 29,000 in full settlement
of his claim tk.30,000.
" 17 Received from Supti tk. 24,250 in settlement of his debt tk. 25,000.
i 22 Shop rent tk.20,000 paid by cheque, cheque no. 032651.
* 27 Sold old computer of business tk. 9,000.
= 31 Interest allowed by bank tk.1,000.
a) Determine the amount of transactions which will not include in
Cash Receipt & Cash Payment Journal.
b) Prepare a Cash Receipts Journal from the above transactions.
c) Prepare a Cash Payments Journal from the above transactions for
the month of March in Modern stores.
4. On March, 2017 Transactions of Ferdous Traders are as follows:
March 1 Cash balance tk. 7,500.
” 4 Goods purchased from Sumon Traders in cash tk. 4,000 allowing 5%
discount.
= 8 Goods sold tk. 15,000.
oO 10 Chair purchased for business use tk. 3,000.
s ” 11 Additional Capital brought in tk.45,000 in business by the owner.

132 Accounting
= 18 Paid to Arif Traders tk. 2,500.
» 20 Depreciation charged on furniture tk. 300.
” 22 Sold old furniture tk. 8,000.
* 25 Tk.1,000 withdrawn for personal & tk.5,000 withdrawn of business:
needs,
= 30 Bank interest and service charged tk.500 and tk. 1,000 respectively.

a) Write the General Journal Entries (without explantion), which
transactions will not include in cash book.

b) Prepare a single column cash Book of Ferdous Traders with the
transactions occurred on March | to March 11.

c) Prepare a Double column cash Book with the transactions occurred on
March 12 to March 31 considering the opening cash in hand tk. 40,000
and Bank overdraft tk. 15,000.

5. On August, 2017 The following transactions are occurred in Nasir Enterprise:
Aug. | Cash balance and Bank Balance respectively tk.19,000 & tk. 24,000.

* 2 Cheque receive from Rajib Traders for selling goods tk. 7,000.

” 5 Withdraw from bank tk. 5,000.

” 10 Goods purchased tk. 5,000. Discount 5%.

* 12 Received from Jafor stores tk. 5,800 in full settlement of his debt

tk. 6,000.

” 18 Goods purchased from Sajjad & Sons in cash tk. 3,500.

” 20 Paid to Salima Traders tk. 4,300 and Discount received tk. 200.

” 25 Bank overdraft tk.10,000 paid.

* 28 Interest on Bank overdraft tk. 500 paid.

” 31 Deducted tk.1,000 for bank charge.

a) Determine the total amount of Contra Entry from the above
information.

b) Prepare a Double Column Cash Book with the transactions

occurred on August | to August 10.

c) Prepare an applicable cash book using with the transactions occurred
on August 12 to August 31 considering the opening cash fund
tk.55,000 & Bank O/D tk.10,000.

2
a

Cash Book 133
6. The following transactions occurred in Hider & Sons during November 2017:
Nov. | Sold goods to Shahid in cash tk 8,000 allowing 5% Discount.
” 4 Received from Maliha tk. 5,000 and Discount allowed tk.100.
” 5 Calculate purchased for office tk 500.
” 9 Interest received from Investment tk.4,000.
* 12 Paid ot Jamal tk. 3,300 in full settlement of his claim tk. 3,500.
” 18 Paid office rent tk. 2,500.
” 20 Loan taken tk. 10,000.
” 23 Goods purchased from Kamal Traders by cheque tk. 30,000 allowing
5% discount cheque no. 5302.
a) Determine the amount of Cash Discount from the above information.
b) Prepare a Cash Receipts Journal from the above transactions.
c) Prepare a Cash Payments Journal from the above transactions.
7. On January, 2017 The following transactions occurred in Kishor Brother's
business:
Jan. 1 Cash Balance tk. 30,000 & Bank overdraft tk.25,000.
” 3 Goods purchased from Jahir Traders tk. 10,000 allowing 5% discount.
” § Tk. 1,500 taken by the owner from business.
” 10 Paid to Shoeb tk. 8,600 in full settlement of his claim tk.9,000.
” 15 Goods purchased by cheque tk.7,000.
” 20 Salary paid to Employees tk.4,000.
” 25 Owner bought furniture tk.30,000 for business with own money.
” 28 Received from Sumon tk.3,800 and Discount paid tk.150.
” 29 Paid to Jahir Traders tk.9,300 in full settlement of his claim tk.9,500.
” 30 Keeping tk.2,500 in hand the remaining amount deposited in to bank.
a) Give the Journal Entries (without Explantion), of those transactions
that will not be included in cash book.
b) Prepare a Treble column cash book with the transactions occurred on
January 1,28,29,31.
c) Prepare a Cash Payments Journal with the transactions occurred in
January 5 to January 20.
&
&

Chapter Nine
Trial Balance
Prior to the preparation of the financial statement to know the results of financial
activities of a business concern at the end of the year, it is badly needed to ensure
that all the transactions of that period have been recorded and posted correctly in
the books of accounts of the organization. If the books of accounts are prepared
without verifying the arithmetical accuracy, the prepared statement may not
convey true information of the organization. A trial balance is prepared with the
balances of ledger books with due and careful consideration of all possible
errors of recording process in books of accounts, If the posting has been done
accurately and the computation of account balances has been corrected, the total
of all debits should be equal to the total of credits. In order to prove the accuracy
that the total of accounts with debit balances agree with the total of credit
balances, a statement i.e, trial balance is prepared. Errors can easily be identified
and necessary steps for rectifying them can easily be taken through preparation
of trial balance.
Asset
| oe]
| ar
At the end of this chapter we will be able to —
* examine the arithmetical accuracy if the posting of entries is
done accurately.
© find out the agreement and disagreement between debit and credit
balances through revealing the errors.
* explain the necessity of using suspense account.
* make agreement between the balances temporarily by opening 2
suspense account. §

Trial Balance 135
Concept of Trial Balance:

A trial balance is a list of debit and credit balances extracted from the ledger
including the balances of cash and bank columns of the Cash Book on a
particular date, When the total of debit becomes equal to total of credit balances
of the Trial Balance, generally it is assumed that there is no arithmetical mistake
in the Ledger and Cash Book. Otherwise, there might be some sort of errors and
mistakes following double entry system of accounting.

Objectives of Trial Balance:

The main objectives of the preparation of trial balance are as follows:

1. Verification of posting the entries in journal and ledger accurately is
one of the prime objectives of trial balance.

2. To facilitate in preparation of the Statement of Comprehensive Income
and the Statement of Financial Position.

3. To discover the mistakes and rectify the errors, if any, present in
the activities of maintaining journal and ledger.

4. To verify whether both the debit and credit aspects of the transactions
as per double entry system have been recorded properly in the books of
accounts.

§ To bring together all the balances of accounts in one place in
order to facilitate the preparation of final accounts and reduce the
wastage of labour and time thereby.

6. Trial balance can convey the information to the financial statement.

Trial Balance— comments.
Pro-forma of Trial Balance:
Name of the organization
Tnal Balance
As at —-—- 20--------—----
| Serial/ Code No. | Name of the Accounts/ Particulars | LF. | Debit Taka | Credit Taka|
Since trial balance is neither any part of accounting nor a compulsion to prepare
that is why it does not have any recognized pro-forma to follow. Moreover [ASC
(International Accounting Standards Committee) has not yet designed any
x Specific pro-forma for preparing trial balance. The above table is popularly used
® as specimen format for trial balance.

136 Accounting

Brief explanation of different columns of a trial balance is given below:

1, Serial/Code No.: If there is any code no. of accounts then that code no. is
put, otherwise the serial no. of ledger accounts are written in this column.
Such as 1, 2, 3 ete.

2. Name of the Accounts/ Particulars: The full name of ledger accounts
whose serial numbers have been written in the first column are put in this
column. Such as, capital, furniture, cash etc.

3. L.F. (Ledger Folio): The page/pages of the ledger, where the balances of the
concerned accounts are shown, are written in this column. By doing so errors
can easily be identified and rectified.

4, Debit Balance: The amounts of the debit balances of the ledger accounts are
written in this column.

5. Credit Balance: The amounts of the credit balances of the ledger accounts
are written in this column.

Procedure of preparing Trial Balance:

Transactions are recorded chronologically in Journal primarily. Later on,
balance of each accounts calculated after transferring them permanently to
ledger with separate account title. Without preparing the journal, transactions
can also be posted directly in ledger and then the ledger accounts are balanced as

well. After calculating all ledger account balances the trial balance prepared in a

separate sheet of paper or book mentioning all debit balances on the debit

column and credit balances on the credit column.

Factors to be considered in preparing Trial Balance:

Prime objective of trial balance is to test and verify the arithmetical accuracy of

accounts and that is why, special attention is given and also some important

factors are considered in case of including balances from ledger to trial balance.

1. It is necessary to be careful about the recording of stock of goods. Value of

opening stock of goods recorded in debit column as expense in Trial Balance for
the date is prepared for.

2. While ‘Adjusted purchase’ or ‘Cost of goods Sold’ include in trial balance,
then closing stock of goods will be shown in debit column of trial balance as
assets without including opening stock of goods. Because Adjusted «
purchase=Opening stock of goods + Net purchase - Closing stock of goods. &

Trial Balance 137
3. In case of stock of Stationary, opening Stock of stationary have to be shown
in debit column of Trial Balance but the closing stationary will not be included.
4.Opening balance of current assets & current liabilities i.e. cash in hand, bank
balance, debtors, creditors etc. will not come in Trial balance because these are
adjusted with related accounts closing balance.
5. Reserve created against assets, such as: Bad debt reserve or provision for
doubtful debts, provision for discount on debtors or provision for discount on
debtors or provision for discount payable and provision for discount on bills
receivable record in credit of trial balance.
6. Provision created against liabilities, such as: provision for discount on
creditors or provision for discount receivable and provision for discount on bills
paybale. As per the ‘conservitism convention’ of Accounting, it is inappropriate
to charge provision against liabilities. If such provision are found in accounts, it
may write in debit column of trial balance. It is best to skip charging provision
on liabilities.
7. In some account title paid or received are not mentioned. In this case they are
considered as expenses and written on the debit side of trial balance. Such as,
rent, discount, commission, interest etc.
8. Sales ledger balances are considered as sundry debtors and put on the debit
side.
9. Purchase ledger balances are considered as sundry creditors and put on the
credit side.
10. Contingent liability and anticipated assets are not included in trial balance
because business is not confirmed about their certainty. They are shown in the
foot note.
If any disagreement is found, even after taking all necessary careful measures,
then suspense account is opened temporarily to equal debit and credit columns.
Suspense account is not a permanent kind of solution rather it is a temporary
arrangement.
Activity: Find out the accounts which are not included in a trial balance.
Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-18

138 Accounting
Procedure of preparing a Trial Balance taking ledger balances
into consideration:

Where only ledger balances are given in the absence of ledger, the following

rules should be followed to ascertain which of the balances will be written in the

debit column and which will be written in the credit column of a trial balance.
The Ledger balances which are written The Ledger balances which are
on the debit side of Trial Balance written on the credit side of Tria

Balance

All the assets: Land, building, leasehold | All liabilities: creditors, bills payable
property, machinery, furniture, investment, | bank overdraft, loan, etc.
bills receivable, debtors, goodwill, cash in
hand, cash at bank etc.
stock, salary, advertisement, _rent, | interest received, discount received
commission, repairs, office expenses, | apprenticeship premium, interest on
depreciation, bad debt, and discount allowed. | investment, interest on bank deposit etc
Expenses paid in advance: Salaries paid in | Outstanding expenses and unearned
advance, wages paid in advance, rent paid in | incomes: Advanced rent income,
advance is treated as an Asset as because the | Advanced consultation fee is treated ag
future benefit will come from that type of | a liability as because the future service
advance payment. is to be provided.
investment, commission accrued, rent | for bad and doubtful debt, general reserve.
received is treated as an Asset as because the | reserve for discount on debtors.
amount realized in future.
drawing.

Errors detected in Trial Balance:

Even after taking all necessary cautionary measures, there might be some

unintentional errors which lead to disagreement in trial balance. These errors are

less cumbersome to find out and rectify the trial balance. Such errors are:

1, Errors of Omission: While posting from journal to ledger, if mistakenly,
debit has been given to the ledger but corresponding credit has not been given
to the ledger account or vice versa. Moreover if any balance of account is not
included in trial balance then it will not agree. Example: Cash paid to Rahim
Tk. 5000.

Journal: Rahim Bros. A/C---- Dr Tk. 5,000 oo
Cash A/C--------- Cr Tk. 5,000 s

Trial Balance 139
At the time of transferring this to ledger, mistakenly it may so happen that only
Rahim A/C or Cash A/C is transfer or only the balance of one account is
transferred to trial balance.

2. Errors of Commission: Writing debit amount of the account on the credit
side of the concerned ledger account or Writing credit amount of the
account on the debit side of the concerned ledger account at the time of
posting from journal to ledger. Both sides of trial balance will also not
agree, if any transaction is posted twice in the same side of one account by
mistake. Example:

Journal: Rahim Bros. A/C---- Dr tk. 5,000
Cash A/C--------- Cr tk. 5,000
If Rahim A/C----Dr is shown in credit along with Cash---- A/C on ledger or
Cash A/C Cr. is written in debit along with Rahim A/C----Dr.

3. Mistake in amounts of money: While posting from journal to ledger, if
mistakenly, not debiting and crediting both the accounts of a transaction with
the same amount. That is, writing more or less amount in the ledger
mistakenly while posting from journal. Example: Salary paid tK. 2,000.
Mistake in Journal as-

Salary A/C----Dr tk. 2,000

Cash A/C------Cr_ tk. 20,000
OR, while posting in ledger- Mistakenly, Salary A/C is shown as tk. 20,000
and Cash A/C is shown as tk. 2,000 while posting in ledger.

4. Error in Balancing of Ledger Account: If there is any mistake in balancing

the ledger account the trial balance will not agree. Example:
Cash A/C

Dr. Cr.

|__Date | Particulars | J.P. | Taka | Date | Particulars | J.P. | Taka _|
2017 2017
Feb I Capital A/C 1,00,000 Feb 2 Furniture A/C 20,000
Feb 5 Sales A/C 25,000 Feb 12 Creditors A/C 10,000

Feb18 | Bank A/C 15,000
Feb28 | Salary A/C 5,000
Feb 28 Balance C/D 65,000
1,25,000 1,25,000
%6 Mar | Balance B/D 65,000
& The Cash A/C shown above should bear a balance of tk. 75,000 but mistakenly it is written as tk. 65,000.

140 Accounting
5, Mistake in transferring ledger balances to trial balance: While
transferring the ledger balances to the trial balance, wrongly written the debit
balance in credit side and vice versa.
Activity: “Even if the trial balance agrees, we cannot be certain that there is no
mistake in accounts" do you agree? Elucidate your comments.
Errors not detected by the Trial balance:
Agreement of trial does not ensure the hundred percent error freeness of
accounts. Usually arithmetical accuracy is assumed if trial balance agrees. But
there may be some types of mistakes, which will not be detected by a trial
balance. These are called disadvantages or limitations of trial balance. This type
of error is divided into two major types.
The detailed descriptions of errors given below:
Clerical Errors of
Errors Principle
Errors of Errors of Errors of Compensating
Omission} |Commission| |Miss posting) Errors
1. Clerical errors:
(a) Errors of omission: If any transaction is not at all recorded then the amount
of the transaction will not be recorded in concerned ledger account and/or if the
transaction is not transferred from journal to ledger then both the columns of
trial balance will be valued by equal sum lower amount of money. Such as,
goods sold to Shimanto Traders, but not at all recorded in sales journal and
ledger. But Trial balance will agree.
(b) Errors of commission: If any transaction is recorded in primary books of
accounts by lower or higher amount of money then such lower or higher amount
will also be recorded in the ledger concerned and thus the trial balance will
agree as well, Such as, goods sold to Ratan Bros, of tk. 5,000. If it is recorded
in Sales journal as tk. 50,000 then both Sales A/C and Ratan Bros. A/C will be a
higher valued by the amount of tk. 45,000 and Trial balance will agree. a

Trial Balance Ml
(c) Errors of miss posting: Such errors are done because of the carelessness of
employees. Suppose tk. 20,000 has been received in cash from Kalam Traders.
Cash book is correctly debited with tk. 20,000 but while posting to the ledger
Salam Traders account is credited in place of Kalam Traders account. Trial
balance will agree because the total of credits has been the same, though the
amount has been credited to a wrong account. Trial balance wil! agree in this
case also.
(d) Compensating errors: If one mistake is corrected by another mistake then
it is called Compensating errors. Such as, Shihab Traders A/C is supposed to be
debited with tk.5,000 but it has been debited with tk.500. In another
occasion, Jamil Traders A/C was credited with Tk. 500 by mistake, instead of
tk.5,000. So both the accounts will be less by the same amount i.e, tk.4,500, But
Trial balance will agree for this error.
Finally it should be noted that, for the above four errors both debit and credit
columns of trial balance will be equal but error remains.
2. Errors of principle: Errors which are done due to the lack of proper
accounting knowledge or violation of recognized accounting principles are
known as errors of principles. When Capital expenditure is recorded as
Revenue expenditure and vice versa 1s an example of such errors, For example,
a) Machine purchase tk.50,000;

wrongly purchased debited instead of machine account.
b) Repair of machine tk.5,000;

wrongly machine account debited instead of repairs account

disclosed even if trial balance agrees.

Method of correcting an incorrect Trial Balance: If both sides of the trial
balance do not agree then it is to be understood that there are some mistakes in
the accounting process. So the cause of this disagreement is to be found out but
there is no hard and fast rule to correct an incorrect trial balance. In many cases
the following actions can be taken:
(1) Verify the totals of the two columns in trial balance.
(2) Check whether all the balances of ledger accounts have been correctly

entered in the trial balance.

% (3) Check whether posting of the debit and credit balances have been correctly
5 done in the appropriate side of the trial balance.

142 Accounting

(4) Check whether posting from Journals to the ledger accounts has correctly
been done.

(5) Check whether balance of any account posted to trial balance with changed
amount or wrong column.

(6) Find out the difference between the totals of the two columns of the trial
balance is divisible by 2 (two). If so, then it is to be noted if there is any
similar amount in the trial balance and whether the amount is placed in
the right place in trial balance.

(7) Check whether the balances of asset, liabilitity and owner’s equity account
from previous year correctly transferred to current year’s Ledger.

In spite of the above mentioned steps taken, if the mistakes or errors can not be

detected, then the amount, by which the trial balance disagreed, should be put in

"Suspense Account" for the time being. Subsequently, when the errors will be

detected, those will be rectified through suspense A/C which will be closed after

rectification of errors.

Suspense Account:

Finding out the errors is necessary where totals of both the sides of trial balance

do not agree. But in most of the cases the detection and rectification of errors

take long time. So it is not rational and feasible to keep the work of preparation
of Final Accounts pending for such a long time. Under the circumstance,
disagreement of both the sides of trial balance is made equal through Suspense

Account for time being. It is not a permanent solution rather a kind of temporary

arrangement. If the total of credit side of trial balance becomes less than that of

debit side, the suspense account will be shown on the credit side and vice versa.

Afterwards, when the errors are detected the suspense account is closed through

correction of those errors.

Example-1:

Following Ledger balances of 31 March 2017 got from the accounts book of

Mamun Traders:

Cash - 1,19,000; Capital- 1,00,000; Sales- 60,0000; Debtor -9,000; Purchase -

20,000; Salary- 3,000; House rent expense-7,000; Wages expense-2,000. ~

prepare a trial balance as on 31 march , 2011. Ss

Trial Balance 143
Solution: Mamun Trader’s
Trial Balance
31 March 2017
a
1 Cash 1,19,000
2 Capital 1,00,000
3 Sales 60,000
4 Sundry Debtors 9,000
5 Purchase 20,000
6 Salary expense 3,000
7 House rent expense 7,000
8 Wages expense 2,000
Total
Example-2:
From the following Ledger balance of M/S Mukta traders, prepare Trial balance
as on 3] December 2017:
accounts
Capital 60,000 | Drawings 2,480 | Depreciation 1,410
Stock (1.1.17) 16,400 | Business expense 990 | Rent received 430
Sales 81,200 | Cash in hand 800 | Salary expense 4,300
Gas & Water 840 | Cash at Bank 5,260 | Insurance premium| 1,060
Land & Building 20,000 | Purchase 32,160 | Return inward 490
Wages expense 18,490 | Tax & Rates 840 | Bills payable 4,000
Debtors 35,800 | Furniture 1,250 | Creditors 10,370
Commission 1,470 | Bills receivable 1,470 | Returns outward 6,400
Equipment 10,270 | Cash at Bank (1.1.17) 6,700 | Bank charge 3,370
Transportation 3,370 | Stock of Goods (31.12.17)| 19,400 | Discount received 120
=
aR

144 Accounting
Solution: M/S Mukta Traders
Trial Balance
As on 3ldecember 2017
a a
| 2 | Stock (11.2017) | CT 1600 |
| 3 | Saes CC CCS 8200
| 4 | Gasandwatr TH
| 6 | Wages
a es es
| 8 | Commission S| S| S70 | Cd
| 9 | Machinery Ss | | 0270S |
|_10 | Transportation | CT 80d
| it | Drawings OT
| 12 | Tradeexpense = | CT CTC
es
| 14 | BalanceBank ss | CT S80 S| Cd
| 1S | Purchase 8G
| 16 | Taxandrates CT CTC HT
a
| 18 | BillsReceivables | | SATO OT
| 19 | Depreciation = | CT CIT
| 20 | Rentreceived | TC 8
| 21 | SalaryExpenses | | 43800 |
| 22 | InsuranceExpensss sss | S| SS iG—s| Cd
| 23 | Rewminward ss | CT CTC
| 24 | BillsPayable =F | OC] CCidLC C000
| 25 | Creditors CT CT Cd 10370
| 26 | Retumoutwad | CT CE HOO
| 27 | Bankcharge ss | CT CTC
|_28 | Discountreceived | |
a
8

Trial Balance 145
Task: Mahbuba Traders prepared Trial Balance wrongly as on 31 December 2017,
you are required to prepare correct Trial Balance.

sso) howtos [Et | SS
] Opening Stocks 50,000
2 Capital 1,00,000
3 Purchase 80,000
4 Sales 1,00,00
5 Commission received 10,000
6 Salaries Expenses 20,000
7 Rent Expenses 12,000
8 Bad debt 3,000
9 Machinery 5,800
10 Debtors 35,000
11 Creditors 40,000
12 6% mortgage Loan 10,000
13 Closing stock 80,000
14 Sales return 2,000
15 spense Accounts 89,800
—~*d Ci <8 800 318,800 |
Exercise
Multiple Choice question:
1, What is the objective of preparing Trial Balance?
a) To determine financial condition
b) To verify the mathematical accuracy
c) To determine profit or loss
d) To reduce work load
2, Debit side of Trial Balance will be recorded
i) Capital
it) Drawings
iii) Sales return
Which one is correct?
a)i &ii b)i & iti
c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
3. Which one is separated from other three?
a) Apprentice allowance b) Apprentice premium
c) Insurance premium d) Rent and Taxes
Class-9- 10, Accounting, Farma-19

146 Accounting
4. To be recorded in Trial Balance
i) Opening stock
ii) Opening cash balance
iii) Closing cash balance
Which one is correct?
a)i & ii b)i & iii
c) ii & iii d) i, it & iii
5. In a Trial Balance debit balance of 130 is wrongly recorded into credit side.
If all other things remain same what will be the difference of both side
of a Trial Balance?
a) TK. 130 b) TK. 65
c) TK. 310 d) TK. 260
6. What does Suspense account express in Trial Balance?
a) Debit Balance b) Credit Balance
¢) Difference between debit 4) Sum of Debit and credit column
and credit column
7. Sales account debited tk 5,000 for selling furniture; the type of error is-
a) Error of omission b) Writing error
c) Compensating error d) Error of principle
8. For which error both side of trial balance will agree?
a) Purchase Account tk. 500 debited in excess
b) Salaries Account debited twice
c) Purchase Account debited for furniture purchase
d) Drawing Account debited with tk. 200 instead of tk. 1,200
9. Salaries are debited with tk. 2,000 instead of tk. 2,500 and sales account
credited with tk. 4,500 instead of tk. 5,000. What type of error is this?
a) Errors of Principle
b) Errors of Commission
c) Errors of Omission
d) Compensation Errors
10. The error which will create suspense account, that is-
i) “Furniture purchase TK. 45,000” recorded Purchase Account debit TK. 45,000
ii) “Goods purchase TK. 10,000” recorded Purchase Account credit Tk. 10,000
iii) “Repair to Furniture TK. 2,000” recorded Furniture Account debit Tk. 20,000
Which one is correct?
a)i &ii b) i & iii
c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii ~
Ss
i)

Trial Balance 147
Read the following stem and answer the question no 11 and 12:
Accountant of Zafnin & Sons’ have posted 3 account balance tk. 3,000. tk. 6,000
& tk. 9,000 in the credit column of Trial balance because of not writing ‘Paid’ &
‘Received.’ As a result , Trial balance disagree.
11. What in the amount of suspense account in trial balance of Zafrin & Sons?
a) Tk. 9,000 b) Tk. 15,000
c) Tk. 18,000 c) Tk. 36,000
12. The error which is made in account while recording by the accountant,
those include-
i) Salary ii) Commission iii) Discount
Which one is correct?
a)i& ii b) i & iii c)ii&iii di, ii, & iii
Creative Questions:
1. Following Ledger balances of Shihab and Brothers as on December 2017 are
as follows:-
Capital 1,10,000 | Insurance Premium 5,000
Cash in hand (01/01/17) 15,000 | Import duty 3,500
Debtors 25,000 | Commission received 2,000
Creditors 15,000 | Investment 30,000
Drawings 10,000 | Interest on Bank Deposit 500
Purchase 30,000 | Furniture 40,000
Sales 45,000 | Advertisement 1,000
Interest on Investment 3,000 | Opening Stock 25,000
Closing Stock 12,000 | Closing Bank balance 6,000
a) Calculate the total amount of those items which not include in Trial Balance?
b) Prepare a Trial balance of Shihab and Borthers from the above Ledger balances.
c) From the Trial Balance calculate Revenue Income & Revenue expenditure,
2. Balances of Jubili Enterprise as on 31 December 2017 are as follows:
Capital 150,000 | Building 45,000
Furniture & Equipment 50,000 | Debtors 30,000
Bills Receivable 30,000 | Creditors 25,000
Bills payable 25,000 | Salaries 5,000
General Reserve 5,000 | Unearned Service Revenue 3,000
Cash in hand (1-1-2017) 6,000 | Bank overdraft 2,000
Stocks (1-1-2017) 40,000 | Cash in hand (31-12-2017) 10,000
« | Bad debt 5,000 | Insurance 8,000
S | Provision for bad debt 3,000 | Stocks(31-12-2017) 35,000

148 Accounting
a. In the Trial Balance of Jubili Enterprise which balances are not recorded
and what amount of that?
b. From the above balance prepared a Trial Balance.
c. Determine Current Assets and Short-term Liabilities.
3. Accountant of M/S Saleh & co. prepared a Trial Balance but there are some
irrelevance in that. Defective Trial Balance is as follows:
Trial Balance
as at 31st December, 2017
[SNe] __Ascoming Tide [LF Debi Tata | Cit Ta
| Opening Stock 34,000
2 Purchase 1,00,000
3 Salary 12,000
4 Creditors 40,000
5 Debtors 16,000
6 Bank Balance 45,000
7 Return Inward 3,000
8 Freight 5,000
9 Bills Payable 20,000
10 Loan Taken 13,000
11 Buillding 55,000
12 Discount allowed 10,000
13 Capital 67,000
14 | Sales 1,40,000
15 Return Outward 6,000
16 Stationery 5,000
17 Bad Debt 9,000
18 Allowance for Doultful Debts 8,000
Ppt ee
a) Calculate the amount of Capital Receipts of M/S Saleh & Co.
b) Calculate the amount of Revenue Expenditure from the above information.
c) Prepare the Correct Trial Balacne Considering the stem of M/S Saleh & Co. 2
&

Trial Balance ad
4. Following Ledger balances of Ohi Ceramics are supplied as on 31
December 2017 for the purpose of mathematical accuracy verification:
Taka Taka
Capital 94,000 Training Allowance 5,000
Cash in hand 1/1/2017 15,000 Export duty 13,500

Receivable 22,000 Discount received 12,000

Payable 15,000 Investments 15,000

Income Tax 10,000 Dividend received 500

Purchase 1,30,000 Furniture 40,000
Sales 1,45,000 Opening Stocks 25,000
Rent Received 13,000 Closing Bank balance 16,000
Closing Stocks 22,000 Return inward 3,000:
a. Determine total amount that will not be included in the Trial Balance of
Ohi Ceramics.
b. Prepare Trial Balance of Ohio Ceramics considering above information.
c. Calculate capital income and capital expenditure considering above
information.
5. Following ledger balances of Sinthia Enterprise as on 31 December, 2017 are
as follows:

Accounting Title Accounting Title
Capital 1,85,000 _ | Stationery 5,000
Unexpired Insurance 10,000 Utility expenses 70,000
Saving Certificate 1,00,000 _| Service Revenue 1,55,000
due Rent 12,000 | Bank loan 1,00,000
Accrued Commission | 30,000 | Commercial expenses |  1,30,000
Unearned Revenue 8,000 | Accounts Receivable 25,000
Supplies expenses 34,500 | Municipal & Tax 38,700
Postage & Telegram 22,800 _ | Advertisement payable 12,000

a) Calaculate the amount of Capital Receipt from information mentioned above.
b) Determine the amount of closing assets and liabilities of Sinthia Enterprise.
= c) Prepare a Trial Balance from the above information.
Lary

150 Accounting
6. Following ledger balances of ‘Doel Enterprise’ as on 31 December, 2017 are:
as follows:
Capital 1,90,000 | Mortgage loan 1,00,000
Cash fund 1,54,000 | Purchase 2,54,000
Sales 4,67,000 _ | Accounts Receivable 3,62,000
Drawings 15,300 | Provident fund 60,000
Return Outward 3,500 | Income Tax 9,200
Advance rent received 8,000 | Deferred Advertisement} —_ 25,000
Prepaid Insurance 9,500 _ | Closing stock of goods 15,500
Opening stock of goods} 30,000 _| Accounts payable 41,500
Return Inward 11,000
a) Determine the amount of Adjusted Purchase from the above information.
b) Prepare a Trial Balance of Doel Enterprise.
c) Determine the amount of Closing Owner’s Equity of Doel Enterprise.
2
&

Ten Chapter
Financial Statement
Every business organization prepares Finanical Statement to know the financial
position at the end of the definite period. There are two aspects of financial
Statement: (i) Ascertainment of financial result of a specific period and (ii) Total
assets, liabilities and equity of a specific date for a business organisation. The
statement which is prepared to ascertain the profit and loss of the business is
known as the Statement of Comprehensive Income and the statement prepared
to ascertain the assets & liabilities is called the Statement of Financial Position,
which was previously known as Balance Sheet.
Picture: Graph indicator of Profit and Loss
At the end of this chapter, we will be able to —
e differentiate between the transaction of capital and revenue nature as well as the
application of this differentiation in preparation of financial statement,
* prepare the Statement of Comprehensive Income and also be able to explain the
profits and losses.
¢ prepare the financial statement and differentiate between the varieties of fixed
and current assets; long term and current liabilities.
* understand how capital accounts can be affected through drawings of cash and
merchandise, inclusion of new capital in the business or net profits and losses.
* realize the necessity of consideration of bad debts and provisions for those
debts.
* apply depreciation in financial statement by understanding the meanings,
objectives and necessity of depreciation.
¢ interpret the need for evaluating the state of affairs as well as the necessity of
ratio analysis.
¢ determine and analyze different types of ratios, for example, net profit to sales
ratio, net profit to capital ratio, currents assets and current liabilities ratio etc,
% # compare the comprehensive income statement and important figures between
qi two years and understanding the changes of financial position.

152 Accounting
Financial Statement
Five types of Financial statements are prepared to know the financial results and
condition of the business as per International Accounting Standards.These
Financial statements help the investors, bond holders and other accounting
information users to make economic decision by providing accounting
information of financial results, financial position and cash flow. etc. Financial
statement is an important base to evaluate managerial efficiency and overall
condition of the organization. Following 5 types of financial statements prepared
according to the International Accounting Standard-01 (IAS-01) :

1. The Statement of Comprehensive Income

2. The Statement of Changes in Equity

3. The Statement of Financial Position

4. The Statement of Cash Flows

5. Notes, comprising a summary of significant accounting policies and

other explanatory information provided in the financial statement.
In secondary stage (Class 9 & 10), the concept and process of preparation
of first 3 parts of financial statements are illustrated:
The Statement of Comprehensive Income:
Revenue income & expenditure are recorded in comprehensive income
statement. In service providing business organisations net profit is found after
subtracting service providing expenditure from service revenue. On the other
hand, in merchandising business gross profit is found after subtracting cost of
goods sold from the amount of goods sold. And operating profit is found after
subtracting operating expenditure from gross profit. Net profit before tax is
found after adding other incomes & subtracting other expenses with operating
profit. However, in sole proprictorship business carned profit considered as
owner’s income, hence the income tax payable considered as owncr’s personal
expenses. So, in comperhensive income statement of such organisation net profit
before tax is considered as net profit without subtracting income tax expenses.
2
R

Financial Statemenet 153

Objectives of the Statement of Comprehensive Income:

1) Wecan know net profit and loss from comprehensive income statement. The
owner that can not claim excess of the net profit. Because, claiming excess
of net profit means the break down of capital structure which may lead to
severe interruption of future business activities of the firm.

2) By analyzing different income and expenditures of the Statement of
Comprehensive Income, we can know how to increase net profit of a firm
by increasing future income and decreasing expenditures.

Preparation of the Statement of Comprehensive Income (Service providing

business):

The Statement of Comprehensive Income is prepared in each year for a particular

period of time. Net income is ascertained by deducting the expenditures from

the income of that year.

Preparation of the Statement of Comprehensive Income (Merchandising

business):

For a merchandising business, main source of income is Sales. It is the main

operating income. There are some other income too, such as, commission

received, rent received, interest received from the bank etc. Operating expenses
are manager’s salary, travelling & conveyance expenses, repairing &
maintenance expenses, bad debt, depreciation, insurance expenses etc.

Statement of Comprehensive Income is prepared mainly in three stages.

In first stage, Gross Profit is calculated by deducting Cost of Goods Sold from

Net Sales.

In second stage, Operating profit is calculated by deducting Operating

Expenses from Gross Profit.

In third stage, Adding other incomes with operating profit and from the sum of

these two amount other expenses will be deducting to calculate Net profit.

Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-20

154 Accounting
The table given below shows the list of operating and non-operating incomes
and expenses,
—“Tncome/Revenue | SSSRpemse
Goods Sold * Interest on Bank | + Opening Stock of + Salary & Allowance « Interest om Loan
Service Revenue | Deposit Goods + Travel & Conveyance Exp. « Interest on Bank O/D
* Dividend Received | . Goods Purchased * Training Allowance
* Rent revenue : * Printing & Stationary ‘anon
+ Commission | CATAG® Inward | « Postage Telegu Exp. of Fined Assets
Income/Received |* Import Duty * Electric, Gas & Water/Utility Exp! * Interest on
«Profit on Sale | * Freight —e pow
—— + Dock Charge + Bank Charge Seay Toes
a * Marketing & Advertisement Exp.
+ Interest on . oe i
Investment . eo Bailding
+ Dep. cn Office Equipment
* Sales Commission
* Insurance Exp,
* Legal Exp.
* Discount Exp/allowed
* Goodwill writien off
* Patent written off
* Trademark written off
+ Bad Debus
» Entertainment Exp,
Sample table of the Statement of Comprehensive Income
(Service providing business)
Name of organisation...........sssecesesessees
Statement of Comprehensive Income
For the year ended ON ..........:000e000
[ Particulars Taka | Taka Taka
Incomes: Service Revenue —-*
Add: Service Revenue Receivable ——, nie
Interest Revenue +
Dividend Income/Received +
Total Incomes “
Less: Expenses: Office Rent +?
Add: Duc —*
Salary & Allowance ~~
Electric & Telephone bill —*
Insurance Expense —
Conveyance Expense ~*
Legel Expense ——-
Printing & Stationery Cd
‘Total Net Profit | $= s

Financial Statemenet 15S
Sample table of the Statement of Comprehensive Income
(Merchandising business)
Name of the organisation......................0000+++
Statement of Comprchensive Income
For the year ended On ........c.sseccceee
[Particulars | Taka | Taka | Taka _|
Sales o*
Less: Sales returns (#9)
Net sales sees
Less: Cost of goods sold
Opening Stock oes
Purchase —*
Less: Purchase at
ne Net Purchases ener
Carriage Inward oon
Import Duty one
e+ |
Less: Closing Stock (##9)
(e4e%)
Gross Profit eee
Less: Operating Expenses
Carriage Outward arity
Salaries oon
Office rent +88
Office Electricity +ee%
Office Expenses eee
Discount allowed +e0%
Repairs of Fixed Assets +eee
Postages & Telegrams ene
Advertising +e
Stationary eee
Packing Expenses +eee
Traveling Expenses eee
Insurance Expenses eee
Depreciation on Fixed Assets one
Lease hold properties Written off one
Goodwill Written off sane
Commission Paid one
Bank Charge eee
Closing Bad Debt & Provision for doutful debts one
Te eee (o4#8)
( jing — sa debts written off)
Add: Deficiency of Provision for Bad debt & doutful debts bdhdadhd
(Bad debts written off - Opening Balance) aeee
(*ee9)
s Operating profit oeses

156 Accounting
Particulars Taka | Taka | Taka

Other incomes:

Profit from selling of fixed assets tee

Interest on investment eee

Discount received sane

Interest on loan paid sane

Interest from bank deposit eens

Commission received see

House rent revenue +aee

Dividend received eee

s+e8

Less: Other Expenses a

Loss from selling of fixed assets eee

Interest on debenture eee8

Interest on loan / bank loan anne

Interest on bank overdraft eens

Theft or Accidental losses eee

(+9)
Net Profit/Loss | Sesees |
Activity: Fill in the gaps (marked (?)] by correct figure
ae Se oe ee
goods sold | _ expenses profit/ loss loss
A 10,600 7,800 1,300 ? ?
B 9,300 tf 1,100 800 ?
Some expenditure is discussed below:

1) Cost of goods sold: Total of the expenses incurred on the goods sold
during a period to bring them into saleable condition is called cost of goods
sold. Cost of goods sold = opening stock + (net purchase + other
expenses related with purchase) — closing stock. Here other expenses
related with purchase means carriage inward, import duty etc. =

~

Financial Statemenct 157

2) Insurance: Assets of business like Building, Machinery, and Stock-in-trade
are insured against their destruction in any accident. Premium is to be paid
to Insurance Companies at regular intervals. This Premium is treated as
insurance expense.

3) Depreciation: Reduction of fixed asset arises from continuous use. This
reduction is called depreciation. Changes in assets model usages, taste,
keeping assets unused for a long time also cause depreciation.

4) Bad Debt: In case of credit sales, the amount which is confirmed to be not
realized from debtors is called bad debt. The reason of bad debt is death,
bankruptcy, absconding of debtors.

5) Provision for Bad & Doubtful Debt: The amount of debts which may not
be realized is called doubtful debt, which is a probable loss and will be
included in operating expenses.

Some incomes are discussed below:

1) Dividend received: Excess of necessary income is sometimes invested as
shares at other companies. Dividend received from Shares is considered as
other income.

2) Interest received: Additional incomes which are deposited at bank or
invested at profitable ventures and get some benefit is called interest.

Procedure of preparing Statement of Changes in Equity:

Statement of Changes in Equity is prepared to ascertain the closing balance of

owner's equity at the end of the accounting period. To ascertain this, the

additional amount of capital, net profit/loss and drawings are adjusted with the
opening balance of owner's equity. A sample table of Statement of Changes in

Equity is shown below:

Name of the organization ——--—--——
Statement of Changes in Equity
For the year ended on ..........:::00000

Capital (Opening Balance)

Add: Additional capital employed

(+) net profit / (-) net loss

Income Tax
e | Add: General reserve
R quity (Closing Balance

158 Accounting
The Statement of Financial Position:

To know the financial position of a business at the end of year the Statement of
Financial Position is prepared with all assets and liabilities and capital. One can
know the amount of fixed or current assets, long or short term liabilities and
capital of the business from the Statement of Financial Position. Various
decisions can be taken by analyzing this information, for example, we can know
proportion of claim over assets; if current assets are sufficient to meet current
liabilities, proportion of net profit over capital employed, etc.

Procedure of preparing the Statement of Financial Position:

Information is recorded in the Statement of Financial Position in two stages.
Assets are shown dividing into four types in first stage. i.e.1) Fixed assets,
2) Long term investment, 3) Current assets & 4) Fictitious assets. Equity and
liabilities are shown at the second stage. Liabilities are divided into two types.
i.c.1) Long term liabilities & 2) Current or Short term liabilities.

Assets & liabilities are summarised in the statement of financial position under
two methods. e.i.1) Permanence preference method & 2) Liquidity preference
method. In permanance preference method fixed assets are written at the
beginning of summarising assets. Investment,current assets & fictitious assets
are written chronologically there after. Again long term liabilities are shown at
the beginning & current liabilities are shown at the end of writing liabilities.
Contrary, liquidity preference method is opposite of permanence preference
method. However, If there are any ficititious assets, it will be shown at the end
of all assets.

Importance of classification of assets and liabilities:

Different assets are of different nature and they have varicties of objectives in
business. It is necessary to know how quickly an asset will be encashed, how
quickly a liability will be paid for the sake of efficient management of assets.
And thus it will be easier to put emphasis on individual assets and liabilities.
Fixed Assets: Fixed Assets are those which are used in the business for long
time. Such as, goodwill, land, buildings, machinery, furniture etc.

Current Assets: Current assets are those assets which can be converted into
cash within one accounting period e.g. cash & bank balance, debtors, stock of
goods etc.

Long Term Liabilities: Liabilities which are taken for a long period of time is
called long term liabilities e.g. Bank loan, mortgage loan, debenture etc.
Current Liabilities: Liabilities which are payable within one accounting period
is called current liabilities e.g. creditors, outstanding expenses, advance income,
or unearned revenue , bank overdraft etc. s

Financial Statemenet 159
Performa of statement of financial position
Name of the trading firm——--
Statement of Financial Position
As on ------------ Date ------------
Fixed Assets:
Goodwill less written off sone
Furniture less accumulated depreciation sone
Office equipment less accumulated depreciation eee
Machinery less accumulated depreciation oeee
Land & buildings less accumulated depreciation =
Total Fixed assets
Long term investment:
Investment
Current Assets:
Cash in hand & cash at bank wane
Debtors
Less: Closing bed debts & doubtful debts
Bills Receivables tose
Unused Stationery +088
Income receivables eee
Expenses made in advance e488
Closing Stock o+e8
Total Current assets
Fictitious assets:
Preliminary Expenses ose
Deferred Advertisement +++
Total Assets
Owner’s Equity & Liabilities:
Equity (closing balance)
Long term liabilities:
Bank loan/ Mortgage Loan
Debenture
Current liabilities: veer
Creditors
Bills payable
Outstanding expenses
Advacne income/unearned revenue
Bank overdraft
Total current liabilities oeee
6 Total liabilities
s Owner’s Equity & Total Liabilities

160 Accounting
Application of accounting principles in preparation of statement of financial position:
In preparation of the Statement of Comprehensive Income and the Statement of
Financial Position certain accounting principles are followed. In order to
ascertain accurate profit or loss and to determine the accurate value of assets and
liabilities following principles must be followed.
1. Business entity concept: Under this concept the business is said to be quite
distinct from its proprietors. Only for this reason all accounts are kept in the
name of the business are not in the name of the proprietors. That is why, capital
supplied by the proprietor is the liability of the business and drawings by the
proprietor are his own expense and reduce the value of capital.
2. Going concern concept: Under this concept, it is taken into consideration
that the business will continue for an indefinite period of time and is not
organized for a limited period. That is, a business will run for unlimited period
and there is no plan to stop business. In the light of this concept, the incomes and
expenses are divided into capital and revenue nature. Capital items are used to
prepare the Statement of Financial Position. According to this concept,
depreciation is calculated over the life span of fixed assets. If this concept does
not exist it is not possible to prepare financial position and no need of charging
depreciation,
3. Periodicity concept: According to going concern concept there is no specific
period of business. But we can't wait for unlimited period to know the financial
position of business. For that reason, to know the financial condition of each
year we have to prepare comprehensive income statement and statement of
financial position. Unlimited period of business can be divided into equal small
parts. This small part is called periodicity. Generally periodicity indicates for
one year.
4. Accrual concept: According to this concept, at the time of preparing
Statement of Comprehensive Income, outstanding references are added to the
related expenses which have been paid and outstanding incomes are added to
related incomes which are already received during the concerned accounting
year, Over and above, unearned incomes and prepaid expenses are shown as
deduction from respective account head. S
a

Financial Statemenet 161
5. Conservatism principle: According to this principle, to calculate profit you
have to be conservative, that is anticipating no profit but providing for all
possible losses. It means provision should be created if there is any
possibility of loss in future, but anticipated profit should not be taken into
consideration unless and until it is realized. If profit or dividend is
distributed from anticipation, then it is as if the break down of capital of the
business which is not only ultra vires to the company act but also harmful for the
concern. As per conservatism provision for bad and doubtful debt is
considerd as expense. And closing stock is valued at cost or market price
whichever is lower.

6. Cost price principle: Under this principle, fixed assets are shown in the
financial statement based on their historical cost that is at the price when they
were purchased. Fixed assets are not shown at the current market price because
they are not purchased for trading rather for long term use in business. Cost
price means amount sacrificed for acquiring respective asset and other
necessary expenses made to make the asset usable for the business.

7. Consistency principle: According to this principle, books of accounts are
prepared and maintained following the same methodology each and every year.
This is because of comparison and analysis between the years and
inter-organization. Otherwise, true financial picture can not be gained.

8. Materiality convention: Under this convention, recording of transactions is
done through using knowledge, experience and intelligence of the accountant.
Accountant himself considers the relevant & irrelevant at the time of recording
the transaction. For example, clock, staple machine, punch machine, calculators
etc. are bought to use long span of time in business but since they are lower in
price and the value of these assets are comparatively lower. At the end of
accounting period these items are going to be recorded in specific year’s
expense account not in assets though it has been written as assets in the primary
book of accounts.

Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-21

162 Accounting
Adjustments to be considered at the time of preparing statement
of financial Position:
1. Adjustments of closing stock of goods:
Value of closing stock of goods is calculated at the end of accounting period of
a business organisation. Adjusting entry for this is as follows:
Closing stock of goods Debit
Purchase return account Debit
Cost of goods sold Debit
Opening stock of goods Credit
Purchase account Credit
Carriage inward account Credit
It is noticeable that through the above adjusting entry Cost of goods sold account
& Closing stock of goods account are created, which is required to prepare
financial reports.
2. Outstanding Expenses:
After preparation of trial balance it will be found that wages are due Tk. 500.
Then according to the accrual concept Tk. 500 will be at Statement of
Comprehensive Income because this expense is relating to current accounting
period. The same amount will be shown in the Statement of Financial Position
as current liability. Adjusting entry for this is as follows:
Wages A/c Debit
Wages due A/c Credit
3. Expenses paid in Advance/Prepaid Expenses:
At the end of the year it is found that house rent for Tk. 800 paid in advance.
According to periodicity concept this prepaid rent will be deducted from the
total house rent and shown in the Statement of Comprehensive Income because
this expense is not relating to current accounting period. The same amount will
be shown in the Statement of Financial Position on current assets.Adjusting
entry for this is as follows:
Prepaid house rent A/c Debit
House rent A/c Credit ~
Ss
~

Financial Statemenet 163
4. Accrued Income:
At the end of the year, it is found that interest on investment of Tk. 600 has been
earned but not yet received. According to periodicity concept Tk. 600 will be
shown in the Statement of Comprehensive Income as income. The interest
receivable will be shown in the Statement of Financial Position as current asset.
Adjusting entry for this is as follows:
Interest receivable on investment A/c —_— Debit

Interest on investment A/c Credit
5.Income Received in Advance/Unearned Income:
Suppose, in the trial balance of current accounting period, rent received has been
shown as tk.10,000. Out of this amount tk.3,000 received in advance for next
year. This prepaid rent of tk.3,000 will be deducted from the rent received
tk.10,000, actual rent received for this year tk.7,000 will be shown in the
Statement of Comprehensive Income and tk.3,000 will be shown in the
Statement of Financial Position as current liabilities. Adjusting entry for this is
as follows:
House rent revenue A/c Debit

Advance house rent revenue A/c Credit
6. Depreciation:
Depreciation is the reduction of value of an asset i. e. buildings, machineries etc.
owing to its use or other causes. Such reduction or loss known as depreciation
and it will be shown as operating expenses in the Statement of Comprehensive
Income. For example Plant and machinery is shown in the trial balance at Tk.
80,000. Depreciation on plant and machinery is to be charged @ 15% p.a. Here
depreciation will be (80,000 X 15% )= Tk. 12,000 will be shown as operating
expenses in the Statement of Comprehensive Income. The same amount will be
deducted from plant and machinery as accumulated depreciation in the
Statement of Financial Position. Adjusting entry for this is as follows:
Deprecation expense A/c Debit

Accumulated deprecation A/c — Credit
7) Bad debts & Provision for doubtful debts:
Generally Goods sold & service provided in business on credit. So that debtors

e, account is found at the end of financial accounting period. Generally all debtors
S are not capable of paying their debts. A part of debtors is kept under bad debts &

164 Accounting
provision for daubtful debts account to determine correct profit of a business
organisation at the end of accounting period. When any debtor failed to pay their
debts, then it’s identified as bad debt. Different writers have recorded bad debts
direcly subtracting from debtors. But in this Testbook the procedure of
recording bad debts through Provision Method is shown with illustration .
With the following illustration recording of bad debts written off & bad debts
provision explained: Let’s guess, In trial balance- Debtors tk.50,000, opening
balance of bad debts & provision for bad debts tk.2000. One of the debtors failed
to pay his debt tk.1,000 due to financial incapability. Proper Adjusting Entry &
effect on Related Accounts are shown for this.

Adjusting entry for this is as follows:

1) Bad debts & provision for doubtful debts account Debit tk.1,000

Debtors account Credit tk.1,000
(Bad debts tk.1,000 written off)
2) Bad debts expenses (50,000-1,000) x 5% -(2,000-1,000) Debit tk.1,450
Bad debts & provision for doubtful debts account Credit tk.1,450
(Bad debts & provision for doubtful debts charged on Debtors A/c)
Effect of Bas debts & Provision for doubtful debts in related accounts:
Debtors Account
Balance B/D 50,000 | Bad debts & provision for doubtful debts account} 1,000
Balance C/D 49,000
FO] 0,000 |
Bad debts & Provision for doubtful debts Account
Debtors 1,000 | Balance B/D 2,000
Balance B/D 2,450 | Bad debts expense 1,450
Bad debts expense Account

Bad dks & ovo ordoldebwaccomt] 1.450 | ‘+
Bad debts & Provision for doubtful debts are shown in Comprehensive Income
Statement & Statement of Financial Position

oo
s
nN

Financial Statemenct 165
In Comprehensive Income Statement:
Closing bad debts & provision for doubtful debts account {(50,000-1,000)} x5%} 2,450
Less: Opening balance bad debts & provision for doubtful debts account 2,000
(-) Bad debts written off 1,000
1,000
1,450
In Statement of Financial Position:
Debtors 50,000
Less: Bad debts written off (1,000)
49,000
Less: Closing bad debts & provision for doubtful debts (2,450)
46,550
the end of the year debtors for Tk.60,000. Suppose that, in current year 10% of debtors'
may not to be collectable. How much loss to be shown in comprehensive income
statement and how much rest for reserve debt to be shown in statement of financial
For the benefit of students some Financial Statements are given bellaw:
Illustration: 1
Prepare Comprehensive Income Statement, Statement of Changes in Equity and
Statement of Financial Position from the Trail balance & other information of
‘Akon & Associates’ of Chartered Accountant Mr. A-R. Akon
Akon & Associates
Trial Balance
31 December 2017
1. Capital 3,30,000
a Office Equipment 2,20,000
3. Service books 1,21,000
4, Audit fees 8,70,500
. Bi Office rent 2,70,000
S| 6. Electric & Telephone Expense 38,500

166 Accounting
qd. Cash in hand 30,400
8. Investment ( Share) 2,00,000
9. Dividend received 42,500
10. | Advance Audit fees 60,000
ll. Conveyance Expense 3,600
12. Insurance Expense 6,500
13. | Salary & Allowance 65,000
14. | Bank deposit 3,00,000
13. Drawings 48,000
13,03,000 | 13,03,000
(1) Audit of Accounts is compeleted of an organisation, which bill tk.55,000 not
yet realised.
(2) Office rent due for three months.
(3) Charge depreciation 10% on office equipment.
Akon & Associates
Comprehensive Income Statement
for the year ended 31 December 2017
Income:
Audit fees 8,70,500
Add: Audit fees receivable 55,000
9,25,500
Dividend received 42,500
Total Income 9,68,000
Less: Expenses
Office rent 2,70,000
Add: rent due 90,000
[3.60000 :

Financial Statemenet 167
Electricity & Telephone Expense 38,500
Conveyance Expense 3,600
Insurance Expense 6,500
Salary & Allowance 65,000
Depreciation on Office Equipment 22,000
4,95,600
Net Profit 4,72,400_
Akon & Associates
Statment of Changes in Equity
as on 31 December 2017
PO Taka | Taka
Capital 3,30,000
Add: Net profit 4,72,400
8,02,400
Less: Drawings (48,000)
Owner’s Equity or Closing Capital
Akon & Associates
Statment of Financial Position
for the year ended 31 December 2017
Taka Taka | Taka |
Fixed Assets:
Office Equipment 2,20,000
Less: Accumulated Depreciation (22,000)
1,98,000
Service book 1,21,000
Total fixed Assets 3,19,000
Long term Investment:
= Investment (Share) 2,00,000
aS L !

168 Accounting
Current Assets:
Audit fees receivable 55,000
Bank balance 3,00,000
Cash in hand 30,400
Total Current Assets 3,85,400
Total Assets 9,04,400
Owner’s Equity & Liabilities:
Owner’s Equity (31/12/2017) 7,54,400
Current Liabilities:
Advance Audit Fees 60,000
Office rent due 90,000
1,50,000
Owner’s Equity & Total Liabilities
Illustration: 2
Accountant of Arthi & Sons has prepared the following Trial Balance.
Trial Balance
31 December 2017
poe it Taka Credit Taka
Purchase & Sales 1,47,000 2,90,000
Goods return 4,000 3,000
Salary 20,000
Carriage inward 2,000
Carriage outward 800
Insurance premium 5,000
Advertisement expense 2,500
Cash at Bank 15,000
Capital 5,00,000
Debtors 7,000
Creditors 10,000
Machinery 2,80,000
Land 4,73,200
10% Loan (Payable at 2020) 1,00,000
Accumulated depreciation 56,000
Provision for bad debt 500
Stock (01 December 2017) 3,000 20

Financial Statemenet 169
Adjustments:
i. Closing stock: cost price 5,000 Taka, market value 4,000 Taka;
ii. Depreciate 10% on Machinery;
iii. Salaries are due 6,000 Taka;
iv. Prepaid insurance premium are 2,500 Taka;
vy. Charge provision for bad debt 10%;
vi. Interest on loan is due.
You are required to prepare Comprehensive Income Statement, Statement of Changes
in Equity of Arthi & Sons for year ended 31 December 2017 and Statement of Financial
Position as on that date.
Solution: Arthi & Sons
Comprehensive Income Statement
for the year ended 31 December 2017
P| Taka | Taka | Taka |
Net sales:
Gross Sales 2,90,000
(-) Return 4,000
Less: Cost of goods sold 2,86,000
Opening stock 3,000
Purchase 1,47,000
(-) Return (3,000)
1,44,000
(+) Carriage inward 2,000 '
1,49,000
-) Closing stock 4,000
(-) g (4,000) 1,45,000
Gross profit 1,41,000
Less: Operating cost
Salary 20,000
(+) Due 6,000 26,000
Carriage outward 800
Advertisement expense 2,500
Insurance expense 5,000
(-) Prepaid (2,500)
Depreciation (2,80,000 10%) 2,500
Closing bad debts & provision for doutful debts (7,000% 10% 700 iid
Less: Opening bad debts & provision for doutful debts 00 00
~ | (60,000)
Operating profit 81,000
Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-22

170 Accounting
Less: Other expenses
Interest on loan (1,00,000< 10%) (10,000)
Net profit 71,000
Arthi & Sons
Statement of changes in equity
For the year ended 31 December 2017
Pf Taka Taka
Capital 5,00,000
Add: Net profit 71,000
Equity (31/12/2017) 5,71,000
Arthi & Sons
Statement of Financial position
as on 31 December 2017
Po Taka | Taka | Taka
Fixed assets:
Machinery 2,80,000
Less: Accumulated depreciation 84,000 1,96,000
Land 4,73,200
Total fixed assets 6,69,200
Current Asset :
Cash and Bank 15,000
Debtors 7,000
Less: Closing bad debts & provision for doutful debts 700 -
6,3
Prepaid Insurance 2,500
Closing stock 4,000
Total Current Asset 27,800
Total assets 6,97,000
Owner’s Equity & Liabilities:
Owner’s Equity (31/12/2017) 5,71,000
Long-term liabilities:
Loan (Payable at 2020) 1,00,000
Short term liabilities:
Creditors 10,000
Interest due on Loan 10,000
Salaries due 6,000
Total current liabilities 26,000
Total liabilities 1,26,000 |
Owner’s Equity & Total Liabilities 6,97,000 | 5

Financial Statemenet 171
Illustration: 3
From the following information you are required to prepare Comprehensive
Income Statement & Statement of Changes in Equity for the year ended 31 December
2017 and Statement of Financial Position for that date of Arpon Traders
Arpon Traders
Trial Balance
31 December 2017
Opening stock 30,000
Purchase and Sales 76,000 1,57,000
Dock Charge 10,000
Carriage inward 5,000
Carriage outward 8,000
Commission received 500
Salaries 24,000
Advertisement 10,000
10% Investment 20,000
Cash in Hand 3,600
Debtors and Creditors 30,000 19,500
Import Duty 7,000
Stationery 3,000
Office expense 6,000
Electricity expense 5,000
Drawings and Capital 40,000 1,70,000
Sales return & Purchase return 7,000 6,000
Bank overdraft 30,000
Sales commission 8,000
Discount allowed & discount received 1,000 800
Furniture 20,000
Machinery 70,000
Interest on Investment 800
Interest on Bank overdraft 1,000
354,600
Adjustments:
i. Closing stock (31/12/2017) tk. 40,000.
ii. Office expense are due tk.1,000.
iii. Unused stationery tk.500.
~ iv. Prepaid salary tk.4,000.
&

172 Accounting
Solution: Arpon Traders
Comprehensive Income statement
for the year ended 31 December 2017
Tak Taka Taka
Sales 15,7000
(-) Return (7,000)
Less: Cost of goods sold 1,50,000
Opening Stock 30,000
Purchase 76,000
(-) Retum (6,000)
70,000
Carriage inward 5,000
Import Duty 10,000
Dock Charge 000
1,22,000
(-) Closing stock (40,000) (82,000)
Gross profit 68,000
Less: Operating Cost
Return outward 8,000
Salaries 24,000
(-) Prepaid Salaries (4,000) 20,000
Advertisement 10,000
Stationery 3,000
(-) Unused Stationery (500) 2,500
Office expense 6,000
(+) Due 1,000 7,000
Electricity expense 5,000
Sales commission 8,000
Discount allowed 1,000
(61,500)
Operating profit 6,500
Add: Other incomes
Interest on investment 800
Discount received 800
Commission received 500
3,300
Less: Other expences 9,800 |
Interest on bank overdraft (1,000),
Net profit “8,800. =S

Financial Statemenct 173
Arpon Traders
Statement of changes in equity
for the year ended 31 December 2017
Taka | Tata
Capital (1/1/2017) 1,70,000
(+) Net profit 8.800
1,78,800
(-) Drawings (40,000)
guity (31/12/201 1,38,800
Arpon Traders
Statement of Financial position
as on 3] December 2017
poset | Taka | Trak
Fixed Assets :
Furniture 20,000
Machinery 70,000
Total fixed assets 90,000
Investment :
10% Investment 20,000
Current Asset :
Cash in hand 3,600
Debtor 30,000
Unused stationery 500
Prepaid Salary 4,000
Accrued interest on Investment 1,200
Closing stock 40,000
Total Current Asset 79,300
Total Assets 1,89,300
Owner’s Equity & Liabilities:
Equity (31/12/2017) 1,38,800
Current Liabilities:
Creditors 19500
Bank overdraft 30000
Office expenditure due 1000
Total current liabilities 50,500
% Owner’s Equity & Total Liabilities 1,89,300
gS

174 Accounting
Illustration: 4
From the following information you are required to prepare Comprehensive
Income Statement & Statement of Changes in Equity for the year ended 31 December
2017 and Statement of Financial Position for that date of Showkat Traders
Trial Balance
31 March 2017
Debit Taka__| Credit Taka
Cash in hand 8,200
Cash at Bank 11,000
Bills receivable and Bills payable 3,500 2,000
Capital 1,00,000
Opening stock 11,000
Purchase and Sales 35,000 58,000
Sales returns and purchase returns 3,000 2,000
Debtors 22,000
Creditors 20,000
Profit on sale of furniture 1,000
Advertisement 7,000
Salaries 10,000
Carriage 1,000
Entertainment expenses 2,000
Provision for bad debt & provision for doubtful debts 1,500
Commission paid and commission received 300 500
Lease property (5 years) 30,000
Furniture 4,000
Office equipment 5,000
Drawing 32 000
p85, 000 | 1,85,000
Adjustment:
i. Closing stock tk. 20,000 ;
ii. Salary of two months are due;
iii, Tk.1,000 out debtors are not collectable;
iv. Half of advertisement is to be deferred ;
vy.  Depreciate on Furniture and Office equipment @ 5%.
%
S
™

Financial Statemenet 175
Solution:
Showkat traders
Comprehensive Income statement
for the year ended 31 December 2017
Taka | Taka | Taka
Sales $8,000
(-) Sales returns (3,000)
55,000
Less : Cost of goods sold
Opening stock 11,000
Purchase 35,000
(-) purchase returns (2,000) 33,000
(+) Carriage 1,000
45,000
(-) Closing stock (20,000)
(25,000)
Gross profit 30,000
Less : Operating expenses
Advertisement 7,000
(-) Deferred (4) (3,500) 3,500
Salary 10,000
(+) due 2,000
12,000
Entertainment expenses 2,000
Unrecorded Bad debts 1,000
Less: Opeaing bad debts & provision for doutful debts (1,500) (500)
Commission paid 300
Written off Lease property (3) 6,000
Depreciation- Furniture 200
Depreciation- Office equipment 250 450
23,750
Operating profit 6,250
Add: Other income
Profit on sale of furniture 1,000
Commission received 500
1,500
Net profit 7,750.
2
&

176 Accounting
Showkat Traders
Statement of Changes in Equity
for the year ended 31 March 2017
pO Taka Taka
Capital (1.4.2016) 1,00,000
(+) Net profit 2,150
1,07,750
(-) Drawings (32,000)
quity (31/03/2017 75,750
Showkat Traders
Statement of Financial Position
as on 31 December 2017
Fixed asset :
Lease 30,000
(-) Written off (6,000) 24,000
Furniture 4,000
(-) Accumulated depreciation (200) 3,800
Office equipment 5,000
(-) Accumulated depreciation (250) 4,750
Total Fixed asset 32,550
Current Asset :
Cash in hand 8,200
Cash at Bank 11,000
Bills receivable 3,500
Debtors 22,000
(-) Unrecorded Bad debts (1,000) 21.000
Closing stock 20,000
Total Current Asset 63,700
Fictitious Asset ;
Deferred advertisement 3,500
Total asset 99,750
Owner’s Equity & Liabilities:
Equity (31/03/2017) 75,750
Current Liabilities:
Bills payable : 2,000
Creditors 20,000
Accrued salary 2,000
Total Current Liabilities 24,000 -
Owner’s Equity & Total Liabilities 99,750} 5S

Financial Statemenet 177
Illustration: 5
From the following information you are required to prepare Comprehensive:
Income Statement & Statement of Changes in Equity for the year ended 31 December
and Statement of Financial Position as on 31 December 2017 of Farhana Enterprise.
Trial Balance
30 June 2017
Title Credit Taka
Debtors and Creditors 20,000 37,000
Building 70,000
General reserve 10,000
Cash in hand 18,600
Capital 1,00,000
Drawings 35,000
Opening Stock 30,000
Purchase and Sales 84,000 1,54,000
Repair to Building 2,600
Freight 4,000
Import Duty 1,000
Dock charge 1,700
Salary and wages 18,000
General expenses 5,000
Bank overdraft 3,000
Insurance premium 1,500
Legal charge & Provision for doubtful debts 3,000 2,500
Advertisement 5,500
Sundry loss 3,600
Interest on Bank O/D 10,000
Discount received 4,000
Travelling expenses 3,000
House rent received 11,000
Income tax 5,000
Adjustments:
i. Goods drawings for personal uses 1,000 Taka were not recorded.
ii. Unrecorded Return inward and Return outward 4,000 and 2,000 Taka
respectively.
iii. Insurance premium have paid up to 30 September 2017 (For one year).
iv. Unused stationery 1,000 Taka and sublet for one month is due.
v. Write off 2,000 Taka as bad debt and charge 10% provision for bad
debt & doubtful debts on remaining debtors
vi. Closing stock 40,000 Taka.
Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-23

178 Accounting
Solution: Farhana Enterpise
Comprehensive Income Statement
for the year ended 31 March 2017
ee ee
Sales 1,54,000
(-) Return inward (4,000)
Less: Cost of goods sold 1,50,000
Opening Stock 30,000
Purchase 84,000
(-) Goods Drawings (1,000)
83,000
(-) Return outward (2,000)
81,000
Freight 4,000
Import duty 1,000
Dock charge 1,700
1,17,700
(-) Closing stock (40,000)
(77,700)
Gross profit 72,300
Less: Operating Cost
Repair to Building 2,600
Salary and Wages 18,000
General expenses 5,000
(-) unused stationery (1,000)
4,000
Insurance premium 1,500
(-) Prepaid (375)
1,125
Legal charge 3,000
Closing bad debt & provision for doubtful debts 1,400
Less: Surplus of bad debt & provision for doubtful debts (500)
(Op.balance tk.2,500-bad debt written off) 900
Advertisement 5,500
vi
Travelling expenses 3,000 38,125
Operating profit 34,175
2
&

Financial Statemenet 179
Other Incomes:
Discount received 4,000
House rent received 11,000
(+) Receivable 1,000
12,000
16,000
Other Expenses: 0175
Sundry Loss 3,600
Interest Bank Overdraft 10,000
(13,600)
Net profit 36,575
Farhana Enterpise
Statement of Changes in Equity
for the year ended 31 march 2017
Taka Taka
Opening Capital 1,00,000
(+) Net profit 36,575
1,36,575
(-) Drawings :
Cash 35,000
maa 100g (36,000)
(-) Income tax 5,000
95,575
(+) General reserve 10,000
Owner’s equity (31/03/2017) 1,05,575
Farhana Enterpise
Statement of Financial Position
as on 31 March 2017
Assets | Taka | Taka | Taka |
Fixed Asset :
Building 70,000
Total fixed Asset 70,000
Current Asset _:
Cash in hand 18,600
Debtors 20,000
se | (-)Unrecorded return inward (4,000)
& 16,000 _

180 Accounting

(-)Unrecored bad debt (2,000)

14,000

(-) Closing bad debt & provision for doubtful debts (1,400) 12.600

House rent receivable 1,000

Prepaid Insurance premium 375

Unused stationery 1,000

Closing stock 40,000

Total Current Assets 73,575
Total Assets 1,43,575
Equity and Liabilities

Equity (31/03/2017) 1,05,575

Current Liabilities:

Creditors 37,000

(-) return outward (2,000) 35,000

Bank overdraft 3,000

Total Current Liabilities 38,000
Equity and Total Liabilities 1,43,575

Evaluation of financial condition of business:
From comprehensive Income statement and statement of financial position any
one can know overall condition of business such as profit, loss, fixed assets,
current assets, current liabilities, long term loan, capital etc. But this
information is not sufficient. Because the most important item is not only to
know profit or loss of a business but also to know how much profit has been
earned against how much capital invested. Beside these, we have to know not
only the amount of current asset and current liabilities but also to know how
much current assets to current liabilities, which indicate the loan repayment
capacity of a business through current assets. So, to know the financial
condition of a business perfectly we have to compare each item of
comprehensive Income statement and Financial statement to another item, we
have to calculate percentage of each account to another account or ratio of each
account to another account. From these percentage and ratio comparative
evaluation of more than one year of a business is possible. Not only this, under
these ratio it is possible to compare one business to another business. Some ratio _
analysis is given below: S

Financial Statemenct 181
Profit ratio:
We can compare net profit to Sales and capital employed. That is, we can calcu-
late percentage of net profit to sales and net income to capital employed.
Increase of these ratios indicates good capacity of earning profit. Beside, this
profit ratio of business is higher than another business indicates better capacity
of earning profit.
Net profit
1. Net profit ratio = ———————— x 100
ms Net sales
‘ ; Net profit
2. Net profit to capital employed ratio = ——_—- x 100
—_ —_—_— Capital employed
Capital employed= Total assets-Current Liabilities
Capacity of loan repayment:
We can know the loan repayment capacity of business from comparisons of current
assets and current liabilities that is calculation of current assets and current liabilities
ratio, For this reason we have to calculate following two ratios:
‘ Current Assets
1. Current ratio= ———————
Current Liabilities
2. Liquid ration Curent Assets-(tock of Goods + Prepaid expenses)
Current Liabilities
As prepaid expense & stock of goods are not possible to convert into cash
quickly.These type of items are deducted from current assets when we are
calculating liquid ratio standard value of current ration is 2: | i,c against every 1
taka current liability business should keep 2 taka current assets, alternatively for
liquid ratio business should keep | taka liquid asset against every 1 taka liquid
liability. That's why standard value of liquid ratio is 1: 1.
Illustration:
Following information’s are collected from the books of Rani Enterprises and
= Sreelekha Enterprises of 2017:
La]

182 Accounting
Rani Enterprises (Taka) Sreelekha Enterprises (Taka)
Gross profit 10,000 15,000
Net profit 8,000 6,000
Sales 1,00,000 1,20,000
Capital 60,000 80,000
Current Asset 9,000 10,000
Current liabilities 5,000 6,000
Stock 1,000 1,200
Requirement:
a) Calculate net profit ratio and net profit to capital employed ratio.
b) Current ratio and liquid ratio of two businesses.
c) Which is better business?
Solution: a)
Sect Ens
1. Net profit ratio = 8,000 ‘ 6,000
= ——_— x 100 = §9%
Net profit. 199 100,000 ~°°" 8% | 720,000 *'°= 5%
Net sales
2.Net profit to Capital employed 6,
* -— —_ ae x 100= 13.3% £,000 100 = 7.5%
ratio = PFO _ 199 60,000 80,000
Capital employed
b.
1. Current ratio = _Current Asset 9,000 _1g:1 | 10,000 _1.,.,
Current Liabilities 5,000 6,000
2 Lig nate 9,000-1,000 = 1.6: 1
_ Current Assets-(Stock of Goods + Prepaid expenses) | “$090 10,000 -1,200 = 1.46: 1
Current Liabilities 6,000
c) Financial condition of Rani Enterprise is better than Sreelekha Enterprise.
Profit of Rani is 8% and 13.3% and Sreelekha is 5% and 7.5% Liquid or loan
repayment capacity of Rani Enterprise is better than Sreelekha Enterprise.
Slandered current ratio is 2: 1 that indicate sufficient cash will remain after
loan repayment. S

Financial Statemenet 183
Activity: From the of following information you are required to calculate net
profit ratio, return on capital employed ratio, current ratio and liquid ratio:
Gross profit 40,000 Capital employed 1,00,000
Net profit 18,000 Current Asset 35,000
Sales 1,20,000 Current liabilities 20,000

Closing stock $,000
Exercise
Multiple choice questions:
|. What is the result of Ist step of comprehensive income statement?
a) Net Sales b) Net Purchase
c) Gross Profit d) Cost of Goods Sold
2. Which one substracted for calculating cost of goods sold?
a) Opcining Stock of Goods b) Closing Stock of Goods
c) Net Purchase d) Net Sales
3. Operating income
1) Sale of Furniture
ii) Good Sold
lil) Service Revenue
Which one is correct?
a)i &ii b) i & iii
c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
4, Which one is correct?
a) Profit changes capital,
b) Profit decreases capital.
c) Capital comes only from profit,
d) Profit increases capital.
5. Gross profit is-
a) Cost of Goods Sold — Closing Stock b) Net Sales - Cost of Goods Sold
¢) Cost of Goods Sold + Opening Stock d) Net profit - operating expenses
=
qi

184 Accounting
6. Includes in Other Income -
i. Interest on investment
ii. Sales
iii. Discount received
Which one is correct?
a)i & ii b)i & iii
c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
7. If Sales 18,000 Taka, Stock 2,500 Taka, Purchase 1,700 Taka, Purchase 13,400
Taka Carriage inward 700 Taka then what will be cost of goods sold?
a) 16,600 Taka b) 14,900 Taka
c) 15,900 Taka d) 18,300 Taka
8. Depreciation means-
a) Purchase price of fixed assets b) Sales price of old fixed assets
c) Written down value of used fixed asset. d) Replacement value of old fixed asset.
9. Provision for doubtful debt is kept, when-
a) Debtors become insolvent.
b) Debtors are not found.
c) Confirm that money will not collect from debtors.
d) Possibility of non-collection of amount due to debtor.
10. If gross profit tk.70,000, operating expenses tk.85,000, other income
tk.15,000 then net profit will be-
a) 20,000 Taka b) 25,000 Taka
c) 30,000 Taka d) 50,000 Taka
11. Inspite of gross profit earned, what is the reason for net loss?
a) Cost of goods sold increases _b) Stock of goods increases
Cc) Operating expenses increases 4d) Other income increases
12. Which one is operating expenses?
a) Office expenses b) Drawings
c) Sundry loss d) Interest on loan
13. Creditors show in which part of financial statement?
a) Current Asset b) Current Liabilities
c) Fixed assets d) Long term loan
2
&

Financial Statemenet 185
14. In the book of Leena Traders, tk.5,000 Debt balance under Mina & Sons.
What does it mean for Leena Traders?
a) Expense b) Income
c) Asset d) Liability
15. Which one is the formula of liquid ratio?
Ps Current Liabilities -(Stock+ Prepaid expenses )
Current Assets
b) Current Assets + (Stock of Goods — Prepaid expenses)
Current Liabilities
°) Current Assets
Current Liabilities
4) Current Assets - (Stock of Goods + Prepaid expenses)
Current Liabilities
Creative questions:
1. Trial Balacne & other necessary adjustment of ‘Shotota Law Chamber’,
Dhaka on 31 December 2017 mentioned below:
Shotota Law Chember
Trial Balance
31st December, 2017
Accounting Title LF. Debit Credit
Taka Taka
1 Drawings & Capital 60,000 | 3,50,000
2 Prepaid camber rent 1,20,000
3 Furniture & Equipment 80,000
4 Service Revenue 4,75,000
5 Bank Balance 2,00,000
6 Unearned Service Revnue 50,000
7 Law Books 40,000
8g 6% Investment (1-7-15) 2,50,000
9 Accumulated Depreciation 16,000
(Equipment)
Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-24

186 Accounting
Salary & Allowance 1,10,000
Electric & Telephone Bill 24,000
Convence expenses 7,000
a ee Ee
Adjustment:
1) Cheque tk.40.000 received in advance for providing legal service from a
Company, which is included in Service Revenue.
2) Salary & Allowance is due for Imonth.
3) Half of prepaid chamber rent expried.
4) Charge depreciation on furniture & equipment 10%.
a) Calculate current liabilities from above information.
b) Prepare comprehasive Income statement of Shotota Law Chamber.
c) Calculate Total amount of classified Assets in statement of financial position.
2. A few ledger balances and necessary adjustments of Rimjhim Enterprise as at.
31 December 2017 are as follows:
Opening stock of goods 30,000
Purchase and sales 2,90,000 4,20,000
Carriage Inward 6,000
Returns 12,000 5,000
Discounts 7,000 10,000
Salaries (9 months) 54,000
Import duty 5,000
Stationery 4,000
Advertisement 12,000
Bills receivable 15,000
a a
Adjustments:
1) Purchase price of closing stock of goods is tk. 40,000 of which market price
is tk. 2,000 more. ~
2) Opening stock of goods includes stationery worth tk. 500. Ss

Financial Statemenet 187
3) Goods disturbutied free of cost among the prospective buyers worth tk.
6,000 was not recorded.
4) Carrige expenses is due tk.3,000, on the other hand tk. 1,000 has been paid
advance for duty.
a) Calculate the amount of net sales from the above informations.
b) Determine the cost of goods sold of Rimjhim Enterprise.
c) Considering gross profit tk.1,26,000 prepare the statement of
comprehensive Income.
3. The trial balance and other information of Jafrin and Sons as at 30 June 20107
are as follows:
Jafrin and Sons
Trial Balance
30 June 2017
Purchase and Creditors 1,50,000 90,000
Debtors and Sales 73,000 1,27,000
Carriage outward and return outword 15,500 6,500
15% Bank overdraft (3 1-1-2017) 40,000
Capital 1,00,000
Prepaid rent 10,000
Bank charge and Bad debt reserve 2,000 3,500
Cash discount 7,500 11,000
Lease-hold property (8 years) 1,20,000
pat || zum | 3.22,000)
Other information:
1) Value of unsold goods is tk. 63,000.
2) Prepaid rent worth tk.6,000 is expired.
3) Amount of bad debt for the year is tk. 3,000 and povision for bad debt is to
be kept @5%.
a) Calculate the cost of goods sold from the above information.
b) Prepare the statement of comprehensine income of Jafrin and Sons,
considering Gross profit tk. 47,000.
2 c) Prepare the statement of financial position considering the closing
a balance of owners equity tk. 1,06,500.

188 Accounting
4. Trial balance and other information of Prionty Enterpirse as at 31 December
2017 are as follows:
Capital 1,48,000
Cost of goods sold 1,52,000
Closing stock of goods 58,000
Sales 3,25,000
10% Investment 1,20,000
Salaries and honorarium 72,000
Training allowances 18,800
Commission 7,200 4,000
Discount received 11,000
Sundry creditos 40,000
ae
Other information:
1) Salaries and honorarium due for 4 months.
2) Charge 10% depreciation on furniture.
3) Commission receivable tk. 4,000 not yet recorded.
a) Calculate gross profit or loss from the above information.
b) Prepare the statement of comprehensive income considering the
gross profit tk.1,73,000.
c) Prepare the statement of financial position considering the net profit
of tk.60,000.
5. The trial balance and adjustment of Chondona Enterprise as at 31 December
2017 are as follows:
No. Taka Taka
Stock of goods (1-1-2017) 40,000
Purchase and Sales 1,90,000 | 3,50,000
Office expenses 65,000
Carriage expenses 3,000 eo
Cash in hand 15,000 s

Financial Statemenet 189
6 Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable 63,000} 25,000
7 Provision for bad & doubful debts 6,500
8 Discount received 700
9 Sundry loss 2,500
10 | Profit on sale of equipment 2,500
11 | Bank charge 3,500
12 | Dock charge 1,200
13. | Postage and telegrame expenses 1,500
a
Adjustment:
1) Goods sold by cash tk.15,000 was not recorded.
2) Write off tk.2,500 as bad debt and 5% provision for doubtful debts is to be
charged.
3) Tk. 5,000 was paid for legal expenses of the business, not yet recorded in
the books
4. Unrecorded return inward tk. 2,000 and return outward tk.1,000.
a) Determine tha amount of closing cash from the above information.
b) Determine the Gross profit or loss by preparing comprehensive
income statement.
c) Calculate Net profit or loss considering Gross profit tk. 1,34,800.
6. Shotodol Enterpirse’s earned Gross profit tk.1,28,000 for the year ended 30
June 2017. Partial Trial balance & necessary adjustments on that date of
business are as follows:

5 Te LF. Debit Credit
ie
1 Drawings & Capital 10,000 | 2,80,000

Z Office Equipment 2,40,000
3 Salary (6 months) 72,000
4 Notes Receivable & Note Payable 25,000 26,000
5 House Rent Income 6,000
6 Accumulated Dep. (office equipment) 12,000
x | 7 8% Investment (1/1/16) 1,00,000
a|8 Commission 3,000 2,000

190 Accounting
Interest on Investment 4,000
10% Mortgage Loan (1/2/17) 1,20,000
Adjustments:
1. Cost price of closing stock of goods tk.1,28,000 but market price tk.20,000
higher.
2. House rent received for 2 years.
3. Charge depreciation 7.5% on office equipment.
4, Commission receivable tk.2,000.
a) Calculate cost of goods sold considering Net sales tk.3,56,000.
b) Prepare comprehensive income statement for the year ended 30 June 2017
of Shotodol Enterprise.
c) Determine financial position at the closing date of accounting period
considering Net Loss tk.27,000.
7. Trail balance & other information on 31 December 2017 of Nishitha Traders
are as follows:
Trial balance
31 December 2017
re ad Taka | Taka
1 Purchase & Sales 2,50,000 | 3,15,700
2 Carriage 15,000
3 Salary & Allowance 30,000
4 Rates & Taxes 14,500
5 Commission 7,500 18,000
6 Stationary 4,000
7 Port charge 12,000
8 Lease rent & Dividend received 6,500 | 30,000
9 Discount paid & Discount received 7,000 12,800
10 Sock of goods (01/01/2017) 30,000
Other information:
1. Unsold goods valued tk.1,30,000 & in this amount, stock of stationary tk.2,500 3
included. a

Financial Statemenet 191
2. Sales tk.10,000 & purchase tk.5,000 on credit yet to record.
3. Tax due tk.1,500, on the contrary rates paid tk.500 in advance.
a) Calculate Net current assets from above information.
b) Calculate Gross profit or loss preparing comprehensive income statemtnt.
c) Calculate Net profit considering Gross profit tk.1,25,000.
8. Trial balance & other information on 30 June 2017 of Shotabdi Bors. are as
follows:
Trial balance
30 June 2017
Serial : LF. Debit Credit
a oe
1 Drawings & Capital 2,000 | 2,20,000
2 Cash in hand 13,000
3 Furniture 18, 000
4 Accounts Receivable 10,000
] Prepaid Insurance Premium 500
6 12% Investment in Bond (01-01-2017) 2,00,000
7 Bank overdraft 8,000
8 Additional Capital (01-01-2017) 20,000
9 Deferred Advertisement 4,000
10 Income tax 1,500
ll Salary due 7,800
12 General Reserve 23,200
13 Machinery 30,000
a a ee ee)
Other information:
1. Closing stock of goods valued tk.30,500.
2. Owner’s life insurance premium tk.5,000 paid from business, which is not
recored.
3. 2 notes of tk.1,000 were completely destroyed, which need to be recorded.
4. Interest accrued on Investment.
a) Calculate current liabilites from above information.
b) Prepare statement of changes in equity considering net profit tk.40,500.
co  ¢) Determine total assets at the last date of accounting period in statement of
& financial position.

192 Accounting
9. Following is the information of Raman and Brothers for the year 2016 & 2017-
2016 2017 2016 2017
Gross profit 16,000 15,500 Current Asset 8,500 11,000
Net profit 6,900 5,600 Current Liabilities 6,400 9,500
Sales 90,000 92,000 Stock 1,200 900
Invested Capital 50,000 75,000
a) What will be the operating cost of 2016 & 2017?
b) Calculate the net profit ratio and Capital employed ratio of 2016.
c) Explain short term loan repayment capacity for the year 2017.
10.Raihan Enterprise earned gross profit TK. 25,000 in the year of 2017 through
whole sale business. His Trial Balance and other information’s are as follows:
(SENo| Accountname __[L.F. | Debit Taka | Credit Taka |
1 Bank overdraft 23,000
2 Purchase and Sales 22,000 60,000
3 Sales return & Purchase return 3,000 1,000
4 Debtors and Creditors 35,000 8,000
5 10% Investment (1-7-17) 20,000
6 Fixed Assets 80,000
7 Packing expenses 2,000
8 Provision for bad debt & doubtful debt 4,000
9 Capital 1,00,000
10 | Interest on Bank overdraft 5,000
11 Opening Stock 23,000
12 | Cash in hand 6,000
Other Informations:
1. Closing stock- cost tk.20,000 and market value tk.22,000.
2. Two tk. 500 note was stolen from cash box.
3. Goods Purchase on credit tk. 2,000 was not recorded in the books.
a) From the above information calculate liquid ratio of Raihan Enterprise.
b) Prepare comprehensive income statement of Raihan Enterprise
c) Prepare statement of financial position considering net profit tk. 29,000 .
11. Following is the Trial Balance of Surovi Traders as on 31 December 2017:
_SLNo. | ‘Title | LF. | Debit Taka_| Credit Taka
1 Opening Stock 20,000
2. Purchase & Sales 80,000 1,20,000
3 Return outward 3,000
4 Return inward 4,000 x
5 Furniture 24,000 8

Financial Statemenet 193
6 Carriage inward 4,000
7 Salary 12,000
8 Rent 5,000
9 Reserve Fund 30,000
10 Rates and Tax 6,000
ll Drawings & Capital 10,000 80,000
12 Additional capital (1/7/17) 20,000
13 Machinery 90,000 a
Total 2,54,000 2,54,000
Other Informations:
1. Closing stock tk.14,000.
2. Owner personally paid tk.12,000 to employee of business, not yet recorded.
3. Depreciate 10% on Fixed assets
a) Calculate net value of fixed assets at the end of the year of Surovi Traders.
b) Determine net profit or loss of Surovi Traders.
¢) Prepare owner's equity Statement of Surovi Traders. (Considering Net Profit tk.35,000)
12. Following is the Trial Balance of Khadija & Co. as on 31 December 2017:
Serial| _———Accountname __—__|_L.F | Debit Taka | Credit Taka |
1 | Opening Stock 15,000
2 | Purchase & sales 40,000 1,05,000
3 | Salary 5,000
4 | Return 3,050 1,750
5 | Insurance premium 750
6 | Postage & Telegram 1,300
7 ‘| Carriage 2,500
8 | Advertisement 2,750
9 | Discount received 1,000
10 | Provision for bad debt & doubtful debt 2,600
11 | Sundry debtors 40,000
Total | 110,350 | 110,350 |
Adjustments:
1. Closing Stock 12,300 taka.
2. Goods Purchase 2,000 taka is not recorded.
3. Goods withdrawn by the owner 1,000taka was not recorded in the books.
4. Charge 4% provision for doubtful debt and 2% provision for discount on debtors.
5. Advertisement was paid for 5 years.
a) How much amount of net purchase?
b) Calculate Gross profit on the basis of above information of Khadija and Co.
c) Prepare Comprehensive income statement considering gross profit tk.57,000.
Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-25

Eleventh Chapter
Cost Price, Cost of Production and Selling Price
Determination of production cost and selling price is most important for the
goods and commodities which are produced, purchased and sold for business
purpose. If price is not properly determined, business will suffer loss and many
other hazards. To survive in current competitive market situation, determining
cost price at the time of production or purchase, also to determine selling price
at the time of sales and overall, price is vital for maintaining interest of both
purchaser and sellers.
- zz = “> eg .
wR TEE jo TY 7
¢ Parana Megs Eade wt Se;  —
 - oy ir = et ; ~ a my
, > wei i i" ask “aa _ Je
ff rd rN ro = > =
itm P mt
Sales center of manufactured goods
At the end of this chapter we will be able to —
© Determine cost and selling price of a trading concern.
¢ Classify element of cost of productions.
e Prepare cost sheet and determine total cost price and total sales price.
=
&

Cost Price, Cost of Production and Selling Price 195
Determination of Cost Price & Selling Price:
The prime objective of a business concern is to ascertain actual profit and loss.
Determination of actual profit or loss will not be possible if the price of the
goods purchased and their selling price are not properly determined. Cost price
is determined by adding direct expenses incurred to the value of goods produced
or purchased. Indirect expenses are added to them to make up total cost of the
goods purchased and a certain percentage of profit is added to this total cost for
determining selling price.
Determination of Cost Price:
In ordinary sense, cost price is that price which is paid at the time of purchasing
goods or commodities. But in the real sense, cost price includes all the cost of
carrying goods or commodities to the places where these are stored. Such
carrying costs are known as direct expenses. For example carriage inward,
import duties, dock charge, payment to porters etc. Illusrations are meant for
example:
Samad & Sons of Gazipur purchased 5,000 litres of Soyabin oil from
Chittagong at Tk. 120 per litre. He paid truck fare of Tk.15, 000, labour charges
of Tk. 1,200, toll charge of Tk. 1,000. Tk.1,500 paid for off-loading expenses to
warehouse. In this case, the price of per litre oil will be-
Particulars | Taka | Tak
Purchase of Soyabin oil (5000 litre x Tk. 120) 6,00,000
(+) Direct Expenses :
Truck fare 15,000
Labour charge 1,200
Toll charge 1,000
Off-loading expenses 1,500
18,700
Total Cost price 6,18, 700
s Price per litre (6,18,700+5,000) = Tk. 123.74
™N

196 Accounting
Table of Purchase cost, cost of goods purchased and selling price are shown in below:
Name of the firm
For the year ended on --------------- Dated ----------------
oT iParticulars | Taka | Taka
Amount paid for the price of goods purchased
Add: Direct expenses:
Carriage
¢ Dock charge
* Duty
Cost price
Add: Indirect expenses:
e Rent
e Salary
e Advertisement
Total cost of goods purchased
Add: desired profit
Selling price
Determination of Selling Price:
Selling price is that price which is determined by adding profit to the total cost
of goods purchased or manufactured. For example, shop rent, staff salary,
electricity, advertisement expense etc. are added to the cost of goods purchased
to find out the total cost. Then selling price is determined by adding desired
profit to the total cost. For example, total cost price of soya bin oil was of
tk.6, 18,700. To sell the oil they also paid as indirect expenses of tk. 10,500 staff
salary tk.6,000; electricity bill tk.1,500; advertisement tk.2,000 and
travelling expense tk.1000. If the oil is sold at a profit ( desired) of 10% on the
total cost, then the selling price will be-
Particulars Taka Taka
Total Cost price 6,18, 700
(+) Indirect Expenses :
Staff salary 6,000
Electricity bill 1,500
Advertisement 2,000
Traveling expense 1,000 10,500
Total Cost 6,29,200
(+) Desired Profit (6,29,200 x 10%) 62,920
Selling Price 6,92,120 &
Selling price per liter oil (6,92,120+5000) = Tk. 138.42 a

Cost Price, Cost of Production and Selling Price 197
Purchase cost, cost of goods purchased and selling price are shown below by an
example:
Example:
Nasir Enterprise of Dhaka imported 1,000 bundles of Corrugated Iron Sheets
from Vietnam at tk. 4,000 per bundle. Following expenses were paid to import
1,000 bundles of Corrugated Iron Sheets:
Import duty tk.15,000; freight tk.75,000; Shipping insurance tk.8,000; clearing
charge tk.7,000; porter expenses tk.2,000; truck rent tk. 20,000. Besides, paid
tk. 12,000 as Godown and shop rent and tk. 7,000 as employees' salary. He also
paid tk. 10 as commission for the sale of cach bundle corrugated sheet. The said
businessman earns 15% of profit on total cost by selling the corrugated sheets.
Solution:
Nasir Enterprise
Statement of cost price and selling price
/ Particulars | Taka | Taka
Purchase of Corrugated Sheets (1,000 bundles x tk. 4,000) 40,00,000
(+) Direct Expenses
Import duty 15,000
Freight 75,000
Shipping Insurance 8,000
Clearing charge 7,000
Porter expenses 2,000
Transportation 20,000
1,27,000
Total cost price 41,27,000
(+) Indirect Expenses :
Godown and shop rent Staff salary 12,000
Employees’ salary 7,000
Commission (Tk. 1,000X 10) 10,000 | ___29,000
Total Cost 41,56,000
(+) Desired Profit (41,56,000 x 15%) 6,23,400
Selling Price 47,79,400
Cost per bundle of corrugated sheet = (Tk. 41,56,000+1000) = Tk. 4,156.
Per bundle selling price of corrugated sheet = (Tk. 47,79,400+1000) = Tk. 4,779.40.
«
Ss
~

198 Accounting
Activity: Hannan & Bros. of Khulna purchased 200 pieces of Pump Machine from
Chittagong at tk. 5,000 each, Paid tk. 20,000 as carriage: tk.2,000 as Transportation
insurance; tk. 1,000 as duty and tk. 1,200 as dock charge. Besides, paid tk. 4,000
as werehouserent; tk.3,000 as shop rent; tk. 2,500 as staff salary and tk. 2,000 as
electricity charge. Profit 20% on total cost.
Find out purchase cost, total cost and selling price.
Cost and Elements of Cost
Sit, gt AR iS Ly, ere =e
ey a SE nt aga el ll
a =e? aan ie a
eo Foes
see ae a
Picture; A garment Industry
Meaning and significance of cost:
Generally, paying the expenses of all kinds for producing or purchasing of any
product is called cost of production. The amount which is paid for acquiring any
economic wealth is called cost, In short, the cost of any product is the sum total
of all expenses incurred in producing or manufacturing it, so we can say that, the
cost of any product is the sum of total expenses incurred at different levels of
production in a factory right from the use of raw material up to finished product.
For example, the sum total of expenses incurred for timber used in the
production of furniture, coloring, burnishing, wages paid for labour, cost of
using machinery and other expenses, can be called cost of furniture production.
In the same way, the cost of sand, earth and clay, wages and the expenses for
bricks baking in total can be considered as production cost of brick
manufacturing.
Achieving expected profit through controlling of cost is one of the basic
objectives of Cost Accounting. Cost of production plays a vital role in case of
determination and control of cost, fixation of selling price, administrative %
control and managerial policy making of an industry. Determination of total cost §

Cost Price, Cost of Production and Selling Price 199
cost and per unit cost of goods produced in factories is of great importance. If we
fail to determine the total cost and per unit cost of any goods and services, we
can't determine their selling price. Selling price of any product is fixed only after
correctly determining its cost of production.

The elements which are involved in determining total production cost, mean all
types of direct and indirect expenses are kept and recorded properly. As a result,
while we can keep track of the cost incurred with regard to different elements of
cost, we can also know the various elements of expenditure, on the other hand,
keep track of losses with regard to theft, wastage, misuse and abuse. Thus, it
helps us to control and reduce total production cost.

Activity: Why is determination of cost of production so important?

Objectives of determining cost of production:

Determination of cost of production is the basic objective of cost accounting.
Existence and success of a firm majorly depend on perfect determination of cost.
Some vital objectives of costing are given below.

1. Ascertaining profit or loss: The prime objective of business is to get true
financial picture through ascertaining correct profit or loss. Profit and loss
ascertainment can easily be done through determination of cost.

2. Valuation of stock: Determination of cost is important to determine the
actual value of stocks after an accounting period.

3. Fixation of responsibility: Comparison between predetermined and actual
cost can not only find the discrepancy but also find out the reason behind
such gap. By doing so, it can easily pinpoint the person who is responsible
for this.

4. Determination of selling price: cost is necessary to determine the
profitable selling price in a competitive market. Using cost as a strategy,
firstly, per unit cost is determined. After that considering the demand for
goods or services, strength of competitors, government policy, and profit
policy the desired percentage of profit is added with cost of production.

5. Budget preparation: Budget is considered as the guide line of future action
plan.Budget is prepared for every single unit of expenses of a firm. Since
per unit cost is determined so total cost budget can easily be prepared.

6. project appraisal: Economic feasibility of a project is evaluated before the

2 project is in actual operation. So determination of cost plays an important
® role in case of feasibility study.

200 Accounting
Working: Which are the other objectives of cost of production?
Elements of cost:
Determination of total cost is not sufficient in ae
case of producing goods or services. For the
purpose of appropriate control and decision Material Indireet
making, classification and analysis of elements Raw Material
of cost is badly needed. The various clements
of cost which go to make up the total cost of
any product may be divided into three main | Wages or
heads, Viz: - (a) Raw Materials, (b) Labour and | labour Indirect
(c) Chargeable expenses. Labour
Each of these three elements is again divided
into two classes i.e. direct and indirect,
Chargeable
Expense Indirect
Expense
Elements af Cost
Raw Chargeable
Direct | [tnaiect} | pirect | [Indirect] | Direct | [Indie
Total cost can be determined by above mentioned cost elements. This total cost
can also be analyzed through the table given below-
Prime \ = — i Direct Direct
Cost — Material Labour ee Expense
Production == /( Prime wile Factory
Cost —u Cost Overhead x
S
a

Cost Price, Cost of Production and Selling Price 201
= Direct aa Factory
=
Total \, mmm / Factory ala Administrative fia Selling
Cost / ™" \ Overhead Overhead Overhead
Selling =a Estimated
Overhead/ === Profit

Elements of cost are discussed below.

1) Raw Material
i) Direct Raw Material: Materials which are primarily used for the
production of any goods and which are considered to be inseparable parts of
those goods are direct raw materials. Direct raw materials are included in
case of determining prime cost. For example, paper for making book, wood
for making furniture, yarn for the manufacturing of cloth, sugarcane for
sugar.
ii) Indirect Raw Material: The materials other than direct raw materials
which is used for production is called Indirect raw materials. That is, the
materials which are not directly used for production is known as indirect.
raw materials. Yarn and button for making shirt, Glue for making shoe, and
screw, wire, sand paper for making furniture are the examples of indirect
raw material. Indirect raw materials are used as materials for production.

2) Labour/wages
i) Direct Labor: The workers who are directly related with production is
called direct labor. The payment that is made to the workers for transforming
raw materials into finished product and from working process to finished
product is called direct labour or wages. For example, wages paid to the
machine operators in factories, worker cost for making furniture, sewing
cost for making dress.
ii) Indirect Labour: The workers who are not directly related to the
production, but helps for production is called indirect labour. For example,
helper's wages in ready made garments factories are indirect labour. These

Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-26

202 Accounting
labours help in production rather direct participation of production
process actively. For spending indirect labour, total cost of production
will not be increased,

3) Chargeable expenses:

i) Direct expenses: The expenses which are incurred neither for direct
raw materials nor for direct labour but they are directly being charged to
the production are called direct expenses. These expenses are also called
chargeable expenses. For example-
* Expenses of architectural design for construction
* Engineering designing cost
* Special forma making cost for producing shoe
* Purchase of tender in case of contractual job, i.c. tender cost, travelling
cost for tender, etc.
ii) Indirect expenses; The expenditure which incurred in the production
process can not be identified separately is called indirect expenses. For
example screw expenditure for making furniture, can not be identified
separately. These expenditures treated as indirect expenditure. These
expenditures incurred for overall management of the organization and
helped various logistic supply regularly. Indirect expenses or Overhead
can again be sub-divided into three categories:

a) Factory Overhead: All costs
related to production other than
direct materials and direct labour
are called factory overhead. For
example, Factory rent, Insurance,
water supply etc.
b) Administrative Overhead: Expenses related to office and administration
matters are called administrative overhead. It refers to all indirect expenses
incurred in connection with overall administration and office management. For
example, salary for office staff, office rent, other office expenses i.c. postage &
telegram, telephone & electricity, printing & stationary, conveyance expense,&
legal expense etc.

¢) Selling Overhead: The sum total of indirect expenses incurred for the sale of

finished goods is termed as selling and distributional overhead. All expenses in =

connection with order collection of produced goods, create new market, =

Cost Price, Cost of Production and Selling Price 203
possession old market, attract customers, For example, advertisement expenses,
rent of showroom, carriage outward, salary & commission paid to sales
manager or sales representative, all expenses releated to selling office etc.
Again, all expenses related to after sales servicing and repairing, changing the
goods are also included in selling expenses.
Activity: Give three examples of each of the followings
a) Direct Raw Material and (b) Direct Labour.
Cost Sheet:
Cost Sheet is a statement where elements of cost regarding to production are
systematically arranged for specific time. Usually, manufacturing organization
prepares cost sheet showing the expenses of elements of cost incurred in the
process of production as a part of financial statement at the end of the accounting
period. Cost sheet can be prepared for monthly, quarterly, half yearly, and yearly,
depending on the nature of job of a particular organization. For the purpose of
determining cost of production, cost of goods sold and profit, cost sheets can be
prepared in three stages. A specimen form of cost sheet is given below:
Name of the Manufacturing firm
Cost of Goods Manufactured Statement
for the period of.........-..
Element of cost Details Taka Taka Total Taka
Opening stock of raw materials
Add: Raw material purchase
Carriage inward
Less: Return of purchased raw material
Usable raw material
Less: Closing stock of raw material
Raw material used
Add: Direct wages
Other direct expenses —_
Prime cost
Add: Factory overhead XXX
Production cost =n
Add: Opening Work in process (Half finished) ——
Less: Closing Work m process (Half fintshed) XXX
os Cost of goods manufactured org —
= = —
~

204 Accounting:
Name of the organization.....
Cost of Goods Sold Statement
for the period.........
ee
Opening stock of finished goods
Add: Cost of goods produced
Saleable goods
Less: Closing stock of finished goods
Cost of goods sold
Name of the organization.......
Comprehensive Income Statement
for the period........
a
Sales
Less: Return
Net sales
Less: Cost of good sold
Gross profit/ loss
Less Operating cost-
Office and administrative
Selling and distributing
Net operating profit
Illustration: From the following information of Simanta Food product as
on 30 June 2017, you are required to prepare a Cost Sheet:
Opening Closing
Stock: Taka Taka
Raw materials 6,400 7,600
Work-in-process (Half finished 12,300 15,000
Finished goods 10,500 8,700
Packing materials 1,000 800
Purchase:
Raw materials 63,000
Packing materials 3,000 Distribution expenses 2,000
Carriage in ward 1,000 Selling expenses 3,200 ,
Wages 44,300 Salary of sales manager & sales man 5,000 $

Cost Price, Cost of Production and Selling Price 205
Factory cost 8,600 Repair to factory building 2,200
Depreciation 4,400 Managing Director allowances 1,500
Office expenses 2,500 sales 1,79,000
Solution:

Simanta Food product
Cost of Goods Manufactured Statement
for the period of half year ended on 30 June 2017
po aka | Taka | Taka
Opening stock of Raw Materials 6,400
Add: Purchase of Raw Materials 63,000
Carriage in ward 1,000 64,000
Cost of Raw Materials Available 70,400
Less: Closing stock of Raw Materials (7,600
Raw Material Used 62,800
Add: Wages 44,300
Add: Direct expenses: Opening stock of 1,000
packing materials
Add: Purchase of packing goods 3,000
4,000
Less: Closing stock of packing goods (800)
3,200
47,500
Prime cost | 1,10,300
Add: Factory overhead
Production cost 8,600
Factory depreciation 4,400
Repair to Factory Building 2,200
15,200
Production cost 1,25,500
Add: Opening stock of Work-in-process 12,300
1,37,800
Less: Closing stock of Work-in-process (15,000)
Cost of goods manufactured
<=
a

206 Accounting
Simanta Food product
Cost of Goods Sold Statement
for the period of half year ended on 30 June 2017
ee es)
Opening stock of Finished goods
Add: Cost of goods manufactured 1,22,800
Cost of goods available for Sale
Less: Closing stock of Finished goods (8,700)
Cost of goods sold 1,24,600
Simanta Food product
Comprehensive Income Statement
for the period of half year ended on 30 June 2017
tka | Take |
Sales 1,79,000
Less: Cost of goods sold (1,24,600)
Gross profit 54,400
Less: Operating cost:
Administrative Overhead:
Office Expenses 2,500
Salary to Managing director 1,500 4,000
Selling Overhead:
Selling expenses 3,200
Distribution expenses 2,000
Salary of sales manager & salesman 5,000 10,200} 4 4,200)
Net Operating profit 40,200
Manufacturing limited as on 31 December 2017
Taka Taka
Raw materials stock (1.10.2017) 7,500 Fuel & Power 1,250
Raw materials stock (31.12.2017) 9,500 Carriage inward 1,000
work-in-process stock (1.10.2017) 2,800 Carriage outward 1,500
work-in-process stock (31.12.2017) 3,600 Indirect wages 1,750
Finished good stock (1.10.2017) 5,400 Depreciation to machineries 2,500
Finished good stock (31.12.2017) 3,500 Direct expenses 1,100
Sales of Finised goods 65,000 Office rent 3,500 S

Cost Price, Cost of Production and Selling Price 207
Raw materials purchase 7,000 Miscellaneous expenses 4,500
Direct wages 5,650 Salesmen salary & commission 2,250
Miscellaneous office expenses 2,000
Mass communicaiton expenses 1,700
Prepare Cost of goods manufactured statement, Cost of goods sold statement and
Comprednsive Income statement
Exercise
Multiple choice question:
1. Which one means Factory overhead?
a) Direct Raw materials + Indirect Raw materials + Direct wages
b) Direct Raw materials + Direct wages + Factory rent & electricity
c) Indirect wages + Depreciation of Furniture + repair to Machinery
d) Factory rent + Office rent + Shop rent
2. The expenses include in production cost are -
i) Depreciation to machinery
ii) Special expenses relating to contract received
iii) Repair to furniture
Which one is correct?
a)i & ii b)i & iii
c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
3. Which are the chargeable expenses related to show manufacturing?
a) Leather purchase b) Gum purchase
c) Forma d) Stitching cotton
On the basis of following information answer to the question no. 4,5 & 6.
Prime cost 50,000 Taka, Factory overhead 10,000 Taka, Administrative overhead.
5000 Taka, Selling overhead 3,000 Taka and profit 20% on total cost
4. Amount of sales?
a) 81,600 Taka b) 83,700 Taka
c) 84,500 Taka d) 98,500 Taka
5. Amount of profit is taka?
a) 12,600 b) 13,600
c) 15,600 d) 18,600
6. Amount of total overhead?
oe a) 12,000 Taka b) 18,000 Taka
5 c) 58,000 Taka d) 68,000 Taka

208 Accounting
7. Factory overhead costs are-
i) Telephone bill
ii) Showroom rent
iii) Stationery purchase
Which one is correct?
a) i & ii b) i & iii
Cc) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
8. Which one the is selling overhead cost?
a) Advertising expenses b) Printing and stationary
c) Repair to furniture d) Electric & telephone bill
9, Production cost =?
a) Cost of goods available for sale + Opening stock of finished goods
b) Cost of goods available for sale + Closing stock of finished goods
©) Cost of goods available for sale - Opening stock of finished goods
d) Cost of goods available for sale - Closing stock of finished goods
10. What type of cost clement is paper purchase for book publishing organization?
a) Direct Raw material
b) Indirect Raw material
c) Factory overhead
d) Office overhead
Creative questions:
1. Transactions of Shahin Fruits Comer of Dhaka during the first week of
June 2017 are as follows:
e 200 buskets of mangoes were purchased at tk.500 each from Rajshahi:
e@ 10 kg mangoes are in every busket. Total tk.5,000 paid truck fare and
packing expenses tk.20 paid for each busket.
e After leaving the truck in Dhaka it’s found that 10 buskets of mangoes are
completely damaged and unfit for selling.
e Shop rent tk.2,000 paid weekly for selling mangoes and tk.1,000 paid for
Sales commission.
a) Determine the Quantity (in kg) of Saleable mango from the above
information.
b) Determine the total cost of sold mangoes of Shahin Fruit Corner.
c) Determine the selling price of per busket and per kg mango assuming
total cost tk.1,15,000 and 20% profit on cost. eo
g

Cost Price, Cost of Production and Selling Price 209
2. Amin paper house purchased 10 reams of paper at the rate of taka 18 per quire.
They paid for wages Taka 500 and carriage Taka 1,000. They spent taka 2,000
for hire of shop, electric & telephone bill tk.1,000 and taka 500 for salesman
commission for purpose of paper selling. The paper house earned profit of
taka 2 per quire of paper.
a) Calculate the cost of per ream of paper of Amin paper house.
b) Determine total cost of per quire paper sold of Amin paper house.
c) Determine selling price of per quire of paper considering total cost
tk.40,000 of sold papers of Amin paper house.

3. Shapla printers of Comilla have got the work order from Uttara Bank head office
for the printing of 5,500 Diary for year of 2017. Following expenses occurred
for the purpose of above work:

Paper purchase - Taka 70,000
Printing ink purchase - Taka 25,000
Direct wages - Taka 12,500
Gum and cotton purchase - Taka 5,000
Factory rent - Taka 10,000
Factory electricity - Taka 3,500
Office and Administrative expenses - Taka 12,000
Entertainment expenses - Taka 1,500
Bill collection expenses on tender price - 2%
Tender price per Diary . Taka 35

a) Calculate the conversion cost on Shapla printers.

b) Determine cost of production per Diary of Shapla printers.

c) Calculate profit or loss per Diary considering total production cost

tk.1,25,000 of Shapla printers.
4, Sonali Garments Sold shirts worth tk.30,00,000 from 01 May to 31 May
2017. Production & selling expenses of shirts are as follows:
Clothes purchased tk.4,20,000.
Carriage cost tk.11,500.
Button and other materials purchased tk.42,000
Value of unused clothes tk.65,000.
Opening work-in-Process tk.72,000
Opening stock of finished shirts tk.1,45,000.
Closing stock of finished shirts tk.1,05,000.
Total wages of worker tk.12,00,000.
Showroom rent tk.21,300.

‘Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-

210 Accounting
Incidental cost of factory tk.52,000
Office rent tk.18,000.
Telephone & Electricity bill tk. 9,000
Salesman Commission tk.25,000
a) Determine the cost of Raw Material Used from the above
information.
b) Determine the amount of Cost of Shirts Sold of Sonali Garments.
c) Determine the amount of profit or loss considering the cost of
goods sold tk.18,50,000.
5.From Ist January to 31st March, 2017 Manufacturing expenses and selling
expenses of bricks of Ashraf & Co. are as follows:
Taka
Soil purchased 1,60,000
Carriage for soil 3,00,000
Fuel cost 2,00,000
Wages of worker 1,40,000
Rent & Electricity for brick field (per month) 10,000
Cost of Kneading soil 20,000
Office rent (per month) 12,000
Conveyance & Telephone 14,000
Advertisement expenses 40,000
Salesman Salary 60,000
Sales (2,00,000 bricks) 16,00,000
Opening Stock of Finished Bricks (50,000 bricks) 2,50,000
Closing Stock of Finished Bricks (60,000 bricks) 2,43,000
a) Determine the quantity of Bricks produced from the above information.
b) Prepare a stament of cost (Quarterly) of Ashraf & Co.
c) Determine the profit considering the production cost of bricks tk. 8,50,000.
Note: Opening finished Stock + Production Units = Sales Units + Closing finished Stock.
2
&

Twelfth Chapter
Accounting for family and self-employment Enterprise
To maintain smoothly and nicely, it is very important to have a well designed
plan and an applicable accounting system at every sphere of life. Application of
appropriate accounts of income and expenditure can make life well balanced and
disciplined. So we have to spend money in our social and family life associated
with income. It is not possible to spend on the basis of the income if the accounts
of income and expenditure of the family are not maintained. Even without
budgeting of income and expenditure a family can't be maintained properly. So
every family needs to design appropriate plan for maintaining family accounts
strongly. Also preparing budget for project is vital in the case of
self-employment enterprise for making a person or a family become self reliant.
A ule Uy = ’ “= 2 SFT, d 4
ec.  ~y ab ae: Ty
” AY vm *. Xe X S ¥ y
rad Fula.
Photo: Self employment Projects

At the end of this chapter, we will be able to —

e explain the concept and characteristics of family accounting system.

© prepare a family budget.

e prepare the family financial statement.

® prepare budget for self-employment enterprise and also maintain the

accounts there of.
bh]

212 hana
Concept of family accounting system:
Family is said to be the destination of happiness. For the sake of this happiness,
each and every person thinks about living an improved family life. Planning is
necessary to lead the family nicely and systematically and application of
appropriate accounting is an indispensable part of that plan. A family without a
financial plan can not be maintained properly. Without maintaining of family
income and expenditure account, a family can not live a disciplined life. As a
result family happiness may be disturbed, So maintaining of family income and
expenditure account is also essential like business organizations. Family is not a
business organization so accounting system is different since family is a
non-profit making continuous organization. Like other organizations some
financial transactions occur in a family. That is, there are some income and
expenditure. So maintaining of family budget is essential. There should be
predefined plan for maintaining the family smoothly and happily within the limit
of income,
Characteristics of family accounting system:
The salient features of family accounting system:
1.Non-profit making organization:
Family is considered to be a non-profit making organization, Question of
profit and loss does not arise here, so family can know surplus or deficit
through preparation of income- expenditure account and financial statement
at the end of a particular period.
2. Assumption of separate unit:
Each family member of the family considered separately from the head
for completing the accounts.
3. Responsibilities:
Family accounts are not to be submitted to anyone. So there is no need of its
audit or responsibility.
4, Cash transaction:
Most transactions of the family are done in cash so it is easy for record keeping.
§. Specific head:
In most of the cases, family transactions have some specific heads.
Activity: Why are the features of family accounting system different from the
features of profit earning organization? s

Accounting for family and self-employment Enterprise 213
Necessity of family accounting system:
For happy and healthy life within the limit of income,it is essential for maintaining
proper accounts. The necessity of family accounts is as follows:
1. Proper Planning:
Transparency can be ensured if accounts are kept properly, thus family ties can
be enjoyed more vividly,
2. Family Solvency:
“Expenditure within income”-if this policy is followed, it may be possible
to attain financial solvency and happiness of the family.
3. Creation of values:
Family accounting can ensure transparency which can help creating values
and ethics between the family members.
4. Family Budget:
Preparation of family budget and with the help of it, proper management of
family can be ensured by controlling all the income and expenditure.
5. Saving and consumption Tendency:
For better life style in future money should be saved from the present income.
If accounts are kept properly, habit of unnecessary expenditure decreases
and tendency of saving increases.
6. Family Discipline:
Possibility of arising of any dispute and misunderstanding among the head
and other members of the family are least if accounts are kept systematically
and properly.
Fe a epee ae new ae ma]
Family Budget:
Budget is a kind of numerical expression of planning. For achieving some
specific purpose, numerical expression of pre-defined plan of income and
expenditure of a stipulated time is known as budget. There is no hard and fast
tule for the specific time frame; it may be weekly, monthly, or yearly. Family
budget means future plan for income and expenditure of the family, Family
budget is designed through a pre plan, based on the sources of income and sector
wise demand for expenditure of a family. Budgeting helps to keep the family
within a financial framework where over expenditure is not possible, If family is
= maintained within such financial framework i.e, budget, then we can live a better
S_ life with limited income.

214 Accounting
Procedure of Family Budget:
It is essential ot follow some steps to prepare a family budget. If a budget
is prepared following the systematic procedure, implementation of the budget
becomes easier. Steps are as follows-
1. Listing of necessary materials: Prioritise the list of materials based on the
need and demand of the family members for budget time frame.
2. Valuation of materials:
Price and cost of the product and services are to be determined for including
the total cost of the product for budget preparation.
3. Determination of possible income:
Expenditure of family budget depends on income.So to make budget more
effective, determination of income sources efficiently is needed to include
them in the budget.
4. Maintaining balance in budget:
In each family, budget is prepared with a view to achieving optimum benefit
within the limited income and thus to save for better future. That is why, we
are to pay attention of maintaining equilibrium between income and
expenses at the time of budget preparation.
5. Suitability of budget:
A family budget should be as such that it is practical and rational. Budget
should be flexible so that in special cases if one or more expenditure increases
then it can be set off by reducing other expenditures.
Specification of family budget:
Success of budget preparation and implementation mostly depend on
socio-economic condition of the family. Forms, sizes, sources of income, taste
and desire of the members etc. are to take into consideration strictly while
preparing a family budget. Each family will have separate budget. It is not
possible to prepare budget of same standard for cach family. Over all family
budgets can be prepared through equilibrium of income and expenditure. Sector
wise allocation of expenses depends upon the structure of the family. For
example, expenditure for food 20-30%, clothing 5- 10%, housing 30-40%,
Education 10-15%, transportation 15-20% approximately. oo
Ss
~~

Accounting for family and self-employment Enterprise 215
A pro-forma of Statement of Family Budget is shown below:
Name of the month-—-—-—---—---
(Number of family members-6)
Income
Ei a
Other sources (rent, agriculture ete. 10,000 50,000
Expenditure
aka aka %,
1) Food Items:
Rice 1,575
Pulses 300
Oil 700
Salt 75
Flour 200
Mayda (White Flour) 100
Noodles 200
Tea and Sugar 150
Spices 200 3,500
Kitchen items:
Fish 1,500
Meat 1,000
Chicken 1,200
Eggs 700
Vegetables 1,500
Fruits 500
Onion, Garlic and Ginger 400 6,800
10,300 21%
2) Housing:
House rent 15,000
Electricity 1,000
Gas 400
others 300
16,700 33%
=
&

216 Accounting
3) Clothing:
Purchasing cloths 500
Sewing and Tailoring 300
Washing and laundry 200
1,000 2%
4) Education:
Tuition fees 1,000
Books, work books and stationery 500
Payment for private tutors 2,000
Transportation 1,000
4,500 9%
5) Medical Expenses: 2,100 4%
6) Personal Expenses:
Amusements and recreation 2,000 4%
7) Other Expenses:
Guest entertainments 1,000
Gifts and charity 1,000
Subscription of newspapers 400
Wages of the house-maid 1,000
3,400 ™M%
8) Savings schemes:
Provident Fund 7,000
D.P.S 3,000
10,000 20%
Total Expenditure: | 50,000 | 100% |
Preparation of Family Financial Statement:
Transactions relating to income and expenditure of the family are recorded in
books of account. But scattered records can not depict the true financial picture
of the family. That is why, preparation of financial statement is essential for
finding actual financial picture. Financial statements show the income and
expenses of the family for a particular period of time and statement of financial
position depicts the financial strength i.e. state of family assets and liabilities.
Steps of family financial statement are-
1) Receipts and Payments Account
2) Statement of Income and Expenditure
3) Statement of Financial Position S
~

Accounting for family and self-employment Enterprise 217
1.Receipts and Payments Account: From summary of family cash
transactions an account is prepared at the end of the year by classifying and
summarizing the transactions is called Receipts and Payments Account.
Although it looks like a cash book of a business concern but it is not a cash
book. It is the first step of family accounting system. This account is prepared
by compiling all types of cash transactions.
All sorts of cash receipts are shown on the debit side and cash payments are
shown on the credit side. Capital and revenue incomes of any year, which are
received in this year in cash are shown on the debit side; and Capital and
revenue expenses of any year, which are paid in this year in cash are shown on
the credit side of the Receipts and Payments Account.
2. Statement of Income and Expenditure: At the end of the accounting period
a statement is prepared to ascertain the excess or deficit of income over
expenditure of the family, with the help of revenue nature income and
expenditure relating to current year only is known as Statement of Income and
Expenditure. In this statement if income is more than expenditure then we call
it as surplus or excess of income over expenditure, and if the expenditure is
more than income then we call it as deficit or excess of expenditure over
income. Excess of income over expenditure increases the family fund while
deficit reduces that fund.
3. Statement of Financial Position: Shortly It means a statement of assets and
liabilities. That is, on a particular date, a statement is prepared showing all
assets and liability of the family is known as Statement of Financial Position.
Like business organizations, family also has some assets and liabilities. For
example, assets are building, furniture, investment, cash and liabilities are loan,
outstanding expenses, creditors etc. Families do not have any opening capital
because it is not a business organization. But family fund is calculated here.
Family fund is shown as liability in the Statement of Financial Position. Excess
of income over expenditure from the Statement of Income and Expenditure is
added with family fund and deficit is deducted from family fund.
A pro-forma of Receipts and Payments Account is shown below:
Receipts and Payments Account

| _____ Receipts | Taka | Payment — | Taka_|
ES oe

Revenue nature income Capital nature expenses

Capital nature income Balance c/d
Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma- 28

218 Accounting
Features of Receipts and Payments Account:
1. It is like a cash book of a business concern.
2. Left side starts with opening cash and bank balance and right side ends
with closing cash and bank balance.
3. All receipts are shown on the left side and all payments are shown on the
right side.
4. In case of this account, period is not a matter of consideration i.e. receipts
and payments of current, previous and next year is recorded here in this book.
5. Transaction of current year’s outstanding income or expenses is not recorded.
6. Quantitative figure of the left side is always greater than that of the nght
side because cash payments can never be greater than cash receipt.
7. Transaction relating to depreciation is not shown in this account.
8. Cash flow can be known from this account.
Activity; What kind of role can be played by the Receipts and Payments Account
while preparing family account?

Procedure of preparing Statement of Income and Expenditure from Receipts

and Payments Account:

1, Revenue nature incomes are recorded on the income side and revenue nature
expenses are recorded on the expenditure side of Statement of Income and
Expenditure.

2. Opening and closing balances of Receipts and Payments Account are not
needed to show in the Statement of Income and Expenditure.

3. Capital nature income and expenditures are not shown in the Statement of
Income and Expenditure.

4. Only revenue nature income and expenditures are shown in the Statement of
Income and Expenditure.

5. Only current year’s revenue nature income and expenditures are shown in
the Statement of Income and Expenditure,

6. Income and expenditures relating to previous or next year will not be shown
in the Statement of Income and Expenditure.

7. Transactions relating to purchase and sale of assets will not be shown in the
Statement of Income and Expenditure.

8. Income receivables and outstanding expenses of current year will be included
in the Statement of Income and Expenditure.

9, Depreciation will be shown on the expenditure side of the Statement of Income
and Expenditure.

included in the Statement of Income and Expenditw =

Accounting for family and self-employment Enterprise 219
Procedure of preparing Statement of Financial Position from
Receipts and Payments Account:

Basic objective of preparing the Statement of Financial Position is to take

perception of assets, liabilities and family fund at a particular point of time at the

end of the year.

Procedures are given below:

1, Family fund is calculated by deducting the opening liabilities from the opening
assets ofa family.

2. Capital nature incomes of the Receipts and Payments account are shown on
the liability side and Capital nature expenditures are shown on the assets side
of the Statement of Financial Position.

3. Closing cash and bank balances of the Receipts and Payments Account are shown
on the assets side of the Statement of Financial Position.

4. Depreciation is to be deducted from respective assets are shown on the assets
side of the Statement of Financial Position.

5. All unearned incomes are to be shown on the liability side and all prepaid
expenses are to be shown on the assets side of the Statement of Financial Position,

6. Excess of income over expenditures of the Statement of Income and Expenditure
are to be added with Family fund and deficits are to be deducted from the
Family fund on the liability side of the Statement of Financial Position,

7. Opening cash and bank balances of the Receipts and Payments Account will
not be considered in case of preparation of the Statement of Financial
Position, Those balances will be used in case of determining the Family fund.

Activity: Identify the items of the Receipts and Payments Account which will be
included in calculating the Family fund.

Illustration- 01

Mrs. Rubina who works in Govt. oraganisation maintains family with her salary

& the income that comes from her husband's business. Information of her

family’s income and expenditures mentioned below:

Monthly salary tk.35,000; Houserent paid tk.18,000 per month, Food Materials

total expenese for whole year tk.1,20,000; Medicine & Doctors fees tk.25,000;

Profit from business tk.4,80,000; Clothes purchased tk.32,000; Profit from

business tk.4,80,000; Clothes purchased tk.32,000; Education expenses

tk.95,000;Dinning table purchased tk.42,000; Income Tax paid tk.16,000;
= Computer & Printer purchased tk.76,000; Gas,Water & Electricity bill paid
™ tk.38,000; Deposit to DPS tk.60,000.

220 Accounting

Other information:

On Ist January 2017 her family condition was- Cash in hand tk. 22,000 &

Furniture tk. 1,68,000.

At the end of year, Gas & Water bills are due tk. 24,000.

Required: From the above information you are required to prepare Receipts &

Payment Account, Statement of Income & Expenditure and Statement of

Financial Postion.

Solution:

Mrs Rubina’s Familys’
Receipts & Payments Account
for the year ended 31st December 2017

Debit Credit

Cash Fund (1-1-2017) 22,000 | House Rent (18,000 x12) 2,16,000

Salary (35,000 x 12) 4,20,000 | Spent for Food Products 1,20,000

Profit from business 4,80,000 | Medicine & Doctors fees 25,000
Clothes purchase 32,000
Education expense 95,000
Dining Table purchased 42,000
Income Tax paid 16,000
Computer & Printer purchased | 76,000
Gas,Water & Electricity bill] 38,500
Deposit to DPS 60,000
Cash in hand (31-12-2017) | 2,01,500

9,22,000 9,22,000| .

Accounting for family and self-employment Enterprise 221
Mrs Rubina’s Familys’
Statement of Income & Expenditure
for the year ended 31st December 2017
Incomes:
Salary Received 4,20,000
Profit from business 480,000
Less: Expendenitures: 9,00,000
House Rent 2,16,000
Food Products 1,20,000
Medicine & Doctors fee 25,000
Clothes purchases 32,000
Educatinal expense 95,000
Income Tax paid 16,000
Computer & Printer purchased 38,500
Gas,Water & Electricity bill 24,000
62,500
(5,66,500)
Surplus of Income 3,33,500

222 Accounting
Mrs Rubina’s Familys’
Statement of Financial Position
as on 31st December, 2017
Assets:
Cash in hand 2,01,500
Furniture 1,68,000
Add: Dinning Table purchase 42,000
2,10,000
Computer & Printer 76,000
Deposit to DPS 60,000
Total Assets 5,47,500
Liabilities:
Gas, Water & Electricity bill due 24,000
Family Fund (Note-1) 1,90,000
Add: Surplus of Income 3,33,500
5,23,500
Total Liabilities & Closing Family Fund | 5,47,500
Note: Calculation of Family Fund:
Cash + Furniture = (22,000+1,68,000) = 1,90,000
Illustration: 2
Assets and Liabilities of Osman Gani as on 1 January 2017 are- House
20,00,000; Furniture 20,000; Crockeries 13,000; House building Loan 15,00,000.
His Received and Payment account of that year are as follows: ~

Accounting for family and self-employment Enterprise 223
Receipts and Payments Account
| ___—Receipts | Taka =| ~—S——CSC*éPaymmernts | Traka__—
Received from Salary 2,50,000 | Food purchase 40,000
Income from agriculture 20,000 | Bill for grocer shop 2,280
Sale of old newspaper 2,000 | Municipal tax 3,220
Computer purchase 50,000
Int. on house building loan 10,000
Television purchase 32,000
Refrigerator 60,000
Water, Gas & Electricity 5,600
Entertainment 7,000
Stationery 2,500
News paper bill 4,800
Conveyance and other 4,400
Post office saving bank deposit 48,000
Cash in hand (31/12/2017) 00
| 2,72,000 |
Prepare: Income Statement for the year ended 31 December 2017 and
Financial Statement as on 31 December 2017.
Solution: Mr. Osman Gani
Income Statement
For the year ended 31 December 2017
Income:
Salaries 2,50,000
Agricultural Income 20,000
Sale of old news paper 2,000
Total Income 2,72,000
Expenditure:
Food purchase 40,000
Bill for grocery shop 2,280
Municipal tax 3,220
Interest on house building loan 10,000
Gas, Water and Electricity 5,600
Entertainment 7,000
Stationery 2,500
Newspaper bill 4,800
Conveyance and other 4,400
J Total expense 79,800
& | Surplus /Excess of Income over Expenditure 1,92,200

224 Accounting
Mr. Osman Gani
Statement of Financial Position
as on 31 December 2017

po Taka | Taka | Taka

Assets:

House 20,00,000

Furniture 20,000

Crockeries 13,000

Computer 50,000

Television 32,000

Refrigerator 60,000

Post office saving bank deposit 48,000

Cash in hand’ 2,200

Total Assets 22,25,200

Liabilities and Family Fund:

House building loan 15,00,000

Family Fund 5,33,000

(+) Surplus 1,92,200 7,25,200

Total Liabilities and Family Fund 22,25,200
Note: Calculation of Family Fund:

Family fund = Opening Assets — Opening Liabilities
= House + Furniture + Crockeries — House building loan
= (20,00,000+20,000+13,000) -15,00,000 = Tk.5,33,000
Activity:
Mr Aziz is a doctor. He earns money from private practice beside his service.
His Receipts and Payment for the year ended 31 December 2017 are as follows:
=
&

Accounting for family and self-employment Enterprise 225
Receipts and Payment Account
for the year ended 31 December 2017
Cash in hand (01-01-2017) 25,000 | Investment on Share 1,00,000
Cash at Bank (01-01-2017) 35,000 | Food purchase 40,000
Income from Salary 2,50,000 | Driver salary 60,000
Income from private practice 1,20,000 | Car repair & Fuel exp. 45,000
Income from house rent 30,000 | Education expenses 50,000
Income Tax 31,000
Computer purchase 40,000
Interest on Loan 20,000
Gas, Water & Electricity exp. 37,000
Almira purchase 15,000
Cash in hand (31-12-17) 22,000
Assets and Liabilities are as follows as 1.1. 2017:
Furniture- tk.1,25,000 ; House tk.5,00,000; Utensils tk.40,000; Car tk.7,50,000 &
Loan tk.2,00,00.
Other information on 31.12.17:
a) Salary tk.7,000 due for current year.
b) Rent tk. 3,200 not yet realised.
c) Driver's salary due tk.2,400.
Required:
1. Calculate Family Fund of Mr. Aziz’s family.
2. Prepare Income and expenditure statement of Mr. Aziz’s family for the year
ended 31 December 2017.
3. Prepare Statement of financial position Mr. Aziz’s on that date.
Class-9-10, Accounting, Forma-2¢

226 Accounting
Exercise
Multiple choice questions:
1. In the light of Accounting, family means-
a) Profitable organization b) Non profitable organization
c) Ongoing profitable organization _d) Ongoing non profitable organization
2. Maximum family transaction occurred in-
a) Cash b) Cheque c) Credit d) ‘Free of cost
3. Preparation of family budget on the-
a) Basis of expected income b) Basis of actual income
c) Basis of expected income and expenditure d) Basis of actual income and expenditure
4. To record in Receipt and payment account-
i. Capital nature income
ii. Revenue nature income
iii. Revenue nature expenditure
Which one is correct?
a) i &ii b) iG iii c) i& iii d) i,ii& iii
5.To record in family Income-Expenditure statement-
a) Revenue nature income of current year
b) Revenue nature expenditure of current and last year
c) Revenue nature expenditure of current and next year
d) Revenue nature expenditure of last, current and next year
6. How many steps have used for preparation of Family Financial Statement?
a) 02 steps b) 03steps
c) 04 steps d) 05 steps
=
=

Accounting for family and self-employment Enterprise 227
7. Which one is family revenue nature expenditure?
i) Construction of building
ii) Education expense
iii) Maintenance of assets
Which one is correct?
a) i&ii b) iGiii oc) w& iii d) i, ii & iii
8. Which one is first step for preparation of family budget?
a) Listing of necessary goods b) Determination of possible income
c) Determination of value of goods or d) Data collection for demand and
service. supply of goods or services
9. Steps for family financial statement-
i, Cash account
ii. Received-payment account
iii. Income-expenditure statement
Which one is correct?
a) i & ii b) i& iii c) Wi& iii d) i, ii & iii
Creative questions:
1. Mr. Ahsan Habib has served in a private organization, his monthly salary
tk.12,000. In addition to he got tk. 5,000 honorarium per month by giving part
time lecture in a college. In 1° January 2017 his cash in hand tk. 2,00,000 and
DPS tk. 1,00,000, Following are the transactions of his family of whole year:
Purchase of food materials tk. 30,000. House rent tk. 80,400. Daily shopping
expenses tk.24,000. Furniture purchase tk.15,000. Grocery and stationery bill
tk. 2,500, Gold purchases tk.60,000 and deposit to DPS tk. 24,000.
a) Calculate family fund of Mr. Ahsan Habib.
b) Calculate closing family cash in hand of Mr. Ahsan Habib.
c) From the above information’s calculate family surplus or deficit.
2 . Followings are the family information of Dr. Mahedi as on | January 2017:
Building tk.10,00,000, Furniture tk.90,000, Investment tk.10,000, Gold tk. 80,000,
Cash in hand tk. 3,000 and bank loan tk. 6,000.
a
&

228 Accounting
Family Receipt and Payment account of Dr. Mahedi
For the year ended 31 December 2017
Receipts Taka payments —=«|SCTaka
Cash in hand (1-1-17) 3,000 | Purchase of food materials 60,000
Salary 3,63,000 | Daily shopping 1,20,000
Interest on investment 1,500 | Television purchase 23,000
Income from patient visit 1,20,000 | News paper 3,500
Educational expenditure 28,000
Gas, water and electricity 21,000
Bank fixed deposit ,25,000
Balance (31-12-17) 7,000
Other information’s:
1. Gas, Water and Electricity are still due for tk.1,500.
2. Interest on investment one yet received for tk. 1,000.
a) Calculate family fund of Dr.Mahedi.
b) Prepare his Family Income-expenditure statement for the year ended 31 Dec. 2017.
c) Prepare his Statement of financial position on that date.
3. Mr. Hannan is serving in a private organizaton. His monthly salary tk.30,000 and
gets bonus tk.20,000 twice in a year. On Ist January, 2017 his family’s condition was:
cash in hand tk.12,000; House tk.5,50,000; Equipment tk.6,000; Loan from colleague
tk. 40,000.
Following are the tranasctions of his family of whole year:
Food material purchased tk.78,000; Loan paid to colleague tk.30,000; Medicine &
Doctor fees tk. 18,000; Repair expenses of house tk 31,000; Mobile Set purchased
tk.14,000; Electricity & Telephone expenses tk.8,600; Clothes purchased tk.7,500;
Sold agricalture crops tk.48,500; Refrigerator purchased tk.36,000; Education
expenses tk.42,000; Deposit ot DPS tk.36,000.
Beside this, Electricity bill is due tk. 3,400.
a) Calculate the opening family fund from the above information.
b) Calculate the closing cash fund of Hannan’s family as on 31st December, 2017.
c) Prepare a statement of family Income and Expenditure of Hannan’s Family.
2
&

Accounting for family and self-employment Enterprise 229
4, On Ist January, 2017 The financual position of Mr.Nannu Mia's family is as follows:
Cash fund tk.20,000; House tk.3,50,000; Utensils tk. 25,000; Furniture tk.50,000;
and 12% Loan tk. 60,000.His Receipts and payments account for the year ended is
as follows:
Receipts and Payments Account
for the year ended 31st December 2017
Debit Cridit
Balance B/D 20,000 | Food purchased 77,500
Salary 1,80,000 | Repair of House 8,000
Sold old Table 5,000 | Fridge purchased 28,000
Sold agricultural crops 30,000 | Electricity Bill 6,000
Profit from Pharmacy 75,000 | Treatment expenses 3,500
Business Deposit to DPS 48,000
Cycle purchased 12,000
Education expenses 14,500
Clothes purchased 16,700
Interest on loan 5,800
Balance C/D 90,000
Other information:
i) Stock of Food Products tk. 1,000.
ii) Two months electricity bill due.
a) Determine the amount of Capital Expenditure of family in current year.
b) Prepare a Statement of family Income and Expenditure from the above information
c) Prepare a Statement of Financial position as on 31st December 2017
considering the Family Fund tk.3,85,000,
2
5

230 Accounting
Answer Sheet
Chapter Eight
Creative question of Excercise: 1. b) Amount of cash memo tk.28,500. c) Closing cash
in hand tk.96,000 2. a) Value of office equipment tk.78,000.b) Closing cash in hand
tk. 32,000 & Bank balance tk.1,55,000. c) Closing cash in hand tk.1,00,000, Bank
balance tk.57,500, Discount allowed tk. 1,000 & Discount received tk.5,000 3. a)
Tk.58,500. b) Total of cash receipts journal, Cash tk.1,29,250, Discount allowed
tk.750, Sales tk.45,000, Debtors tk.25,000 & other account tk.60,000. c) Total of cash
payments journal, Purchase tk.25,000, Creditors tk.30,000 Other accounts tk.24,000,
Discount received tk.1,000 & cash tk.78,000. 4. b) Closing cash in hand tk.60,700. c)
Closing cash in hand tk.52,000 & Bank balance tk.3,500. 5. a) Total amount of contra
entry tk.16,000. b) Closing cash in hand tk.19,250 & Bank balance tk.26,000. c) Clos-
ing cash in hand tk.42,500, Bank overdraft tk.1,000, Discount allowed tk.200 &
discount received tk.200. 6. a) Amount of cash discount tk.300. b) Total of cash receipts
journal, Cash tk.27,000, Discount allowed tk.100, Sales tk.7,600, Debtors tk.5,500 &
other account tk.14,000. c) Total of cash payments journal, Purchase tk.28,500,
Creditors tk.3,500 Other accounts tk.3,000, Discount received tk.200 & Cash
tk.34,800.7. b) Closing cash in hand tk.2,500, Bank overdraft tk.3,000, Discount
allowed tk.150 & discount received tk.150. c) Total of cash payments journal, Purchase
tk.7,000, Creditors tk.9,000, Other accounts tk.5,500, Discount received tk.400 & Cash
tk.21,100.
Chapter Nine
Creative question of Excercise:1. a) tk.27,000. b) Total of Trial Balance tk.1,75,500.
c) Revenue income 50,500 & Revenue expenses 52,500. 2. a) Tk.41,000. b) Total of
Trial Balance tk. 2,23,000 & Suspense Account (credit) tk.10,000. c) Capital
expenditure tk.95,000 & Revenue expenses tk.20,000. 3. a) tk.80,000. b) Revenue
expenses tk.1,61,000. c) Total of Trial Balance tk.2,94,000. 4. a) Tk.37,000. b) Total
of Trial Balance tk.2,79,500. c) Revenue income tk.1,67,500 & Revenue expenses
tk. 1,51,500. 5. a) tk.2,85,000. b) Assets tk.1,65,000 & Liabilities tk.1,32,000. c)Total
of Trial Balance tk.4,72,000. 6. a) Adjusted purchase tk.2,65,000. b) Total of Trial
Balance tk.8,70,000. c) Closing owner’s equity tk.3,56,500. %
&

Answer Sheet 231
Chapter Ten
Creative question of Excercise:
1. a) Current liabilities tk.1,00,000 . b) Excess of income over expenditure tk.2,31,000.
c) Total Assets tk.6,21,000. 2. a) Net sales tk.4,,08,000. b) Cost of goods sold
tk.2,81,500. c) Net profit tk.35,000. 3. a) Cost of goods sold tk.80,000. b) Operating
loss tk.2,000 & Net profit tk.6500. c) Total of statement of financial position
tk.2,39,000. 4. a) Gross profit tk.1,73,000 b) Net profit tk.60,000. c) Total of statement
of financial position tk.2,84,000. 5. a) Closing cash in hand tk.25,000. b) Gross profit
tk.1,29,800. c) Operating profit tk.60,875 & Net profit tk. 61,575. 6. a) Cost of goods
sold tk.2,28,000. b) Operating loss tk.37,000 & Net loss tk. 27,000. c) Total of
statement of financial position tk.4,69,000. 7. a) Net current assets tk.1,40,500.
b) Gross profit tk.1,41,200. c) Operating profit tk.57,000 & Net profit tk.99,800. 8.a)
Current liabilities tk.15800, b) Closing owner’s equity tk.295200. c) Total Assets
tk.3,11,000. 9. a) In the year 2016 tk.74,000 & 2017 tk. 76,500. b) Net profit ratio
7.67% & profit on capital employed ratio 13.8%. c) Current ratio 1.16:1 & liquidity
ratio 1.06:1. 10. a) Liquidity ratiol.27:1. b) Net profit tk.23,000. c) Total of statement
of financial position tk.1,62,000. 11. a) Net value of fixed assets tk.1,02,600. b) Net
loss tk.15,400. c) Closing owner’s equity tk.1,67,000. 12. a) Net debtors tk. 37,632.
b) Gross profit tk.57,500. c) Operating profit tk.50,132 & Net profit tk.51,132.
Chapter Eleven
Creative question of Excercise:
1, a) Saleable mangoes 1,900 kg. b) Total cost Net profit tk.1,12,000. c) Selling price
of each busket tk.726.32 & Selling price of per kg tk.72.63. 2. a) Cost price of each
ream of paper tk.375. b) Total cost of each quire paper tk.20.50 c) Selling price of each
quire paper tk.22. 3. a) Conversion cost tk.31,000. b) Prodution cost of each diary
tk.22.91. c) Profit of each diary tk.9.12. 4. a) Cost of used raw materials tk.3,66,500.
b) Cost of sold shirts tk. 1,77,2500. c) Net profit tk.10,76,700. 5. a) Produced Brick
2,10,000 pcs. b) Prodution cost tk.8,50,000. c) Net profit tk.5,93,000
hac}
§

232 Accounting
Chapter Twelve
Creative question of Excercise:
1, a) Family fund tk.3,00,000. b) Closing cash in hand tk.1,57,100. c) Excess of
income over expenditure tk.56,100. 2. a) Family fund tk. 11,77,000. b) Revenue
Surplus tk.2,51,500. c) Total of statement of financial position tk.14,36,000.
3. a) Family fund tk.5,28,000. b) Closing cash in hand tk.1,59,400. c) Revenue Surplus
tk.2,60,000. 4. a) Capital expenditure tk.40,000. b) Revenue Surplus tk.1,51,400
c) Total of statement of financial position tk. 5,99,000.
The End x
&

Academic Year
9-10 Accounting
i
ine , ’
Bear arena vifsaiis
att 6 fre Ftreras Star wor atfeers @ efScres GT UP REET CPST _
dob WH (Orr &, 28 or ASA) ST a
Ten ; ;
F.
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Governmer
People’s Republic of Bangladesh
ie
ah @

