Agriculture Studies
; ’
; 8 ee 3 f
: : - “y a : ia \w ee > iS
5) r e sc NUN 9 »
bas.

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a Textbook for class eight from the Academic Year 2013
Agriculture Studies
Class Eight
Written by
Prof. Muhammad Ashrafuzzaman
Prof. Mohammad Hossain Bhuiyan
Prof. Dr. Md. Anwarul Haque Beg
Dr. Kazi Ahsan Habib
Anwara Khanum
Kh. Zulfikar Hossain
A.K.M. Mizanur Rahman
Edited by
Prof. Dr. Md. Sadrul Amin
Translated by
Prof. Dr. Md. Sadrul Amin
Prof. Dr. Md. Forhad Hossain
Dr. Mirza Hasanuzzaman
Md. Asaduzzaman
Jahid Bin Matin
NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH.

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70 Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka.
[All rights reserved by the Publisher]
First Edition : August, 2012
Revised Edition : September, 2014
Reprint : August, 2017
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh
For free distribution by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Printed by :

Preface
The aim of secondary education is to make the learners fit for entry into higher
education by flourishing their latent talents and prospects with a view to building the
nation with the spirit of the Language Movement and the Liberation War. To make the
learners skilled and competent citizens of the country based on the economic, social,
cultural and environmental settings is also an important issue of secondary education.
The textbooks of secondary level have been written and compiled according to the
revised curriculum 2012 in accordance with the aims and objectives of National
Education Policy-2010.Contents and presentations of the textbooks have been select-
ed according to the moral and humanistic values of Bengali tradition and culture and
the spirit of Liberation War 1971 ensuring equal dignity for all irrespective of caste
and creed of different religions and sex.
The present government is committed to ensure the successful implementation of
Vision 2021. Honorable Prime Minister, Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina expressed her firm determination to make the country free
from illiteracy and instructed the concerned authority to give free textbooks to every
student of the country. National Curriculum and Textbook Board started to distribute
textbooks free of cost since 2010 according to her instruction.
Bangladesh is basically an agro based country. Keeping the challenge of 21st century
ahead in mind this textbook has been developed to introduce a technique to build
up modern agricultural system by capitalizing agricultural science and information
technology, the best utilization of limited land, implementation of appropriate technology
to bring out the highest amount of crops. It is expected that this textbook will
develop students competency on both theoretical and applied agriculture as to help
keeping positive role in socio-economic development.
I thank sincerely all for their intellectual labor who were involved in the process of
revision, writing, editing, art and design of the textbook.
Prof. Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

CONTENTS
Agriculture of Bangladesh and
ae ‘ 1-15

International Perspectives
Agricultural Technology 16-35
Agricultural Materials 36-56
Agriculture and Climate 57-74
Agricultural Production 75-117

Chapter One
Agriculture of Bangladesh and International
Perspectives
Agriculture is the backbone of the economy of Bangladesh. Even in the era of
industrialization, the livelihood of Bangladesh is dependent on agriculture.
However, compared to international agriculture, Bangladesh is underdeveloped
in many sectors. Though Bangladesh is an agricultural country and rice with fish
is our favourite food, the production of rice is still much lower than other
countries like Vietnam, USA, China, Japan etc. Considering international
perspectives, the agricultural scientists of Bangladesh are now thinking in
competitive manners. Once upon a time 75 percent of world jute was produced
in Bangladesh. But due to increasing demand of rice and use of artificial fiber,
farmers reduced jute production compared to rice. However, jute is still playing
better role in the growth of national income. Every year Bangladesh earns a
remarkable amount of foreign currency by exporting jute and jute-based
products.
Bangladeshi market is not self-sufficient with it's own products. They import
many products from neighbouring countries. As a result, a competitive market
has been created between Bangladesh and other countries.
In this chapter, the agricultural condition of Bangladesh and other countries are
discussed.
=e
i | 2\ \G <a
aman | 2) C
1 COED on * ra =
easy I
Fig. Agricultural research organization

Forma-1, Agriculture Studies, 8

2 Agriculture Studies

At the end of this chapter we will be able to -

e explain the contribution of scientists in agriculture

e make a relationship between modern agricultural production and changes
in our lifestyle

e describe the advancement agriculture in Bangladesh compared to some
selected countries in the world

© compare the agriculture of Bangladesh with other selected countries

Lesson-1: Contribution of scientists in agriculture

Scientists have laudable contributions to agriculture. After a long term research

and analysis, scientists have been including new findings in agriculture which

lead to the modernization of agricultural activities. Teachers of agricultural

universities and researchers of agricultural research organizations are

agrcultural scientists. Likewise the farmers are agricultural scientists too.

General people are the pioneer of ancient agriculture. University teachers and

researchers are performing advanced research considering climate,

environment, soil, water, production technologies etc. As a consequence of

their tireless research new technologies are being added to agriculture.

It is necessary to know about the problems of agriculture of Bangladesh. The

main problems of the country are -

1. problems of soil nutrients

2. problems of fertilizer management

3. problems of flood and drought

4. problems of salinity

Scientists are playing a great role to solve the above problems. With a view to

solving the nutritional problems, scientists have divided the country into thirty

ecological zones. Determination of the soil types of each zone is animportant ,,

contribution of agricultural scientists. Soil types of ecological zones are S

Agriculture of Bangladesh and International Perspectives 3
considered to recommend the doses of fertilizers for crop production. Similarly,
a well-organized fertilizer recommendation has been developed by scientists.
Considering the fertilizer dose of previous crops and the fertilizer uptake,
pattern of fertilizer doses for the subsequent crops are determined.
Flood, drought, salinity are the major problems of Bangladesh agriculture.
Scientists have achieved a significant advancement to solve this problem. For
example, the rice research institute has invented two types of paddy in the
name of Kiron and Dishari as late varieties to be cultivated after flood. Recently,
scientists have invented two more types of paddy BRRI Dhan 51 and BRRI Dhan
52 for the flood, affected areas. These two types of paddy can remain under
water for 10-15 days. This is obviously a significant contribution in agriculture.
Like flood drought and salinity are two major problems to our farmers. For this
the scientists have invented drought tolerant paddy- BRRI 56 and BRRI 57. In
addition BRRI Dhan 45 and BRRI Dhan 47 have been developed to overcome the
problem of salinity in coastal areas.
Through their experiences, farmers are also inventing new technologies which
are adding new horizon in agriculture. For example, Haripada Kapali, a farmer
from the district of Jnenidah, invented a new variety of paddy known as ‘Hari
Dhaan'. For some plants, plant parts are used as seeds for propagation.
Scientists observed an additional advantage of such type of seeds. Propagation
with seed can produce a seedling identical to its parents. These advantages of
having parental characteristics in new plants cannot be found with vegetative
propagation. Farmers use vegetative propagation in banana, mango, litchi,
orange, rose, etc. Improvement of quality of seed, development of new
varieties, seed storage, determining the causes of diseases improving
nutritional values of crops, all these are done by the agricultural scientists. Even
from harvesting to marketing, ensuring food security and keeping food healthy,
all kinds of technologies are accomplished by agricultural scientists and other
scientists by research.
The activities of other branches of science are also involved with agriculture.
Not only the scientists of Agronomy, but also the scientists of Soil Science,
Genetics and Plant Breeding, Crop Botany, Horticulture, Entomology, Plant
Pathology, Farm Power and Machinery, Irrigation and Water Management etc.
are contributing in agriculture through their invention and implementation of
Sy information and technology. In addition, another group of scientists are
S working on animal husbandry and animal health.

4 Agriculture Studies
Furthermore, some scientists are involved in performing research on fish farming,
breeding and marketing. Like other countries, we have various research institutes
specialized to perform research on those areas. Scientists from those institutes and
organizations are playing important role in different sectors of agriculture.

Work: Students will be divided into several groups and will discuss about

the contributions of agricultural scientists. Then they will make a poster

followed by presentation and present it in the class room.
Lesson-2: Lifestyle and culture of Bangladeshi people and
modernization of agriculture
Life style, culture and agriculture of Bangladeshi people are tied in the same
string. From the ancient time agriculture was one of the major supports of this
country. With the advancement of time, this ancient agriculture has developed
by the touch of modernisation. By using modern agriculture and technologies,
our agriculture has been carrying gigantic success in agricultural production. In
spite of this, once upon a time the agro based country Bangladesh faced a
serious food scarcity and famine. Besides this, the famine during the 2nd world
war engulfed the total Bangladesh. In fear of being plundered by japanese
army, the British goverment either took away the food grain from Bengal and
Asam to the West or destroyed them. As a result, millions of people in east
Bengal died from unbearable famine. At that time British Government took an
outstanding decision in spite of having difficulties in the World War. They
established an Agricultural Institute at Sher-e-Bangla Nagar in Dhaka (now
Sher-e-Bangla Agricultural University), a Veterinary College in Comilla and a
Faculty of Agriculture in the University of Dhaka which initiated the facility of
taking bachelor degree in the field of Agriculture. In addition, they started a
specialized department as 'The Department of Agriculture’. Although it did not
improve the famine situation instantly, the modernization of agriculture was
initiated. During Pakistan period, an Agricultural University was established in
this country. Later, some Agricultural Extension Training Institute (AETI) and
Veterinary Training Institutes (VTI) were established to make skill field worker at,
grassroot level. Almost every district got a government agriculture farm and a s

Agriculture of Bangladesh and International Perspectives 5
poultry farm also a dairy farm in some districts as demonstration farms. To
perform research on economic crops like jute, sugarcane and tea, specialized
research institutes were established in Dhaka, Ishwardi and Srimangal
respectively, in parallal agricultural and rice research institutes were established
in Gazipur.
As a result of these accomplishments, the initiation of the modernization of
agriculture was started in the early 1960s. This influenced rice cultivation the
most. Local Rice varieties with various taste and aroma having low yield was
replaced by high yielding modern varieties developed by IRRI and BRRI. The
cultivation of these rice varieties increased the demand of fertilizers and
machineries for irrigation and other cultural practices. As a result, cost of
production has been increasing gradually. Farmers with less or no capital either
converted into field workers or migrated to cities and towns to find new
professions. However, poultry and dairy farming has created some
opportunities of employment for rural people. Due to the improved
transportation and marketing, the poultry farms are increasing more rapidly
near urban areas.
Increase in crop production in agriculture, high returns from animal products
like egg, milk, meat and leather lead to an increase in income and
dissemination of education among rural life.
Since soil or land is the base of agriculture, scientists are doing endless research
works on soils. Scientists have discovered a lot of important information about
soil types, soil classifications, soil fertility, soil microorganisms and other
benefits. Farmers have adopted the technologies regarding nutrition, growth,
reproduction, treatments of crop plants, livestock, fishes which results in
constant advancement of agriculture towards the production of healthy
balanced diets. Today, genetics of plants and animals have brought a great
success in agriculture. The productivity of high yielding rice, wheat, maize,
barley has been increased many times.
At present there are four agricultural universities and one veterinary university
in Bangladesh. Beside agricultural study, teachers of most of the science and
so technology universities conduct research. As a result of research, agriculture
& extension officer and field workers make high-yield varieties and technology

6 Agriculture Studies
available to the farmers. Consequently, agricultural production is developing
by leaps and bound. We heard about ‘hybrid rice’. If it is cultivated following
proper methods, it may produce more yield than conventional high yielding
varieties.
Scientists imported many kinds of flowers, fruits, vegetables, cattle, fishes,
trees etc. from abroad and added to the existing agriculture. Further, they
developed environment-friendly new varieties through breeding that make a
better progress of agriculture in this country.
This advancement of agricultural production has also improved the lifestyle of
rural people. Use of agricultural implements is increasing. Diversity of
production as well as competition is increasing. At the same time, use of capital
is also increasing. Production of fish, poultry and egg is now reached into
industrial level. So the demand of education and skill is increasing in rural life.
Work : Students will act and express the changes in the lifestyles by the
modernization of agriculture.
Lesson-3: Advancement of agriculture in different countries in
the world
Now-a-days, the countries of the world are classified into developed and
developing countries. These countries are also classified as industrialized and
agro-based countries.
Industrialized countries are also advanced in agriculture. These countries
developing their agriculture, turn it into industry. On the other hand, the
government and the famers of agriculture dependent country cannot avail of
and use agricultural technology, beacause of poor economy. In fact, now a days,
developing countries are underdeveloped and developed countries are
developed in agriculture.
Advancement of agriculture in the independent Bangladesh: In the beginning
of independence, there was an agricultural university, an agricultural institute,
a veterinary training institute and several agricultural extension training
institutes. At present there are four agricultural universities and one veterinary
university in Bangladesh. In addition, most of the science and technology S
gs

Agriculture of Bangladesh and International Perspectives 7
universities possess the Faculty of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry. Now
there are specialized laboratories for all agricultural crops. Every year
agriculture fairs are organized in both rural and urban areas. Integrated Pest
Management (IPM) for making agriculture more environment-friendly and
other different activities have been introduced to increase farmer’s awarness
and skill in better agricultural processes. To minimize the use of chemical
fertilizers, preparing green manures and compost and applying in the field,
vermicomposting technologies are transferred to farmers. Huge progress has
been made in production and processing of fodder, poultry and fish feeds to
meet the food shortage of cattle, poultry and fish. Poultry industry is now a
notable agricultural industry in Bangladesh and a large portion of fishes in the
market come from cultured fishes. Every year government is encouraging tree
plantation programme which makes the farmers interested towards agroforestry
or social forestry. In agricultural universities Masters and PhD degree education
are being extended. Advancement in biotechnology or genetic engineering
opened a new opportunity for Bangladesh agriculture. Decoding the genetic
map of jute by a Bangladeshi scientist is a remarkable event. Therefore, the
modern era has started in Bangladesh agriculture.
Agriculture in India: India is a big country having diversified geography. Except
some desert areas, most of the hilly areas and plain lands are
agriculture-based. The agro ecology of this country is also diversified. As a
result, field crops, flowers, fruits, vegetables, meat, milk, egg and many more
are produced in India and are available in the markets. The agricultural science
and technologies of India are not only useful for India but also for the rest of the
world. Bangladesh is one of the remarkable importers of Indian agricultural
products.
Agriculture in China: The advantages of socialistic planned production and
distribution are playing a supporting role in the development of the agricultural
system in China. Although it is a country having the largest population in the
world, there is no significant food crisis in China. Chinese scientists have already
built the capacity to produce the highest per hectare yield of rice, wheat and
maize. China is the leading supplier of newly adopted hybrid rice in our country.
% So, it is essential to learn Chinese technologies and applying them into field
& level.

8 Agriculture Studies
Agriculture in Vietnam: The farmer communities and agriculture has a great
role in the development of Vietnam. Especially, Vietnam is the largest rice
exporting country in the world. The Vietnamese success in the development of
agricultural technologies for the last few years is a matter of wonder. We have
many things to learn from them. The facts of agricultural development of
Vietnam are not only confined to the country but also disseminated throughout
the world.
The component organization of the United Nations who works in this perspective
throughout the world is: "Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO)". There are
also some specialized crop research institution like "International Rice Research
Institute (IRRI)". They are playing important roles in the development of
our agriculture.
Work:
1. Individually each student will write a passage about "Advancement of
Bangladesh agriculture" on their notebook and then they will present this
in the class.
2. Write how modernization of agricultrue impact lifestyle and present it in
your class.
Lesson-4: Comparison of Bangladesh agriculture in the
perspective of Asia and the World
Bangladesh, India, China and Vietnam are situated in the Asia. Due to
geographical reason, there are some similarities as well as dissimilarities among
these countries. Rice is the main agricultural product in those four countries.
People of these four countries are habituated to consume rice as staple food.
Among these, China, India and Bangladesh are highly populated countries. The
situation of Vietnam is not so extreme. «
Ss
AQ

Agricultural Technology 9
Bangladesh vs. China

China is more developed in agriculture than Bangladesh. In many sectors, China is
more advanced than Bangladesh specially in agro-based products. China has been
able to change genetic characteristics of rice to such an extent that most of the
species of their rice are no more dependent on seasons. These varieties are
producing 7-fold more yield than previously cultivated conventional varieties. They
are also claiming that their future generation rice will yield double than the
existing varieties. However, there is a big limitation of these super hybrid rice is
that their seeds cannot be stored for future reproduction. Their genetic potential
finished in a single generation. For Chinese socio-economic and political condition
these crops may be suitable or riskless. But in Bangladesh there are some
problems. By heritage farmers of Bangladesh are not dependent on seed traders
for rice seeds because about 85% of the rice seeds are stored and used by the
farmers themselves. The seeds of high yielding rice varieties which were
developed by Bangladesh Rice Research Institute (BRRI) can be grown by the
farmers themselves in their land and can be stored for the next season. So, there is
one kind of freedom of rice farmers about rice seeds. However, Bangladesh
Agricultural University and Bangladesh Rice Research Institute are trying to
develop some varieties of super hybrid rice. It is desired that farmers of
Bangladesh will soon get seeds of those varieties. By this time farmers of
Bangladesh have been experienced of cultivating these types of variety because
some seed companies were interested to release these seeds in Bangladesh and
the government approved their activities with a condition that they will produce
the seed in this country.

Lesson-5: Bangladesh vs. India

India is our neighbouring country. We have both historical and cultural
relationship with this country. This relationship is also true in case of
agriculture. Both of the countries are affected with increasing population
growth rate. To solve the problem of food crisis both of the countries are
dependent on the farmers.

However, agriculture of India is more advanced than Bangladesh. India is far
Forma-2, Agriculture Studies, 8

10 Agriculture Studies
advanced than Bangladesh in producing rice and other cereals, pulses, flowers,
fruits, vegetables, oilseeds, cotton, sugarcane as well as poultry, dairy, fisheries
and other agricultural commodities. India has got the world's largest dairy
cooperative organization which is an ideal example in the world. In spite of
having similar history and culture like Bangladesh India has markedly changed
this trend of development by last 60-70 years. One of the major reasons is that
the Indian farmers are more organized than Bangladeshi farmers; and another
reason is the outstanding advancement in agricultural science and
technologies. Indian scientists are not orily leading the Indian agriculture but
also world agriculture. Indeed, the area of work is also very vast in India.
Being a country of 28-times bigger than Bangladesh, agro ecological diversity is
a matter of challenge and prospect as well. India has got different types of
ecological regions: from desert to ice-covered area; from low marshy land to
hilly uneven area; infertile drought-prone area to fertile floodplain area. While
ice cool winter is prevailing in a part of the country, another part is experiencing
summer or spring. As a result, throuthout India almost all types of crops grow
all the year round.

However, the per unit yield of most of the crops in Bangladesh and India is
almost similar. But in some regions of India like Punjab, Haryana, Kerala the per
unit yield of crops is very high.

Almost all of the agricultural commodities except jute, leather, Hilsha fish are
exported from India to Bangladesh.

Bangladesh vs. Vietnam

The top most similarity between Bangladeshi and Vietnamese agriculture is the
production of rice. But the progress of Vietnamese farmers is more rapid than
Bangladeshi farmers. Twenty five years ago the progress of agriculture was less
advanced and even weaker. Now, in every sectors of agriculture Vietnam has
crossed Bangladesh. The main reason is that the Vietnamese farmer communi-
ties are very much organized. The agricultural cooperative societies in Vietnam
are very much organized and creative. All the farmers of Vietnam are related to
some cooperative society. The agricultural cooperatives are too strong to ,,
provide 50% of the annual cost of government and they also provide economic 3S

Agriculture of Bangladesh and International Perspectives 11
support to local agricultural research and extension organizations. They also
play a vital role in decision making and planning of those organizations. Mean-
while, Bangladesh has adopted some field technologies from Vietnam.
Work: Students will be divided into several groups and discuss about the
comparison between the advancement of Bangladesh agriculture with
other countries. Then they will write them in a poster as chart and present
in the classroom.

Lesson-6: Overcoming the seasonal dependency of crops

Photoperiodism of crop plants is the main reason for seasonal dependency. If it

becomes possible to overcome or minimize the photoperiodism of plants, i.e. if

a season-dependent crop can be made as season independent, it can be grown

in any season.

Utilities:

1. Off-seasonal fruits and vegetable has a great demand in the market. Crop
produced at this time are sold at higher price. Both farmers and retailers
may earn extra money.

2. Marketing of early harvested crops can be a product of high value.

3. Seasonal unemployment is reduced and people may become busy round
the year.

4. For the same reason rural manpower can be utilized round the year.

5. 'Monga’ or such other situation can be avoided.

6. It may increase the diversity of agricultural commodities.

7. Overcoming the nutritional problems may be easier.

8. It may reduce the dependency of importing and may save foreign currency.

9. It may ensure the foreign buyers to get commodities all the time which can

~ result in the expansion of foreign trade.
S 10. Agricultural research may be free from seasonal dependency.

12 Agriculture Studies

Different strategies to overcome the seasonal dependency of crops

1. Creating artificial envi-

ronment for crop produc- ETI NSS

tion: In this technique, any ee

crop may be grown with- rm es Pare ey -_ b io Freee

out changing its biological ina net ee ap eal rs is a et

qualities. In this case stellen e

desired crops are grown in 7 SSS ye ae ad

green house instead of ;

open field or garden. Here Fig. Green House

daylength, light, temperature, atmospheric humidity and other necessary factors are

being controlled artificially in a closed chamber which is suitable for crops. On the

other hand, required balanced nutrients are supplied to plants. The prerequisite of

implementation of this technique is togather detail information about the

environment and nutrients of crops. Secondly, the proper methods of creating

suitable environment and applying proper nutrients should be established and

maintained. Thirdly, uninterrupted electricity supply should be ensured. Though

any crop can be grown in this way, production cost is very high. This technique can

be applied to grow some special crops. Logically, large scale production of any crop

is not possible in this technique. It is not logical to use this technique except for

high value and special crops. In this technique, production of crops in large scale is

difficult.

Since this technique is fully controlled the crops produced in this technique are

completely healthy and disease free.

In our country, this technique has been used to produce Capsicum (sweet

peeper), strawberry and tomato and found that this technique may be used to

grow special crops with profit. At present the market price of these crops is very

high.

2. Manipulating the genetics of crops: The permanent and less expensive way

to overcome seasonal dependency is manipulating the genetics of crops. In this
S

Agriculture of Bangladesh and International Perspectives 13
case, gene sequence may be changed; the genes which are responsible for
seasonal dependency may be deleted or changed so that they remain inactive.
Besides hybridization and recurrent selection, this goal can be achieved by
many other modern ways. These kinds of crops are called GM crops or geneti-
cally modified crops and these technologies are generally termed as Genetic
Engineering or Biotechnology.
3. Experienced farmer may also identify and develop seasonal dependent lines
by observation, selection and experimentation. If these lines can adapt with
field condition, may be certified as variety/cultivar. These early or late varieties
which are invented by farmers become very popular at field level. As a result,
popular agricultral products remain available in the market for a long time. Due
to low production cost of these crops farmers can earn more profit. This is
the oldest methods of developing crop varieties by human.
Work: Explain, how logical it is to grow crops in green house in Bangladesh.
Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. What amount of percentage of the required rice seed of the country is
preserved and used by the farmers themselves?
a. 65% b. 75%
c. 85% d. 95%
2. If seasonal dependency of crops can be overcome-
i. Unemployment problems will be solved
ii. Price of products will be ensured
iii. Various kinds of crop will be available
2
Ss
N

14 Agriculture Studies
which one of the below is the correct?
a. iandii b. iand iii
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
Read the passage below and answer to the question number 3 and 4
Mrs. Rawshan Ara, in her home garden, planted some seedlings of fruit tree
raised by cutting from the branches and she also sown some vegetable seeds
and obtained good yield. But in the next year she could not get a good yield
from the vegetable which were raised from the seed produced by her.
3. What types of characteristic of Mrs. Rawshan Ara's fruit trees will have?
a. Like mother plant b. Like father plant
c. Better than mother plant d. Like both mother and father plant
4. What is the reason behind getting low yield of vegetables in the
following season?
a. Collection of seeds from her own garden
b. Cultivation of vegetables in the same land
c. Having same characteristics of mother plant
d. Having characteristics of both mother and father plants
Creative questions
1. Farmers of the village of Enayetpur cultivate crops on the basis of seasons.
In most of the time their high land remains vacant. As a result, at that time
farmers become unemployed. In addition to the lack of crops in their land,
unemployment makes them crazy and they went to Agricultural Officer for
seeking suggestion. Agricultural Officer motivated them in cultivating crops
varieties which are free from seasonal dependency. Cultivating seasonal
dependency free varieties of rice and vegetables, the farmers of Enayetpur
village are now self-sufficient.
sy
Ss

Agriculture of Bangladesh and International Perspectives 15

a. What is GM crop?

b. Cultivation of super hybrid rice exploit the freedom of the farmers -
explain.

c. Explain which steps were taken by the farmers of Enayetpur village to
get success in crop production.

d. Analyse how the farmers of Enayetpur village were self-sufficient by
the advice of Agricultural Officer.

2. Mr. Rafiq, a farmer, was watching a television report on the agriculture of Viet-
nam. That report was showing the agricultural technologies used in farming,
methods of cultivation, and farmers' activities followed in Vietnam. In that
report, the reporter also mentioned that the less developed countries like
Bangladesh cannot use the modern agricultural technologies which make
them underdeveloped. Mr. Rafiq got an idea about Vietnamese agriculture
through that television program and he organized the farmers of his area.

a. What is agriculture?

b. General people are the pioneer of ancient agriculture - explain.

c. Explain how Mr. Rafiq organized the farmers of his area.

d. Evaluate the comment of the reporter about Bangladesh agriculture.
©
3
XQ

Chapter 2
Agricultural Technology
Invention of technology is a continuous process. Once a technology is released, it
continues for few years. Then other better technologies are invented. People
adopt those new technologies as per their requirements. For example, fertilizer is a
chemical technology. Since long period, farmers have been using improved fertiliz-
ers to supply nutrients to plant. In the same way, old technologies are always
replaced by new technologies.
a = Y- = WAG — Vo
= ME = == \NA- AY -
= Za MY —_“-V ~ ‘| ew y Ve~- -
1 PA 7 WW. -- Rae eee XY —a
: = V- fy =: A PRAMS =.
= [OY — — ee a ha ZZ
-/{/ ~ Pg oe \ t ee oe
7 i - NA i i — =AKKs _
ae = ERY AE -
>) . -_ 7 - - <n Fe
ae _ a =
‘f Al =e ~ VWF - YE
om \\ = aa “= oo - =
V ~ _ _ VA _— Ee -
Fig. Application of urea supergranules in rice field
At the end of this chapter we will be able to -
1. explain the use of various technologies in agriculture
2. explain the diversification of field crops
3. explain the cropping pattern
5,
S

Agricultural Technology 17
Use of various technologies in agriculture
Lesson-1: Application of urea supergranules in rice cultivation
Concept of urea super granules: Many kinds of fertilizer are used in rice
cultivation. Among this, urea is the most vital nutrient that contains nitrogen.
For the convenience of application granular urea fertilizer is converted into urea

super granules by machine.
CN
CH at OD CRUSOE REID,
C.. > E393 J CEE POSER 5 05
. Fig. Granular urea
Fig. Urea super granules

Necessities of urea super granules
Necessity of using urea super granules arises from the limitation of using
conventional granular urea fertilizer. Therefore, at the beginning of this lesson
the advantage and disadvantages of using conventional granular urea are
discussed. Later, the advantages and disadvantages of urea super granules will
be outlined.
Advantages of using granular Urea fertilizer :

1. It is very easy to use.

2. Its using does not affect plant roots.

3. It is available in the market.

4. It takes less time and labour to use it.
Disadvantages of using granular urea fertilizer:

1. Granular urea needed split application in several times.

2. There is possibility of leaching loss due to quick decomposition.

3. This fertilizer can be washed out from the soil with rain or irrigation

water.

4. Using this fertilizer involved much loss and higher cost.

Forma-3, Agriculture Studies, 8

18 Agriculture Studies
Advantages of using urea super granules:

1. Urea supergranules need to be used only once in a season.

2. Using urea supergranules save 20-30% of the nitrogen.

3. Urea supergranules supply nitrogen to the plant slowly.

4. Using urea supergranules can produce 15-20% higher yield.
Disadvantages of using urea super granules :

1. Plant roots may be affected.

2. Desired granule size is not always available.

3. It cannot be applied in dry soil.

4. It takes more time and labor to apply it.
Methods of application of urea supergranules in rice field
Five to seven days before the application of urea supergranules, rice seedling is
to be transplanted maintaining 20x20 cm distance between line to line and
plant to plant as well. Within 5-7 days of transplanting of seedlings, before
being the soil hard, urea supergranules should be applied. Application of urea
supergranules becomes easier when it is applied in the field containing 2-3 cm
of water.
There are different weights of a single urea super granule, viz. 0.9 g, 1.8 g and
2.7 g. The application doses are determined according to the weight of granule.
For example, if the weight is 0.9 g, then 3 granules is to be placed in the middle
of 4 hills for boro rice. For aman and aus 2 granules is to be applied. For the
granule of 1.8 g, 2 granules should be used in case of boro and 1 granule for aus
and aman. On the other hand, if the granule size is 2.7 g, then 1 granule is
enough for boro rice.
Urea supergranules are easier to apply in the crops planted in lines. At first the
urea supergranules are placed into 10 cm deep in the middle of first 4 hills of
first line. Then the granules are placed in the middle of the next 4 hills maintain-
ing same depth. When first line is completed, the second line to be started
which is followed by second, third, fourth line and so on. Thus the entire field is
to be covered. s

8

Agricultural Technology 19
—y WBE AWA Ny Tle: - - IN
7 AWA = er <= W- -We-
-WeY- = \"GA NV an A
5 i WY A= ye Y- =
- y \) = NG 7 hk ZB yo bal Tere ——
WY) WAG. -5 ae ODS «a
WAS IW > = 7\4R RAS WW.
/ iN - WAL AG AWE - eK
— AY - —- - Eb - - An
\\ - = aes 7 - - + AE -
“iY -NG~ \O- NE - > ES -
‘ey a: _ = VF . WF i
: 4 - -_ oad mig _ es
Vy - _ Te. AE - -- EE -
Fig. Application of urea supergranules
Works: Students will divide themselves into groups and explain what type of
fertilizer is more beneficial for paddy cultivation.
New words: Granular urea, urea supergranules
Lesson 2: Cattle fattening
In our country, livestock production is not so high as rice and vegetable produc-
tion. It should be bear in mind that without developing livestock sector,
required amount of protein cannot be supplied to the people. Daily requirement
for meat Per person is around 120g. But from a statistics it was observed that
a Bangladeshi person takes only 24g meat per day. From this ststistics its clear
that we have a deficiency of animal protein. Therefore, Supply of beef should
be increased. In order to solve this problem cattle fattening programme has devel-
oped. With the help of this technology cattle can be fattened within short
period of time. These fattened cattle are marketed at high price and it earns
co high profit.
S

20 Agriculture Studies
System of cattle fattening:
Key points of cattle fattening system:

1) Cattle selection and purchase: Male cattle are suitable for fattening. For
this purpose, it is better to purchase a bull calf of 1.5 to 2 years of age.

2) Housing: House should be built on a land of 1.5m x 2 m dimension for
each cattle.

3) Treatment of diseases: For treatment of any disease it is better to take
suggestions from doctor. Vaccination against contagious diseases is
must.

4) Feed supply: Feed that contains high amount of protein, carbohydrate,
fat, minerals and vitamins should be supplied to the cattle.

Feed (ration) formulation for fattening: Cattle fattening means ensuring cattle
health by supplying proper amount of feed and there by supplying protein to
the human being. Animal gets nutrition from feed and grown up physically.
Cattle should be provided with such type of feed that contains more amount of
protein, carbohydrate, fat, minerals and vitamins that of common feeds. Straw,
maize or wheat crust, molasses,oil cake etc are rich source of protein, carbohy-
drate and fat. Green grass, bone meal etc contain minerals and vitamins.
Feed that are mixed with urea and molasses are helpful for fattening. These
items can be supplied in two ways 1) By mixing with straw and 2) By mixing with
concentrate.
Preparation of cattle feed by mixing urea with straw:

1. Firstly, a dol (large type basket) is to be taken and plastered with mud then

dried.

2. 20 liters of water is to be taken in a bucket

3. 1kg of urea is to be mixed with that water

4. Out of 20kg straw, small amount should be kept in the dol and Urea ,,

solution is to be sprayed over it. Pressing is done while adding straw. S

Agricultural Technology 21
5. Dolis to be fulfilled with straw in this way.
6. Dol is to be covered with polythene after filling it and kept it tied.
7. After 10-12 days straw will be taken out of the dol and will be kept
outside for sun drying.
8. After sun drying straw will be suitable for feeding.
9. Generally a cattle should be supplied with straw that is mixed with 3 kg
of urea.
10. Each day, 300-400 gm of molasses should be mixed with straw.
y ma ZZ 9) mS AN
yt Y vn an
iq , (giro AC oo
\ \ i
( f ;
Fig. Fattened Cow
Work : What quantity of urea, molasses and straw is needed to fatten 10 cattle?
New Word: Livestock, cattle fattening, dol, molasses
Lesson-3: Crop diseases and their control
Concept of crop diseases
Do we know crop plants suffer from diseases? We may confuse how crop plants
suffer from diseases like human and animal. But every organism has experienced
and accompanied with birth and death. Every living organism is surrounded by
virus, bacteria and many other microorganisms which disseminate diseases.
Human, animals as well as plants are infested by microorganisms and become
2 disease-infected. Like human and animal, plants can also be cured from disease
&_ by proper treatment. Due to lack of proper treatment crops may die.

22 Agriculture Studies
If we go to crop field we can observe the
symptoms of diseases. We can observe vari- .
ous spots on the stem or leaves. Sometimes \ f; s }
oa. ; QS ix Ly
mosaic-like mixed spots of yellow-green are WY / fe ql fog
also observed. Some of the cases rotten roots FRAN ANS 4 le Be
; . SESE TRY Wa
are observed or sometimes wilted of rotten Ne i Ast (ES i. .
seedlings are observed inthe seedbed. These ““# NS NN i és: hie es
are symptoms of disease. By observing these °™ rN fig y dN
symptoms farmers become aware and take av a 4 Aw
control measures. Hig Cropdisease
Now we may have curiosity to know what crop disease is. If there are some
abnormalities observed in plant structures such as insufficient growth, weak
and thin appearance of flowers or fruit dropping, it means the plant is suffering
from disease. Diseases are reflected by different symptoms. Various crops are
affected by various diseases and their symptoms are also different. Symptoms
of various disease-infected crops are mentioned below-
1. Spot: Various spots appear in the leaves, P
Ky
stems or other parts of plant. These , ay g r
spots may be black, light brown, dark nla) Je ee
brown or water soaked in appearance. LOY A,
These spots appear due to different \P “—
diseases. For example, brown spot on WW
rice is a symptom of fungal disease. !
Fig. Mosaic disease of okra
xf)
2. Blight: In this case leaves are blighted or EA
INR
burned. Example, Leaf blight of rice and AR ih
potato. Rr ACA aa
3. Mosaic: When dark or light-yellowish ATEN
K Pe PR EAD
mixed staining appears on the leaves of Ke E} is
crop plants, it is called mosaic. Mosaic
diseases occur in okra and mung bean. ARSE. .
It is a symptom of viral disease. Fig, WiRKigigmease oFeGg olan 5

Agricultural Technology 23
4. Wilting: Sometimes stems and roots of crops are affected by diseases and
they are hung downward. This condition is called wilting. Example is wilting of
egg plant.

5. Leaf curling: Leaves of crop plants are curled due to virus infection. This
symptom is observed in the crops like papaya, tomato.

Prevention: Preventive measures should be taken before the crop is affected

by diseases because if a crop is affected by a disease, it is difficult to control.

Therefore, before disease infestation the following technologies should be used.

1. Use of pathogen free seeds: Many diseases are disseminated through
seeds. Therefore, farmers should collect disease free seeds and planting
seeds by treatment.

2. Seed treatment: Some seeds themselves contain pathogens. To disinfect
the pathogens from seeds seed treatment is a good technology. In this case,
fungicides are used.

3. Practicing clean cultivation: In some of the cases, crop may be infected by
diseases when the field is weed infested. So, field should be free of weed
before cultivation.

4. Burning or burying of disease infected crop plants: When a plant is affected
by disease it may be spread in to another plant. To prevent this kind of
spreading, infected crop plants may be pulled out followed by burning.
Otherwise, they should be buried deep to the soil.

Work: Students will collect samples of diseased plants mentioned in the
lesson. Then they will discuss and present them in the classroom.

New words: Leaf spot, blight, mosaic, seed treatment, fungus, virus

Lesson-4: Management of dead animals, birds and fish :

1. Disposal of dead animals 2. Disposal of dead birds 3. disposal of dead fish

Disposal of dead animals: Dead animals should not be kept here and there.

S Environment is polluted by diseased animals. Germs of dead animals spread
8

24 Agriculture Studies
in the air and also infect healthy animals. Dead animals should be disposed as
early as possible. Dead animals should be disposed far from dwelling space and
farm. Dead animals should be buried in high land and at least 1.2 meters deep
in soil. DDT or lime powder should be spread over the pit.
EE KE

vA Ss aot cS Z

Ww Wi a a ‘ a / VA
a fh yy \ % i ee yr, , Ny Se
SII - .: Fpna' ETON. Nees
- ce . "/ ZA “ . PF N § a=
WY ° Brees My . SS
a i OZ, ot fe. VP -eo * © “ Z ° yy SS
S44 "GF - a terme io XV
ZN wes Kay Ly gees sys nha peSers BZ LEE EEE

—— VY.” Wn Ch ae lest igs fa
BSS WOLLEOvlIELLLEZLZ_DAZ

Figure: Dead animal thrown in pit

Disposal of dead birds: Dead birds should be disposed far from homestead and
farms. Dead birds should not be left here and there. Rather, they should be bur-
ied. Otherwise, germs may spread out from the dead birds and affect the
healthy and living ones. If birds die epidemically in the farm they should be
buried into big holes. DDT should be spread over the dead birds and top soil
of the holes.
Disposal of dead fish: Sometimes treatment can not cure the diseased fish. Fish
start to die massively. This dead fish become rotten and pollute the environ-
ment. In this situation, following measures should be taken.
Dead fish should be cllected through nets. A 3-feet deep hole should be dug in
a place far from the pond so that rain water cannot run down from that place
to the pond. Width of the hole will depend on the quantity of dead fish. Dead
fish should be thrown into the hole and bleaching powder should be spread over to
them. Finally, the hole should be filled with soil. 5

Agricultural Technology 25

Lesson-5: Diversification of field crops

Have we observed what types of crop the farmers cultivate in their field? We

can visit and observe which field is rice-based, which field is sugarcane-based,

which field is cotton-based and which field is jute-based.

Crop diversification is a suitable crop rotation for a cropping system. It is a crop-

ping system in which different types of crops are grown rather than depen-

dency ona single crop or technology.

The objectives of crop diversification are-

1. To increase the crop production of a specific cropping pattern and to
increase the farmers income and the standard of their lifestyles.

2. To coordinate the farming activities and to minimize the adverse effects on
agro ecology.

3. To include new crop varieties and technologies in the existing cropping
patterns.

4. To save seeds and reduce the production cost.

5. To identify the problems of the farmers and solve them.

1. Cropping pattern: The land of Bangladesh is suitable for various kinds of
crop. But every farmer follows cropping pattern for crop cultivation. Grow-
ing of crop in sequences throughout the year followed in a particular area is
called cropping pattern of that area. Soil quality, availability of water, culti-
vation methods, crop varieties, risk, and income are considered in a crop-
ping pattern. Including legume crops in a cropping pattern may reduce the
demand of fertilizers and soil fertility is also increased.

2. Mixed and relay cropping: Mixed and relay cropping indicates the produc-
tion of multiple crops together in a same land those are ripen at different
times, growth patterns are different, uptake nutrients from different layers
of soil. In this case insect infestation, disease infection and environmental
risks are less.

3. Zero tillage method: Zero tillage means cultivation without tillage. Zero
tillage is practiced in flood-affected rice-based cropping pattern. For

Forma-4, Agriculture Studies, 8

26 Agriculture Studies
example, after flood, when water go out then lentil, maize, garlic etc may be
sown or planted using residual soil moisture which produce good yield. It
also takes 3-4 weeks less time than normal.

4. Relay cropping: Farmers cultivate legume crops in between flowering and
one week before harvesting of main crop to get some advantages. It is called
relay cropping. The objective of this cropping is to minimize the unavailabil-
ity of irrigation, labor and time. Our farmers generally follow relay cropping
in rice field. In relay cropping soil structure is improved and fertility is
increased.

5. Proper utilization of resources: The main objectives of crop diversification
is (i) more production and (ii) more income. Land, fertilizer, seed, irrigation
water, agricultural machineries, time are the resources of farmers. Farmer's
income depends on the proper utilization of resources. For example, farm-
ers can earn more profit from mixed or relay cropping. On the other hand,
zero tillage may save both time and money. If legume crops can be included
in a cropping pattern it can reduce the demand of fertilizers.

_ Me, an A\) Z | SS AY Bop Weer —— ana eo Une :

AN A aN ae ee

Y\3 + -* Ke | ~~ DOV i, Ook HK a Og s Bc a

Fig. Potato with sugarcane Fig. Wheat, mung bean and maize
Work: Describe how mixed cropping is done in crops diversification in your
locality.

New words: Crop diversification, cropping pattern, mixed cropping, relay crop-

ping, proper utilization of resources. 20

S
N

Agricultural Technology 27

Lesson-6: Use of diversification of field crops

The climate of Bangladesh is humid and hot. Bangladesh has a subtropical mon-

soon climate characterized by wide seasonal variations in rainfall. Round the

year different crops are cultivated here in three different seasons. They are

Rabi, Kharif-1 and Kharif-2. Every year farmers include those crops in their crop-

ping pattern. Crops are selected on the basis of duration of production, soil

fertility, irrigation facility etc. Three different examples on the utilization of
diversification of field crops are given below.

1. Cultivation of pointed gourd as relay crop with potato: This is a remarkable
example of crop diversification. Farmers try to make changes in their farm-
ing practices to improve their economic condition. In this effort, cultivation
of pointed gourd as relay cropping with potato is very popular. In case of
relay cropping, when first crop reaches its maturity then second crop is
planted.

Farmers cultivate early varieties of potato in the month of October-
November. Potatoes are planted in rows maintaining spacing of 55 cm. In
the month of December, pointed gourd is planted in each third row of
potato. Potato harvesting is completed during January-February. Then
pointed gourd continues to grow and fruiting started from March and can
be harvested up to November.

In this technique, there is no requirement of additional fertilizers for
pointed gourd. In this case extra income is possible from the same piece of
land.

2. Cultivation of bitter gourd as relay crop with potato: There is also a scope
to cultivate bitter gourd with potato. The farmers of northern part of
Bangladesh newly started to cultivate bitter gourd with potato to boost up
the production. Farmers plant potato seeds in rows during early in the

20 season i.e. October-November. Furrows are created between two rows.
R

28 Agriculture Studies
After planting of potato bitter gourd seedlings are grown in poly bags. In the
month of January, seedlings of bitter gourd are planted in between two
rows of potato. Harvesting of potato is completed in mid February. After
harvesting of potato the bitter gourd plants grow quickly and fruiting is
started from the month of March. Bitter gourd can be harvested up to
September-December. This is another technique of crop diversification.

3. Cultivation of potato and red amaranth as mixed cropping: Red amaranth
is a short duration and quick growing crop. Cultivating red amaranth with
potato is a good practice of mix cropping. It is already mentioned that
potato is planted in rows. When potato plant become 5-6 cm tall then soils
between the rows are loosen. Then seeds of red amaranth are sown in loose
soil. Potato and red amaranth grow simultaneously. Red amaranth is quick
growing. So, it can be harvested several times. Red amaranth can be
harvested up to the month of December. Potato still grows even after com-
plete harvest of red amaranth. Potato is harvested in mid February.

Besides the above methods of crop diversification, as a relay crop-

1. Tomato is cultivated with
sugarcane a \\
a VG, OVA Var We
2. Mustard is cultivated with (ZI nen
3. Lentil is cultivated with Ne K| NOE! 3: Neh We i
sugarcane ¢ 2 a eee. L
WZ Z See ON
As a mix crop- ) week: EOS S< eo
1. Mustard is cultivated with RMS Se we RS
lentil Fig. Potato as a relay crop with banana
2. Sesame is cultivated with aus rice
3. Aus rice is cultivated in banana orchard
Work: Observe a mixed crop field and submit a report on this.
2
New words: Mixed cropping, relay cropping 8

Agricultural Technology 29
Lesson-7: Concept of crop rotation
Crop rotation is an improved agricultural technology. Crop rotation facilitates
good condition of soil, good crops and high yield. Pest and disease infestation
become lower and efficiency of fertilizer become higher. Use of crop rotation as
a technology is practiced throughout the world.
Crop rotation is the practice of growing a series of dissimilar/different types of
crop in the same area in sequential way maintaining the soil under good
condition. In other words, crop rotation is the practice of growing different
types of crop in the same land instead of growing a particular crop again and
again. For example, shallow rooted crops should be cultivated followed by deep
rooted crops. As a result, pest and disease infestation become low.
To practice crop rotation, farmers divide their land into three or four plots. In the
first year, different crops are grown according to Rabi, Kharif-1 and Kharif-2
season. In the second year, crop of second plot is replaced by crop of that was
grown in the first plot, similarly, third plot is replaced by second plot, and the
same sequence end by replacing first plot with fourth plot of first year. After
second year, third years also follow similar sequence of changes. In the fourth
year, crop rotation is finished and every crop is cultivated once in every plot.
For crop rotation, crop should be selected considering the following factors:
1. Not to cultivate same crop continuously;
2. Not to cultivate crops having same root system;
3. Selecting different crops which has various demand of nutrients;
4. Including pulse crops in the pattern;
5. Cultivating green manures like dhaincha (Sesbania);
6. Cultivating fodder crops for cattle;
7. Cultivating both food crops and cash crops;
2
Ss
N

30 Agriculture Studies
Advantages of crop rotation
There are many advantages of crop rotation which are mentioned below -
1. Crop rotation can preserve the a
Srey Orsalli DT erromere
2. A balance of nutrients is main- wre: i RUM
tained; ee a LIN \| Sec oe SE
. . Bact BS oa EEE 5th Ra
3. Weed infestation become lower; 1,2. 2-58 iy fe See BY
4. Pest and disease infestation =f Arne. Ss Sap
become lower;
Fig. Crop rotation with different crops
5. Water loss is minimized;
6. Yield is increased;
7. Cattle feeds become available.
Consequence of crop rotation:
a) Crop rotation ensures the high grade of crop diversification technology;
b) Infestation of pest, diseases and weeds become lower;
c) Since various kinds of crop are cultivated, soil fertility is maintained;
d) Plant can uptake balanced nutrition;
e) Nitrogen is added to soil;
f) Decreases the use of pesticide.
Work: Farmers of your village practice crop rotation. Discuss with them
about crop rotation then write down why and how the farmers of your
village followed crop rotation.
New words: Crop rotation, deep rooted, shallow rooted oo
2
S
AQ

Agricultural Technology 31
Lesson-8: Utilization of crop rotation
In previous lesson, we have got a concept about crop rotation. We have also
come to know that the farmers are practicing crop rotation with or without
having knowledge about it. They do not have any scientific explanation. But
they have the knowledge that if the same crop is cultivated for many years in
the same land, the yield is reduced. Soil fertility is reduced. Many problems like
the infestation of pest and diseases occur. Farmers have divided their cultivated
crops into Rabi, Kharif-1 and Kharif-2. So, at first farmers decide which crops will
be cultivated based on every season. Secondly they decide which crops will be
grown in which plot. As per rules of crop rotation land should be divided into
several plots. The size of the plots should also be the same. How-ever, the land
of Bangladeshi farmers are divided into many small pieces due to several
reasons. As a result, the plot size may not be similar. Farmers select the land
and crops on the basis of their experience.
Almost all the areas of Panchagarh and Thakurgaon and north western part of
Dinajpur are included in Agroecological Zone-1. It consists of high, medium
high and medium low land. Farmers of this region cultivate wheat, jute,
broadcasting aus, foxtail millet, transplanted aman, potato, vegetables, mung
bean, sugarcane, chilli, boro rice, maize etc. farmers cultivate both irrigated and
rainfed crops. If we observe what kind of crop rotation is practiced by the
farmers of this region, we can get a practical idea about crop rotation.
Suppose, a farmer from Thakurgaon has 4 plots of land, he planned a crop rota-
tion for four years. He decided to cultivate wheat, jute/aus rice, transplanted
aman, potato, vegetables, dhaincha, sugarcane, chilli, sesame on the basis of
Rabi, Kharif-1 and Kharif-2 season. To cultivate those crops farmer can practice

%

g

32 Agriculture Studies
the following crop rotation mentioned in the chart below. In the crop rotation
schedule, we can observe that the cropping pattern which was followed in the
first year become end similar way in the fourth year-
Plot-4
First Rabi: Boro Rabi: Rabi: Potato Rabi: Cauliflower,
year Kharif -1: Mustard/wheat Kharif -1: Black cabbage, radish,
Jute/broadcasting | Kharif -1:Mung | gram tomato
aus bean Kharif -2: Kharif -1: Maize
Kharif -2: Fallow Kharif -2: Transplanted Kharif -2: Egg
Transplanted amar) aman plant
Second | Rabi: Cauliflower, Rabi: Potato Rabi: Rabi: Boro
year cabbage, radish, Kharif -1: Black Mustard/wheat Kharif -1:
tomato gram Kharif -1: Mung Jute/broadcasting
Kharif -1: Maize Kharif -2: bean aus
Kharif -2: Egg Transpla nted Kharif -2: Kharif -2: Fallow
plant aman Transplanted aman
Third Rabi: Potato Rabi: Rabi: Boro Rabi:
year Kharif -1: Black Cauliflower, Kharif -1: Mustard/wheat
gram cabbage, radish, | Jute/broadcasting | Kharif -1: Mung
Kharif -2: tomato aus bean
Transplanted K harif-1: Maize | Kharif -2: Fallow Kharif -2:
aman Kharif -2: Egg plant Transplanted aman
Fourth | Rabi: Wheat Rabi: Rabi: Potato Rabi: Cauliflower,
year Kharif -1: Jute, Mustard/wheat Kharif -1: Black cabbage, radish,
Broadcasting Kharif -1: Mung | gram tomato
aman bean Kharif -2: Kharif -1: Maize
Kharif -2: Kharif -2: Fallow | Transplanted Kharif -2: Egg
Transplanted aman aman plant
Rabi + Kharif-1
MULAN? 8S SS ESS 5) gaara: MIN WAN NSN g sree rR eg 2%
ae get Gn eee LET URN ae ee ee es
GSR CA ae ee map = ROE AN ze 7 PFET S wi¥ $¢ sz
Fig. Crop rotation practice aq

Agricultural Technology 33
Work: Your father asked you for a crop rotation schedule. Based on the
above chart make a crop rotation schedule for your father so that he can
start it from the upcoming Rabi season and present the schedule in the
class.

New words: Rabi, Kharif-1, Kharif-2

Exercise

Multiple Choice Questions

1. Which one is used in disposal of dead animals?

a. DDT b. Formalin

c. Clorine d. Phosphorus
2. Ways of urea and molasses feeding in cattle-

i. Mixed with straw

ii. Mixed with concentrate

iii. Mixed with water
Which one of the following is correct?

a. i andii b. i and iii

c. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii

Read the following paragraph and give the answer of question no. 3 and 4

There is a 3m x 4m size of high and fallow space in front of Rina Begum’s yard.

She made a cattle shed in this space and took necessary steps for cattle fatten-

ing by taking microcredit from bank.

Forma-5, Agriculture Studies, 8

34 Agriculture Studies
3. How many animals can be kept in the shed built in Rina Begum’s yard?
a. 1 b. 2
c. 3 d. 4
4. How will Rina Begum’s family be benefitted from the farm?
a. Meet up the requirement of protein
b. Meet up the requirement of carbohydrate
c. Increase the number of cattle
d. Increase supply of milk
Creative questions
1. Monir cultivated rice in one acre of his land in three consequtive years and
found that the production decreased gradually in every year. He discussed
the matter with agriculture officer. The officer suggested him to adopt crop
rotation.
a) What is crop rotation?
b) What are the advantages of cultivating sesbanil (dhoincho) in crop rotation?
c) How will Monir do crop rotation in his field? Explain.
d) If Monir follows the suggestion of the agricultrue officer, how much
benefited will he be. Analyse.
a 7 26, “\ Be
Ks ak VE. o es)
Fig.: Cultivation process-1. S

Agricultural Technology 35
: > — <N N (|
x | ay \ d | Pay ON
0 aul) 4 U, Ig : \
AN O74 My \
ZS SIN int —SP_| LE LQ
ECE | Ps Speer eres
YT ELEAF LAAT ibe SORE en ook eo
nar 6 we a FB Se
Fig. : Cultivation process-2
a. What is relay crop?
b. How relay cropping can minimize the unavailability of time?
c. In which method of cultivation of the fiqures the cost of production is
low? Explain.
d. Which cultivation process of the figures has influenced on agro ecology?
Analyse.
io)
S

Chapter Three
Agricultural Materials
We have discussed many kinds of agricultural materials in the previous class.
In this chapter various subjects such as how proper tilth soil can be prepared
for sowing seeds, how an ideal seed bed can be prepared and protected; and
how judicious fertilizers can be applied in the land will be discussed. Many
crop seeds will not be germinated if the soils in the seed bed may not be
prepared properly. The seedlings will not be healthy if the seed bed may not
be prepared suitably and protected appropriately although soils are fertile.
Another matter is that the farmer is not following the appropriate rules of
fertilizer application. As a result the farmers face economic loss due to excess
fertilizer application. So, the discussion of these subjects in this chapter is
appropriate.
<———__—_—_ 10 Metter a th
cS
SC BREE erry eee es ee ee ha
Dy PIES 8 OREO AR Pe SOR SO ATT SE TOS CEPR Te
Fig: Wet seed bed

After discussion of this chapter, we can-

e describe the preparing procedure of suitable soils in the seed bed for

sowing seed.
e explain making techniques of an ideal seed bed.
e explain protection of an ideal seed bed. x
N

Agricultural Materials 37
e describe the necessity of judicious fertilizer application in the field.
e describe the necessity of judicious irrigation application in the field.
e establish relationship between higher yield and selection and protection
of good seed.
Lesson 1: Preparation of suitable soil in the nursery for seed sowing
We know that seedlings are produced after sowing seeds in the seed bed of nurs-
ery. Good seedling is not produced if the soils in the seed bed of nursery can not
be prepared efficiently.
The materials needed for preparation of soils in the seed bed are: land, stick, mea-
suring tap, spade, organic and inorganic fertilizers etc. Two types of seed beds are
prepared in our country. These are- (a) Dry seed bed and (b) Wet seed bed.
Direct seed sowing could be done in the dry seed bed. In case of wet seed bed,
soak the soils in the seed bed with water to prepare a clay mould and level it.
Then seed would be sown there.
The rules of soil preparation in the seed bed are as follow :
1. 30 cm wide and 15 cm deep channel will be prepared around the seed
bed.
2. Raise the soils of seed bed at 20-25 cm height.
3. Plough the soils of seed bed about 15-20 cm deep.
4. Left the seed bed open for 2-4 days for sun burn to destroy insect and
pest.
5. Then pick out grasses, roots and stubbles from the seed bed.
6. Mix some loam soils if the soils of the seed bed are clay; but mix organic
matter, loam or clay loam soils in the seed bed if the soils are sandy.
2
Ss
N

38 Agriculture Studies
7. The soils around seed bed should be protected by making temporary
wall using brick with holes or others, so that the soils may not be
washed away through rain or strong air.
8. Smash the big clods in the seed bed and plain the upper soil layer.
9. Mix up TSP, MOP and dry cowdung or organic matter with the soils of the
seed bed at 10-12 days before seed sowing.
10. Apply fertilizer based on the size of nursery.
11. Insects or pathogens may live in the soils of the nursery. So, put some
debris on the seed bed and fire it which may reduce pest infestation.
12. For soil fumigation, use the chemicals like gamaxin, or formaldehyde.
Soils for filling in the polybags : This soil should be prepared following the rules
above. Then the soil should be sieved to make it free from clods. The soil should
be filled in the polybags of specific size.
Practical work: The teacher will ask the students to form some groups and
ask them to prepare soil for seed sowing on the assigned place of the school
premises. The students will then write the procedure of soil preparation for
seed sowing in their practical note book by groups and present in the class-
room. The teacher will stay with the students to do the work for all time and
give direction to complete the task.
sy
S
aN

Agricultural Materials 39

Lesson 2: Preparation of an ideal seed bed

The size of seed bed can be different. Now we will learn about an ideal seed

bed. The size of this type of seed bed and fertilizer application, soil preparation

and protection measure is done following exact rule. The teacher will show a

model picture of an ideal seed bed in the classroom and ask the students to

draw it. Then the teacher will tell the rule of an ideal seed bed.

(A) Seed bed for rice: Seeds in the seed bed are sown to produce seedlings and
take care of them until transplant in the main field. So, the selected land is
prepared by ploughing and laddering for the preparation of ideal seed bed.
Generally, two types of seed bed are prepared: wet seed bed and dry seed
bed. The wet seed bed is prepared on the wet clay soils and dry seed bed is
prepared on the high land containing sandy-loam soils. The area devoid of
shade of trees and does not go under water is being selected for seed bed.

Structure of an ideal seed bed: (Rice Crop)

1. The size of every seed bed will be 9.5 m x 1.5 m and earmark it with the
help of stick.
2. Keep 50 cm area in between two seed beds and 25 cm area for canal
around the seed bed.
3. Raise the seed bed up to 7-10 cm with the soil in between two seed beds
and surrounding soil.
4. Mix cowdung or compost with the soils in two kg squ.metre of seed bed.
<< 10 mm. $A >
l Ce Bam S mp. ones | ¢
is esti to 3 ‘ Sets, Fi oO Seti es ea OW £
Bere ee Bee oe ee ee BE Oe gt ee eM |B
Bee) Peet tee c- OS Ia, fife. £7.26. Fe Too Te
| Bic cei si eee ores foe ee
2
8 Fig. An ideal paddy seed bed

40 Agriculture Studies
(B) Seed bed for horticultural crops: Seeds, seedlings or stumps of horticultural

plants are sown or transplanted in the nursery to get it ready to be

transplanted in the main field. As a result, the normal growths of the

seedling are to be assured and more seedlings are produced with careful

nursing from the small area.
Structure of an ideal seed bed (Horticultural crops):
(1) Select well-drained and well aerated high, fertile land for the preparation of
nursery bed. (2) The size of every seed bed will be 3 mx 1m and earmark it with
the help of stick. (3) Spaded the soils in the nursery to prepare seed bed. 4)
Mix 25 kg cowdung or compost with the soils in each seed bed. (5) Prepare a
canal measuring 50 cm in between two seed beds. (6) Divide the soils in
between two beds and raise the seed bed using this soil up to 10 cm. (7) Then
mix 15 gm Urea, 100 gm SO RE RAY
TSP and 100 gm MOP fertil- Percuecé teat ten stood | |p
izer with the soils of each 3 aa oe Sesh 2
sq.m bed. (8) Apply 150gm | isisseahnate esScae ib Sey
lime in each bed if soils are
more acidic. (9) Sow seeds Bic eee pat
on the bed after removing SA are Re
the stick, rope etc.

LARS eee cet ea ES DROOL
3 Metre
Fig. Ideal horticultural seed bed
2
S

Agricultural Materials 41
(10) vegetables seeds are to be sown as per the following chart :

Tomato SCSSC“‘(‘CCSCOC(#OCOC*C*C‘d’

Singh COSC

fonion SC—sSC“‘(CSCOC(#NASOOOCC‘di

Lesson 3: Management of seed bed

The seedlings germinate from seeds in the seed bed So, management of
seed bed should be done carefully. The management systems of seed bed
are highlighted below:

(1) Keep the upper soil of seed bed plain; (2) Maintain the seed bed free
from weed; (3) Protection measures should be taken if insect and
disease attack in the seed bed; (4) Maintain irrigation facilities to keep
water in the canal in between two beds; (5) Apply urea 280 gm/ for a
decimal area if the seedlings are seemed to be yellowish (6) Do not use
raw cow dung in the seed bed; (7) Make fence around the seed bed to
protect the seedlings from domestic animals like goat, ram and cow
etc; (8) Give shade over seedlings during scorch sunlight to prevent of
soil moisture.

Forma-6, Agriculture Studies, 8

42 Agriculture Studies
Work: The teacher will give some questions to the students for group
work as lesson evaluation and get it presented by group leaders after work.

(1) Which soil is the best for seed bed?

(2) What points should be given more preferences during site selection of
seed bed?

(3) How will you measure the area of land for seedling production?

(4) Why fence is necessary for the seed bed?

(5) What is the important task for the establishment of seed bed?

Lesson 4: Fertilizer application in the crop field

We have learnt about fertilizers earlier. Now we will discuss about advantages

and disadvantages of fertilizer application.

There is no alternate of fertilizer for crop production. Because, fertilizer is the

food for plant. Fertilizer application in the crops starts in 50 decades and that

time farmers overwhelmed for the use of fertilizer in the crop. The activities

of agricultural offices help lessening this nervousness of the farmer. But unfor-

tunately the farmers today apply fertilizer in the crop field injudiciously without

following the rules of fertilizer application. Now it is important to apply judicious
fertilizer in the crop field after soil test to keep healthy growth of crop,

in order to increase flower-fruit production and soil fertility.

If fertilizer use without soil test-

(1) Decrease of crop production and increase cost of production, and (2) loss of

soil fertility and environment.
20
3
ix)

Agricultural Materials 43
On the other hand, because of judicious fertilizer application-
(1) Add nutrients to the soil and, (2) Fertile soil.
Task to be done before fertilizer application in the soil
In the previous lesson, we learnt about the use of fertilizer. Now let us know
about the activities of pre-fertilizer application. The following points should
keep in mind during cultivation of crops in any time of the year-
1. It is necessary to learn about soil properties after soil test. It should be
examined which nutrients are available in how much amount.
2. It is to be learnt which crop will be cultivated in the tested soil.
3. It is necessary to find out the fertilizer demand as crop-wise from the chart
of Upazilla Agriculture Office.
4. It is utmost necessary to learn which crop has cultivated in that land and
which fertilizers have applied there in.
Work: The teacher will give task to the students for the advantages and
disadvantages of judicious fertilizer application. The teacher will collect the
report and evaluate.
Lesson 5: Efficient methods of fertilizer application
There is no alternate to use chemical fertilizers to get higher production from
limited area of Bangladesh. Now the question is, how we can get maximum
yield reducing the use of chemical fertilizers.
The functions of applied fertilizers depend on the application time and meth-
ods. It is significant for the nitrogenous fertilizers. Because this fertilizer is easily
soluble in water resulting 70% washed out from the soil to go out of the crop
20
S

44 Agriculture Studies
root zone and can pollute the environment. Such as-

1. The existence of urea fertilizer in the soil is transitory and nothing of this
fertilizer remain in the soil after cropping season. So, split application of
urea is necessary for the demand of crops growth stages.

2. Next to green manuring crop (12-25 ton dhaincha/ha), the rate of nitrog-
enous fertilizer can be reduced at 15-20 kg/ha for the rice crop.

3. Next to pulse crops (if the plant debris are mixed with the soil), the rate of
nitrogenous fertilizer can be reduced at 8-10 kg/ha.

4. The yield of rice is being constant if apply urea using LCC (Leaf Color Chart)
and there is a analysis that in this way reduction of urea by 25% in case of
transplanted Amon and 23% in case of Boro rice.

5. Twenty five per cent (25%) urea will be surplus if it is use as the form of Guti
urea.

Application of fertilizer in judicious way

We discussed the way of lessening the fertilizer use previously. Now let us know

the rule of judicious use of fertilizer_

1. Chemical fertilizer will not be used on the seed, near the stem of the
tree or on the wet leaves.

2. Apply urea fertilizer on the wet land of rice. But after application on the
dry soil, mix it using khurpi or harrow.

3. Organic matter, TSP and MOP fertilizers will be applied before seed sowing
or seedling transplantation.

4. \f Urea and MOP fertilizers are applied in the sandy soil, the efficiency of the
soil will be increased.

5. It is necessary to start split application of fertilizers at the time of first
tiller emergence, a little earlier of the appearance of inflorescence of
rice, emergence of adventitious root of wheat, height of corn up to the
knee and one week before coming out of female flower.

6. Apply three guti in case of boro rice and two guti in case of amon rice
measuring 0.9 gram for each guti urea. It is necessary to apply guti urea

S
N

Agricultural Materials 45
in 7.50-10.00 cm or 3-4 inch soil depth middle of two rows and in
between four seedlings of rice. Apply guti urea in the soil in the absence
of water on the upper layer.

7. At the time of final ploughing, apply total amount of potash, sulfur and
zinc fertilizers.
Work: The teacher will arrange a debate competition by the students. The
subject of the debate is : ‘Only judcious use of chmical fertilizer can ensure
better yield.’

Lesson 6 : The judicious application of irrigation in the field

Artificial application of water to fulfill the demand of water during crop

production is called irrigation. Rain is the principal source of irrigation water.

The rain water comes and remains in the rivers, ponds, haors-baors etc. The

part of this water enter into the under ground. On the basis of source, irrigation

water is two types: (a) Surface ground water; like rivers, ponds, haors-baors
water and (b) Under-ground water. The under ground water is withdrawn using
different irrigation technologies like; deep tube well, shallow tube well, power
pump etc and used for irrigation purpose. The irrigation water then distributed
in the crop lands through kacha or pacca irrigation channel. There are 52% of
agricultural lands of this country is under irrigation. Out of this, 14.35 lakh
hectares of land is under surface irrigation and 33.73 lakh hectares of land is
under ground water irrigation. A survey report of International Water

Management Institute (IWMI) predicted that the irrigation efficiency in our

country is only 30-35%. The remaining 65-70% of irrigation water is lost in some

way.

Every year a lot of money is spent for the purpose purchase and maintenance

of irrigation pump and for the electricity diesel and petrol to run the pump and

to repair and construct the irrigation channel. Out of total production cost of

Boro, 28-30% is used for irrigation purpose. It is shocking for the environment

that the water layer is going down due to excessive use of under-ground water.

So, it is necessary to increase efficiency of irrigation water by decreasing abuse

S of valuable water resources.
N

46 Agriculture Studies
Availability of water from the soil according to crop demand is the precondition
of good yield. During shortage of water in the crop field, it is necessary to
supply irrigation water according to crop demand. It is a barrier to use
unnecessary water for improved production. More irrigation can reduce crops
yield... So, it is necessary to keep idea about time and amount of water needed
for irrigation. The demand of water also depends on growth stages of crops.
However, all irrigation methods are not suitable for our socio-economic
conditions. For the use of judicious application of irrigation water, the following
point should be taken into consideration:

(A) The type of irrigation channel: Water is transported through irrigation
channels. Much of water is abused through kacha irrigation channel. Moreover,
additional water is misused if the khaca irrigation channel is not made properly.
However, misused of water will be reduced if the irrigation channels are
constructed a little high from plain land, then compact soil at both sides and as
well as floor of the channel.

(B) Irrigation method: There are many irrigation methods available depending
on types of crops, topography of land and properties of soil. Some of the
efficient irrigation methods are described below:

1. Check Basin Methods: In flood irrigation method, no way to control of
spreading water. As a result, much of the water is misused. To solve this problem
it is necessary to use check basin method. In this method the crop field is
divided into several portions based on slope and is given irrigation by checking
water.

2. Ring Basin Method: In the fruit garden irrigation water supplied through this
method reduces misuse of water. In this method ring or circular channel is
prepared around each fruit tree which is connected to the main irrigation
channel.

3. Channel Method: In this method many channels are constructed in the crop
field based on the area of land and connected with the main irrigation channel.
This system is competent for line sowing crops. Mismanagement of water is less
as to control of irrigation water is easier. S

Agricultural Materials 47
4. Sprinkling Irrigation Method: The method by which irrigation is given in the
form of rain is called sprinkling irrigation method. In this system water is sup-
plied with the help of pipes and is sprinkled in all directions with the help of a
nozzle. The primary cost of this method is high. This method is used in tea
garden.
5. Drip Irrigation Method: The method, by which water is supplied to the plant
root system, is called drip irrigation method. It is the most judicious irrigation
method. It is useful in these areas where the irrigation water is limited.

Work: Student will divide themselves into few groups and discuss about

the bad effect of excess irrigation. Affer completion of discussion they will

present it in the class room.
(C) Amount of irrigation water: The plant uptakes water from root zone. The
roots of the plant increase and enter into the soil during subsequent growth of
plant. So it is essential to saturate the root zone by irrigation. The root zone of
many of the crops remains upper 1-1.5 feet of soil layer. The plant uptakes 70%
of total required water from first-half of root zone. For this reason irrigation
water is given at upper 1-1.5 feet soil layer.
(D) Time of irrigation: It is necessary to give irrigation timely for the sake of
efficient use of water. The following two points should be taken into consideration
for timely irrigation:
1, Moisture availability of soil : Irrigation is given after determining moisture of
the soil. There are so many methods of determining of soil moisture. One of the
easier methods is hand feeling method. Dug a hole in the land where irrigation
is needed. The depth of the hole will be two-third of root depth. Prepare a
mud-ball using the collected soils from the floor of hole. If the soil is dry and
sandy, it will come out between fingers or after preparation of the ball if the
mud-ball breaks down with small pieces then irrigation is immediately
necessary. On the other hand if the mud-ball is produced and do not break or
crack after strike it on the ground then irrigation is to be done at 1-2 days later.
If the collected soil is soaked and wet mud-ball is produced, moist the hand and
do not break after hit the ground-give irrigation 3-4 days after testing the soil.
Also, if the wet soil come out between fingers of hand, soak the hand but water

8 do not come out, then irrigation is not obligatory. Test the soil again at 7 days
Slater.

48 Agriculture Studies
2. Growth stages of crop: It is not necessary to give equivalent irrigation at all
physiological growth stages of crop. The sensible stage of crop is that when the
growth of crops affected due to lacking of water. Again, the stages of crop when
the yield of crop is drastically reduced owing to shortage of water are called
critical stage.
Work: The students will discuss with the help of the teacher about judicious
application of irrigation in the crop field and prepare a poster paper.
The sensible stage and the critical stage of some major crops are shown below
by chart :
a
panicle initiation, flowering,
milk stages
of tillaring, flowering
ee renege [FN
flowering
formation
formation of stolon, preliminary bulb formation
preliminary bulb formation
During shortage of moisture in the crop field at sensible and critical stages of
crops, irrigation must be given. No need of excess water if irrigation is given
in the above mentioned way.
Rice is the main food of Bangladesh. Rice is cultivated in about 75% of the total
land. The highest rice is produced in Bora season. In this season the maximum
irrigation is needed due to lack of rain. It is necessary to keep 10-15 cm
standing water for traditional irrigation method. For this reason, about 3000-
5000 liter of water is needed for the production of one kg of rice. This is an ade-
quate amount than the actual requirement. Today, alternate wetting and
drying method is popularized as judicious irrigation technology for rice
cultivation. No stagnant water is needed on the crop field in this method. The
irrigation time is controlled by setting up an observation tube in the field.
Irrigation, fuel and labour cost are minimized by using this method. This &

Agricultural Materials 49
method decreases irrigation water by 30-37%, diesel cost by 29% and increases
rice production by 12 %. Overall it is an environmentally friendly technology.
Work: The students will write on ‘the bad effect of excess irrigation in crop
field and present in the classroom.’
New words: Upper ground water, below ground water, irrigation efficiency,
check basin method, sprinkler irrigation method, drip irrigation method, roo-
zone of crop, sensible and critical stages of irrigation.
Lesson 7: Selection of good seeds
Seeds are fundamental agricultural materials. Regeneration of plants is happen
by seeds. According to botany, "the Mature and Fertilized Ovule is called seed".
We know regeneration is possible by using other parts of plants. Agronomy
certified them as seed. The agriculturist called them agricultural seed and the
mature and fertilized ovule is called true seed or sexual seed. The characteris-
tics of one generation stream to next generation by seed. In the vegetative
propagation, the individuality of mother plant can transfer to next plant. On the
other hand, a resultant mixture of the characteristics of father and mother is
observed in sexual seeds. Here the problem is the characteristics of mother
plant may not go to offspring if it is not self-fertilized. By applying this method,
through hybridization of two seperate types of same crop, a third type can be
generated. The third type may bear some good characteristics of the parents.
This method of genetic improvement of crop is called hybridization.
The farmer wants to get benefit by using high yielding variety of the best quality
for cultivation. The Agricultural Research Institutes work on the development of
seed. Seed Certification Agency give final recommendation of seed and Bangla-
desh Agricultural Development Corporation (BADC) multiply and distribute
seed to the farmer with the help of listed dealers.
The improvement of some seeds or varieties may achieve by using the method of
selection and multiplication. This method of variety improvement is called selec-
tion breeding. The main technique here is observation and assortment. Observa-
tion and assortment carry out during many generations after hybridization.
Forma-7, Agriculture Studies, 8

50 Agriculture Studies
Many matter should be taken into consideration before seed selection in
farmer's field. Such as-
1. Which varieties are suitable for farmer's agricultural environment?
2. Which one of these varieties gives yield in short time?
3. Which one of these varieties can give the highest yield with minimum cost?
4. Which variety is comparatively resistant to disease-pest?
5. Which variety is easier to manage in the field?
Although an important quality of HYV (high yielding variety) is higher produc-
tion, but it is not ascertain to give higher production of a variety if it is not a "good
seed." The qualities of good seeds are :
1. Seeds without mixture of other seeds.
2. Minimum 80% germination capacity.
3. The highest vigor of seedling.
4. Cleanliness of seed.
5. Healthy seed (free from impurity and diseases).
A seed poses above qualities can be determined by easy, quickest and faithful
test. The so called "HYV" seed may not give higher yield if lacking of this quali-
ties. So selection of HYV good seed is the pre-requisite for higher production.
Seed germination and seedling vigor test
° Seen a Be Gs <9 ws a
SF -
3% v\ | |
@ ; Oo ©
e@ ° gota" nore
Fig. : Blotter test Fig. : Paper towel test 8

Agricultural Materials 51
Seed germination and seed vogor test can be done by blotter test and paper
towel test of the figures above. In blotter test, seed germination is tested by
spreading a wet blotting paper on a pettridish and placing a seed on it. Likewise,
seed germination can be done by placing manifolded newspaper on a tray,
pouring water to make the paper wet and then by placing a seed on it. Seedling
vigor can be tested by observing seedling growth for some days. Seed germina-
tion capacity and seedling vigor can be determined percentage.
Work: The students will discuss about good and healthy seed selection,
collection and storage, write on the poster paper and present.

Lesson 8: Seed preservation
Agood seed may turn into bad seed if it lacks proper preservation. It is right for
true seed. Seed can be use year after year if it preserve in the perfect way with
containing the qualities mentioned above.
Good and healthy seed preservation techniques: Selection of seed crop starts
when crop remains in the field. Proper plant protection measures are taken
whether the seed crops are not attacked by any diseases and pests.
The seed crops are collected at maturity stage and winnowing, sieving and drying
should be done so that the seeds may not rupture. The seeds may dry in the open
air and sunny place. The rule of seed drying may different for each crop. Each vari-
ety of seed has its specific safety quantity of moisture. The moisture content of
rice and wheat seeds is 8-10%. If the seeds are too dry, it may crack or its ovule
might fracture. Again pathogen or insect may attack if the seeds remain damp
than its required moisture content.
How much and how many times of stored seed remains good depends on the
moisture content of seed. Not only moisture content of seed, but also the mois-
ture of the seed container and the store play an important role on the quality of
seed. If air does not pass through the seed container, the seed inside it will not
loss its germination capacity.

o9

S The factors other than moisture that can harm seeds are higher temperature,

52 Agriculture Studies
intense ray etc. On the other hand, if the properly dried seeds are preserved in
an air tight container, those factors have little influence on seeds. In addition,
seed container should be stored in a dark and cold place where it is free from
rats and insects. Seed container can also be stored in cold storage; in that
case a particular place in the cold storage is needed for it. If the amount of seed
is not much, then it can be preserved at 5°C temperature in a refrigerator, writ-
ing and leveling about acquaintance of seed on seed packet or seed pot. Before
storage it should be ensured whether the seeds are capable of being germina-
tion.

Lesson 9: Steps of rice seed preservation

1. It is necessary to produce seed rice in the isolated plots with special care. In
this plot, pesticide must spray at regular interval and proper sanitation mea-
sure should be taken.

2. Cut down rice with minimum stalk after ripen, dry carefully, bring in the
threshing floor and start drying at the same day after threshing if possible.

3. The seed rice is tested by teeth whether it is dried
optimum or not. If the seed rice stays in between <<

a . Fe dk HRATTTITII S
teeth, it is needed to dry more time. When the Ci OD
seed rice produce a sound "cot", is the symptom of
optimum dryness. Moreover, moisture content of

F : . 4/06/1
seed rice can he measure by using hygrometer in RB, Name:
the seed container. aie

4. It is necessary to keep seed on the shady place a
for sometimes before storing. Fig: Seed in the drum

5. It is good to keep container full with seed.

6. It is necessary to level the seed container writing: name of seed, date of
preservation, uses of chemical insecticide or not and signature of assigned
person. bo

Ss
AQ

Agricultural Materials 53

Steps of pepper seed preservation

1. Collect required amount of pepper fruits from healthy and disease free
plants.

2. Cut down or break the fruit and bring out seeds of pepper carefully and put it
in the pot.

3. Discard the immature, infested and irregular size seeds and keep the pot
containing seeds in the sunlight for drying. It is enough to dry seeds at 2
hours in the scorch sunlight. It is necessary to turn around the seeds with a
stick.

4. After drying, it is necessary to cool down the seeds before storing. It is wise
to store fewer amount of seeds in the bag containing zipper. Otherwise,
store pepper seed in the polythene bag and sealed it.

5. Label the packet of pepper seed.

inpatient. 2.22 ate

Pepper
iw year
16/11/12
Alif
cree
6. Putsmall packets of seed into a big transparent pot and keep it in the cool

- and safe places of room.
S
N

54 Agriculture Studies
Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. Which irrigation method is used in the fruit orchard?
a. Check basin b. Ring basin
c. Sprinkler irrigation d. Drip basin
2. The sensible stage of rice cultivation-
i. flowering stage
ii. panicle initiation stage
iii. seed formation stage
Which one is correct?
a. iand ii b. iand iii
c. ii and iii d. i, iiand iii
Read the following passage carefully and answer question no. 3 and 4
Polash made 10 beds for preparation of nursery in his village Valuka. At the time
of preparation of bed he applies organic, inorganic fertilizers along with lime.
sy
S
aN

Agricultural Materials 55
3. How much MOP (kg) fertilizer he needed for the preparation of bed?
a. 1kg
b. 2kg
c. 3kg
d. 4kg
4. The reason for lime application in bed is-
a. control of acidity of soil
b. control diseases
c. quick seed germination
Which one is correct ?
a. i b. ii
c. iandii d. iand iii
Creative questions
1. Morshed Mian is popularly known as a conscious and successful farmer in
his locality. He always used modern agricultural technologies. In this year,
he cultivated 4 hectares of rice in his field after producing green manure
crop, dhaincha and follows LCC method for urea application.
a. Which types of soil is suitable for dry seed bed of rice?
b. Why is the seed bad left for 2-4 days after plough?
c. Determine how much reduced amount of urea Morshed Mian will use?
d. Evaluate the activities of increasing crop production of Morshed Mian.
s

56 Agriculture Studies
2. Mr. Kabir is cultivating rice in his field by irrigation during long time. In
recent time, the production cost has increased in manifold due to increasing
fuel price. So, Mr. Kabir talked about the Agriculture Officer. Mr. Kabir took
initiative to test soil for the selection of irrigation time. As a result, he
needed reduced amount of irrigation water in his field.
a. Which is the main source of irrigation water?
b. Explain the necessity of the selection of good seed.
c. Explain how Mr. Kabir identifies time of irrigation of his field.
d. Evaluate the initiative of Mr. Kabir to reduce production cost of crops.
°9
Ss
AQ

Chapter Four
Agriculture and Climate
At first, the unfavourable environment and the importance of unfavourable
environment on agricultural production are discussed in this chapter. The
production technologies in disadvantage situations of environment for
agricultural production such as drought, salinity, and flood prone areas and
sectors they influence including crops, fisheries and livestock are described
here.
Then adaptation and mitigation technologies to protect crops, fisheries and
livestock from disastrous climatic events including water logging, excess
rainfall, drought, hailstorm etc are described.
ad IS Zp LA MA Sa
utpeel 7 \ AY SS
- :, Se i ” Fig: Hail storm
Fig: Flood SRN oe aaa =
Fig: Drought

At the end of this chapter we will be able to:

e describe agricultural production technologies required for unfavourable

climatic adaptations.
e analyse the uses of agricultural technologies to protect agricultural
production under unfavourable climatic factors.

Forma-8, Agriculture Studies, 8

58 Agriculture Studies
Lesson-1: Unfavourable environment and Crop Production
The growth and development of crops become normal if the climate and
environmental factors remain unaffected. But natural factors do not remain
normal always. In some regions crops have to face climatic and environmental
problems in production season. The situation is known as unfavourable
environment. Crops in such situation try to set through regulating bio-chemical
and physiological changes. This is known as adaptation capacity of the crops.
Now we will try to know which factors relating to climate and environment
create unfavourable environments. The climatic factors which create
unfavourable situations include:
1. Flood and water logging
2. Drought or no-rain conditions Wn,
3. Higher temperature Es ¢ aitad Lé 6 a
4. Lower temperature Cui a ee Re 7

; ESS ONS
The environmental factors which == Soe Massena =
create unfavourable situations ~ <i qeulasS SS Sa
include: ane Se = fo = =
1. Soil salinity Fig: Flood
2. Presence of chemical toxins in the

soil

3. Presence of toxic gases in the air.
The problems of unfavourable factors in Bangladesh agriculture are existent from
the ancient time. At present due to global climatic changes the unfavourable
environmental problems are increasing at higher rate. Three critical sectors
have been identified in the agricultural sectors of Bangladesh due to changes in
climatic parameters. These are:
1. Drought.
2. Salinity. to
3. Floods and cyclones. S

Agriculture and Climate 59
The temperature is increasing in the north-western regions of the country due
to climatic change. Rainfall is becoming irregular. The drought intensity is
increasing in the boro or winter and aman seasons. Generally the farmers do
not have any preparation for giving supplementary irrigation in rainfall
dependent aman rice season. As a result the yield of rice is decreasing due to
such silent droughts. Barisal region of Bangladesh was a store house of food
grains once upon a time. Now that Barisal is a food deficit area. About 10 lakh
hectors of land has become unsuitable for rice cultivation in the south-western
region of Bangladesh due to increased soil and water salinity.
About 60 percent area of Bangladesh was submerged due to serious flood in
2007. That flood caused serious damage to aman rice crop. Before mitigation of
the damage done by that flood again one highly destructive tornado CIDR more
seriously affected Bangladesh. About 13 lakhs tons of crop production
were affected by that CIDR.
Bangladesh is highly populated country. The cultivable land area is decreasing by
1 percent per year. In contrast population of the country is increasing by 1.39
percent. Besides, the country frequently has to face unfavourable crop production
environments.
In the situation we must have to know the modern techniques of crop
production facing unfavourable environmental elements to feed the increasing
population.
Work :Write down the importance of producing crops against unfavourable
environment as an individual task and present it in the class session.
Lesson-2: Crop production technologies under drought con
ditions
Drought is one of the main natural disasters for crop production. Crops in all the
seasons are affected by drought in Bangladesh. Drought situation is created due
to occurrence of low rainfall or rainless for a long period in a specific season.
x It causes deficiency of moisture in the soil. As a result the plant suffered from the
& scarcity of water that hampers the normal growth and development of plants.

60 Agriculture Studies
This condition is known as drought. Drought can cause a yield loss ranging from
15-90 per cent. Crop cultivation may be done successfully if appropriate
management is done in the drought affected crop plots. The main management
practices are mentioned here—

1. Cultivating suitable crops or varieties: The crop or the variety of the crop
should be such short duration and drought tolerant that it may be harvested
before affected by drought. The examples are: BINA Rice 7 in Aman season,
BRRI Dhan -33, which matures one month earlier than other varieties. For this
advantage the rice crop may be saved from the September-October drought.
Again in aman season BRRI Dhan -56 and BRRI Dhan -57 are short duration
varieties in one side and can tolerate 21-30 day drought period in another side.
The wheat varieties such as Bijoy, Pradip, and Sufi are found to be drought
tolerant. Cultivating early aman varieties in drought prone areas, chickpea, lentil,
mustard, sesame etc may be cultivated as an additional crops using the existing
field with soil moisture after aman rice harvest. Jujube gardening may also be
done as it is drought tolerant.

2. Breaking soil pores: The land should be given a shallow ploughing when it
reaches to the stage at the end of the rainy season in drought prone areas. This
operation will pulverize and close the soil micropores. The sun ray then will not
cause drying of the soils.

3. Shallow cultivation: If it is observed that the moisture of the soil is low, then
the land should be ploughed in shallow depth. The soil should be compacted by
laddering after every ploughing. It will conserve moisture in the soil.

4. Mulching: Soil moisture may be conserved by using mulches consisting dry
straw, leaves and vines, water hyacinth covering the planted seed or seedling
base. Because of this mulch soil surface water can not be evaporated due to sun
radiation. Black polythene sheets are also used for the purpose in many
countries. This mulch also reduces weed infestation.

5. Water storing: Small canals or trench-pit hole may be prepared in the land
during the rainy season in low rainfall areas. This system reduces surface run off ,,
of the water. The soil absorbs most of the water directly. s

Agriculture and Climate 61
This method of water storage is known as water harvesting. This water may be
successfully utilized ploughing and seeding crop seeds at the end of the rainy
season.

LK Jian Gy eat \ Qa!

Fig : Mulch application Fig : Water storing

6. Raking: Soil moisture may be conserved by giving raking on the surface soil
few days after germination of seeds when the surface soil moisture tends to be
evaporated very rapidly.
7. Changing line direction: Planting of the field should be done making lines
against the sun rays in the drought prone areas. In this method the plant give
shades the interline spaces. Evaporation of soil moisture from the inter spaces
are reduced in this system. Water loss is reduced.
8. Use of organic fertilizers: Use of sufficient organic fertilizers improves soil
physical condition including soil structure. The soil particles become granular
and loose. It increase the water holding capacity of the soils.

Work: Students will be divided into groups. Each group will make a list of

drought tolerant varieties of crops and present in the classroom.
New Terms Learned: Drought tolerant, Mulching, Water Harvesting.
Lesson -3: Crop production technologies in the saline soil zones
We will discuss about the crop production technologies suitable for the saline
soil zones of Bangladesh. In the first lesson we came to know that salinity of
the soil has become a great problem in the southern Agro-Ecological Zones

S (AEZ) of Bangladesh. We also know that sea water is saline. These southern

62 Agriculture Studies
coastal zones are flooded by saline water. The concentrations of chloride and
sulphate salts of sodium, calcium and magnesium are increased due to this
saline water flooding by sea water. The nutrient element and uptake and water
absorption processes by plant from soil solution is affected if the
concentrations of salts in the soil is increased. It causes reduction of normal
growth and development of crop plants. Though salt concentration in the soil
remains slightly lower during the rainy season due to wash out process by
monsoon rainfall water, salinity was found to be greatly increased in the dry
season. This is due to the reason that the salts come out on the soil surface
along with the evaporating water during the dry season. The salts make a
apparent layer on the soil surface in many areas. The crop production
technologies suitable for saline soils are described here —

1. Cultivating salt tolerant varieties: We have to select salt tolerant crops or
varieties of crops for cultivation in the salinity prone areas. The most salinity
tolerant crops are: coconut, betel nut, sugar beet, cotton, turnip, sesbania
dhaincha, spinach etc. The medium salt tolerant crops are: hogplum, sweet
potato, chili, field bean, mungbean, maize, tomato, guava,etc. Wheat, orange,
nashpati, are less salt tolerant. The approved varieties of rice in the aman
season for the salinity zones are — BR 22, BR 23, BRRI Dhan-40, BRRI Dhan-41,
BRRI Dhan-46, BRRI Dhan-53, BRRI Dhan-54. Rajshail, Kajolshail, Bajail are
some local salinity zone varieties of aman rice. The recommended rice
varieties for cultivation in the saline zone in Boro season are: BRRI Dhan-47 and
BRRIDhan-55.

2. Arranging irrigation and drainage: Concentrated soluble salts are usually
leached out of the root of the crop plants along with the drainage water when
heavy irrigation is done making raised border ails of the plot. Again if drainage
channels are prepared along the root zone layer of the soil, the salts
accumulated below the root zone are also leached out from the crop fields. In
the situation seeds should be sown ploughing the land as soon as it reaches the
jo’ stage. This method is very effective in light sandy soils.

3. Reducing evaporation of water: Crops may successfully be cultivated if the
salt concentration could be kept limited below the root zone in the saline soil. .,
Evaporation of sub-surface water due to sun rays carries salts from the lower s

Agriculture and Climate 63
layer to the upper layer of the soils through its macro and micropores when it is
wet. This causes the movement of the sub-surface salts from lower to upper
layer along with the evaporating water. So the continuity of soil pores should be
disrupted breaking or closing it by some process. In one method if the surface
soils is pulverized, loosened or stirred by spade or hand hoes the soil pores are
closed. The accumulate salts get remain in the lower soil layers. The seeds of
winter crops may be sown ploughing the soils when it is still wet after harvest of
aman rice in the saline soil zones. However, several weeding may be needed
after germination of seed or planting of seedlings. Weeding should be given in
the crops after each irrigation or rainfall in the saline soils. No salt can accumulate
on the soil surface if this is properly done.
4. Preparing land using proper methods: The delay of the cultivation process
of winter crops after the harvesting of aman rice causes accumulation of salts in
the upper zone. Land should be ploughed as soon as possible. Power tiller may
preferably be used than country plough for ploughing. The land should be well
levelled at the time of final ploughing. The seeds sown will germinate better in
smooth surface lands. Salts may accumulate in the lower pockets of the
undulated soil surface.
5. Changing seed sowing methods: If seeds are sown in broadcast method salts
will be concentrated at the upper layer of the soil and there will be less
germination of seeds. So seeds may be sown in the bottom of slightly deep
furrows made at specific distances. In another way: shallow trench furrows may
be prepared at a distance of one meter which should be irrigated for several
days. It will increase the leaching of the surface salts in the trench furrows.
Then seeds should be sown on the top of the ridges after lightly spading which
will encourage good germination of the seeds.

Work: Students will be divided into groups. Each group will make a list of

salinity tolerant crops as well as varieties of those crops and present in the

classroom.

S New Term Learned: Salinity tolerant crops.

64 Agriculture Studies
Lesson 4: Crop production technologies in the flood prone areas
Bangladesh is affected by flood every year. But in some of the years crops are
damaged extensively due to serious type of floods. About three lakhs
metric tons of rice damaged due to a long lasting devastating flood in 1998 in
the country. Boro rice at the time of ripening are submerged due to hill flash
floods in the north-eastern region of Bangladesh. Again the large middle part of
the country is flooded and destroyed at the time of transplanting or after
transplanting aman rice. The flood prone areas of the country may be divided
into four categories on the basis of the water level during flooding. These
categories are:
1. Medium high land: The level of the water during flood reaches up to the
height of 0.9 meter.
2. Medium low land: The level of the water during flood reaches up to the
height of 1.8 meter.
3. Low land: The level of the water during flood reaches up to the height of
3.0 meter.
4. Very low land: The level of the water during flood crosses the height of 3.0
meter. Broadcast aman, deep water aman, transplanted aman, broadcast aus,
transplanted aus, and boro rice are cultivated on the basis of the season and areas.
Mainly two types of management practices are adopted for producing crops
in the flood prone areas. These are:
1. Flood control based management practices: Embankments are constructed on
the two banks of the rivers or canals of flood prone areas. Water is controlled by
constructed sluice gates in the rivers or canals so the flood water can not enter the
crop fields. However, the related environmental issues must be considered
critically before establishing such structures.
2. Agronomic management practices: Sudden hill water flash flood happens at the
time of boro rice harvest in the north eastern regions of the country. Crops from
such floods may be protected cultivating early boro varieties. The rice varieties
such as BRRI Dhan-28 and BRRI Dhan-36 which ripen earlier should be cultivated in
this flood prone region. Seedling of the age of about 60 days may be transplanted 3

Agriculture and Climate 65
in the month of January draining out excess water from the field. The crops of
these varieties mature within a period of 140-150 days. As a result these rice crops
may be harvested at the end of April and thus the flood may be avoided. The
approved submergence tolerant BRRI Dhan-51 and BRRI Dhan-52 may be
cultivated in the transplant aman season in this region. These varieties have
capacity to tolerate 10-15 days submergence under water. The local varieties of
deep water aman are also cultivated by the farmers in north-eastern haor regions.
The local deep water aman rice namely Bajail, Fulkuri, Harinshail are the varieties
which can be directly broadcasted on the soil surface after monsoon rainfall in the
months of March and April. This type of rice varieties grow rapidly longer with the
rise of water level. It can grow even up to 25 cm per day and can survive at a height
of even 4 meter water depth.
Flood affects aman rice crops both before and after transplantation in the
mid-zone areas of the country. The farmers can not raise rice seedling due to
lack of seedling nurseries in the early flooding areas. Floating seed bed or seed
beds in the homestead and other high land spaces may be utilized for raising
rice seedlings in these cases. In this case banana leaf or polyethylene sheets
may be placed on the prepared seedbed floor where a layer of muddy soil
should be given. The seedbed should be kept wet for 5-6 hours and the seeds
should be sown densely.
In this process 2.5-3.0 kg seeds may be sown in the seed bed per square meter.
This method is known as Dapog method of rice seedling raising. Seedlings of
the age of about two weeks are transplanted in the main field after recession of
the flood water. The late varieties of aman rice such as Nigershail, BR-22 and
BR-23 should be cultivated if the flood prolongs. There is another method of
Dapog seedling production. The method is: wetting the rice seeds for 24 hours
until the embryo emerge. Then the seeds are kept in earthen pots (Kolsi) or in
sacks for 24-72 hours where the seedling develops. The seedlings grown by this
method may be sown in the field as soon as the stagnant water come down
from the land.

Work: Students will be divided into groups. Each group will make a list of rice

cultivable in flood-prone areas and present in the classroom.
New Terms Learned: Submergence tolerance rice, Deep water aman rice, Dapog seedbed
Forma-9, Agriculture Studies, 8

66 Agriculture Studies
Lesson-5: Livestock rearing under unfavourable environment
All the animals stays within a certain respective surrounding environmental
niche consisting the elements of plants, ponds, rivers and canals, weather and
climate and its component factors. When all these factors and behaviors in
combination of the elements are not well suited for animal rearing then the
situation is called the unfavourable environment. Salinity, flood, drought are
considered as the key event of unfavourable environment. The effects of
unfavourable environment on livestock animals are mentioned below:
1,.Unfavourable :
environment create food | | %‘sagis ‘fe Ai
deficiency of livestock nega, Side ) ee a rae
animal. 2 vf
. = = _ § —y Pe E/N
2. Scarcity of grasses become 2 = Es ay
a problem during flood] -_-_-_ _a@ — 5 B=
and drought. a See ———
= == 7— Wipe i Ps
3. Grasses and crops can not — - fA a
row in saline soils. — ~ WSs | eS
4. Growth and milk oT ST SSS eS
production of animal is Fig : Houseless animals during flood
reduced.
5. The animal faces malnutrition.
6. Many animal dies due to diseases.
What to do during flood : Arrangement should be made in higher lands for the
shelter of animals during flood. The permanent animal sheds must be prepared
in safe height raised lands where flood is a yearly event. Broiler and duck farms
should be established in flood prone areas instead of layer farms. Only after one
month broilers may be marketed. Water hyacinth, edible tree leaves, rice straw,
banana leaves may be arranged for cattle fodder during floods or flood prone
areas. Some wheat and maize grains should be purchased and stored in
advance. The poultry do not get down to water. Their feed should be of ready
made supply. Goats and sheep may be reared in boats and banana tree floats
for few days during this flood time. Much care should be taken about the
animal disease and sanitation management. Special care should also be taken m
so that mud can not accumulate in the animal shed. S

Agriculture and Climate 67
Preventive injections of probable diseases must be given to the animals before
flood occurrence.
Work: The students will individualy write in class Exercise Khata about the
ways of ‘livestock and poultry protection during flood’ and will present in
the classroom.
AEN ae
—_ —

Fig: Goats in banana tree floats during flood Fig: Human and animal under tree shed during flood
Activities to be done during drought. Natural grass production is reduced
during flood. Animals should be fed with leaves of different trees as available
during this time. Animals should not be allowed to stay directly in fully open
spaces during schorching heat. Animals should be kept under tree during hot
spell. Sufficient water should be supplied for animal during this unfavourable
time. Concentrated feed like oil cake, brans, rice, water etc should be given to
the animals along with other available feeds. Injection should be given as per
prescription of veterinary doctors.

Cattle fodder like Napier, Para, grass of German varieties may be cultivated as
a fodder in drought, flood and saline water affected areas. Besides preserved
green grass, sugarcane by-products, banana tree, ipil- ipil leaves are very
suitable for giving as feed during unfavourable drought conditions. Algae
produced in special methods are also fed to animal in the modern world. All
these disaster mitigating technologies may be adopted during stress period.

=

& New Terms Learned: Unfavourable environment, Grain crops by-products.

68 Agriculture Studies
Lesson -6: Fish cultivation under unfavourable condition and
the techniques to protect them in odd weather

Fish culture is very suitable in areas of the regions where ponds contains some
water all the year round, probability of flood is zero or minimum. There are
many ecological environments where fish cultivation is not so favourable such
as the cultured fish may be lost with pond submerging flood water in the flood
prone areas. The fish farmers may seriously be affected. On the other hand fish
cultivation become very difficult due to the drying of pond water or deep
recession of ground water level. Saline water intrusion in the main land water
bodies through the coastal belt is increasing due to the rise of sea water level
as a result of climatic change. Saline water streams entering the rivers at higher
rates through high tides due to reduced seasonal water stream from the upper
portions of the rivers and canals.

It is causing more salinity of inland and pond water. The yield of sweet water
fisheries are decreasing for this reason as yielded before. Mrigel fish can not
tolerate soil water salinity. Rui and katla carps are also not growing at the
expected higher rates. Not the only unfavourable environment, but also odd
weather events like excess rainfall, cyclone and tornado seriously hampering
fish production. For example: 1, 39, 478 number of ponds have been affected
in 2007 CIDR. The farmers lost 6, 511 tons of fish the market price of which was
about 47. 8 crore Taka. The price of lost fishing boats and nets were about 72.1
crore Taka. The following measures may be taken to manage fish production
under unfavourable environment and odd weather events:

1. Harvestable in a short duration and rapidly growing fish species may be
cultivated in the drought prone areas. Tilapia may be cultured in ponds
of drought areas. Tilapia may be harvested within a period of 4-5
months. Magur may also be cultured in such area ponds.

2. Along duration and a short duration fish cultivation plan may be taken
in drought prone areas. The banks of the ponds of such areas should be
made keeping sufficient height and fish fries may be stocked during
drought period.

©
3. Salinity tolerant fish species may be selected for culturing in the water FS

Agriculture and Climate 69
bodies of saline zones according to its increased salinity ranges.
Examples are Bhetki, Bata, Parshe. Initiative may also be taken for
culturing shrimp and crabs. Tilapia may also give good yields in these
situations.

4. Breach of flood control embankments due to unfavourable environment
and odd weather has caused water logging in coastal region. In these
areas planned fish culture including cage culture and crab culture may be
done.

5. Net thatching with bamboo posts should be done where there is
possibility of pond submergence and loss of fishes due to excess
rainfall.

6. Additional water may be supplemented through pump irrigation in
ponds where water volume is reduced and its temperature has been
increased. Fish will get sufficient water and the temperature of the water
will be maintained at a cooler level.

Work : Discuss in group how fish may be cultivated in areas having
probability of drought and flood affects.

New Term Learned : Increase sea water level, Bhetki, Bata, Parshe.

Lesson -7: Crop protection techniques during odd weather

We have learned about unfavourable environment in the first lesson of this

chapter. The climatic and weather elements do not run as usual for normal

growth and development of plants when the environmental factors and climate
are not in favour. Man can imagine about this thing in advance. So, they
become aware of meeting up of its consequences from crop selection to
detailed management of the production techniques. But if the weather
become disastrous during the production period and damages the crops, then
we Call it odd or bad weather. Bad weather is short duration event. But bad
weather can do a damage in a short period. Even the whole crop may be
destroyed. Untimely water logging, excess rainfall, drought, hailstorms, high
temperature, low temperature, tornado, water surge, slits etc are the examples
so of odd weather. Now we will discuss the crop protection technologies from
& these odd weather events in our country.

70 Agriculture Studies
weather. Now we will discuss the crop protection technologies from these odd
weather events in our country.

1. Water logging: Accumulation and stay of water in a place due to excess
rainfall or flood is known as water logging. Water logging due to hill flash flood
may submerge boro rice at the time of ripening in the haor areas.If there is the
possibility of the crops being damaged by the breach of flood control
embarkment.The damaged portion should be repaired immediately if
possible the excess water may be removed cutting drains. Aman rice seedlings
may be raised in another high land and may be transplanted in the flood
affected main field after recession of the stagnant water. Rapid arrangement
should be taken to make available the seed, seedling and fertilizers so that the
farmers can use it just after the flood is over.

2. Excess rainfall: Excess rainfall occurs in Bangladesh from June to October.
Torrential rainfall for several days is also recorded frequently in the country. It
causes water stagnation in many places including crop fields roads and
homestead. Many trees incline due to the loosening of the bases. The fruit,
medicinal and herbal plants or tress should be bound with straight bamboo
posts in such weather situations. Vegetable fields get more damaged by excess
rainfall. Stagnant water from vegetable plots should be immediately removed
cutting drainage canals. Drainage canals or furrows should be cleaned by spading.
Vegetables are cultivated in raised beds to overcome this situation. A drain of
30 cm width may be made within two beds.

3. Lack of rainfall or drought: Continuous rainless for 15-day duration in the dry
season is known as drought. We give irrigation to meet the adverse effects of
drought. Supplementary irrigation should be given to aman rice if such
situations when rice is cultivated under rain-fed system. Weeding by hoes
should be given to close the soil cracks and macro pores. It will reduce
evaporation of water from the soils. Mulching should be done to conserve soil
moisture in the vegetable fields during winter season. A pre-sowing irrigation
may be given in case of vegetable, rice, jute, in the drought months of March
and April to bring jo’ condition in the fields or after seed sowing to enhance
germination.

4. Hailstorms: Hailstorm is mostly common during the months of March and =
April. The early winter crops such as onion, garlic, wheat, potato, etc are &

Agriculture and Climate 71
damaged by hailstorms. The range of damage depends on the size and intensity
of hailstorms. The crops should be immediately harvested if the hailstorm
effects seem severe. Aftercare including pruning of damaged portions of the
plants of the crop should be intensified if hailstorm is mild and some more time
is needed to attain the maturity stage. Boro rice, mango, okra, brinjal, chili are also
affected by hailstorms if it happens in the months of April-May. The brinjal, chili
and okra are affected by breaking branches at the growing stage due to
hailstorms. Such crops may be recovered by pruning and cleaning damaged
branches or twigs and giving fertilizer and irrigation along with doing other
intercultural operations.
Work: The student will prepare a poster individually writing the difference
between unfavourable environment and bad weather and thus present in
the class session.
New Terms Learned: Bad (odd) Weather
Lesson-8: Livestock protection techniques from bad weather
Every country in the world has its own weather and natural features. It happens
in a specific cycle over an year. However, out of these normal phenomena sudden
deviations happen in the forms of untimely flood, storms, tornados, excess
rainfall or lack of rainfall, too cold, earth quake, etc creating severe problems. The
uncertain or sudden happenings of the environment are known as bad or odd
weather. It should be remembered that unfavourable environment comes every
year in a regular sequence, but bad weather comes suddenly. The effects of bad
weather on livestock and poultry mentioned here:
1. It takes time to adapt bad BSS ER SE CWA RS C7
weather by animals. P ee “- iii i A “a 3
2. Scarcity of animal and poultr a SCA mcf Pl,
feed occurs ec“ ax ul ew layed ao
3. The animals are infected by = | pS
diseases. ea “eee OY
4. The production of milk, meat = =-= a -
and egg are reduced. Se ee Se
2 oe ee SS
« o- Danger arises for death of TSS SS
S animals. Fig : Death of animal due to tidal upsurge

72 Agriculture Studies
There is very little scope to meet up the bad weather effects as it comes
suddenly and it is very difficult to solve the created problems. Presently the
weather specialist can forecast about probabilities as to its time and
intensity. Some disaster mitigating preparation should be taken according to
the weather forecasts. Facing bad weather is a short term activity. But long
term planning is required to meet or managing unfavourable environmental
events.
The people become helpless during disasters especially during the tornados in
the southern and coastal regions of Bangladesh. However, attempts must be
taken to protect livestock during disasters.
The animals should be taken to higher lands for shelter in case of sudden water
logging and floods. Collected in advance the animal feed including straw, tree
leaves water hyacinth and concentrated feed should be supplied. It is possible
to allow livestock for outside feeding. In this case the collected feed is given as
stall feeding. Especially jackfruit leaves should be given to goats hanging the
branches in front of them.
|
AlN
gh : ay,
Rul > BINS - Leg On - . Wea» PO ESI)

HO ie

EX INN SEF SO} ef BOY EO

ig ui) wi in ge OR gy = =_-
BS SS
PREM ED TSR GE 8 ae _ _— _— _

Fig : Goat eating leaves in bad weather Fig : Cutting water hyacinth for livestock

The movement of air around the animal house should be controlled to protect
them from cold during winter season. Straws should spread over the shed floor.
Special care should be taken so the animals are not infected by pneumonia.
The dead animals should be buried under soil. The treatment of animals should
be done as per prescription of the veterinary doctors. Sq

Agriculture and Climate 73
Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. Which is climatic factor that causes unfavourable environment?
a. Water logging b. Soil salinity
c. Toxic gases of air d. chemical toxin of soil
2. If the soil micropores are closed-
a. Moisture will be conserved b. Weeds will be controlled
c. Water logging will be created d. Fertility will be increased
3. If covered by water hyacinth-
i, Water will be conserved
ii. Nutrient elements will be reduced
iii. Weed infestation will be reduced
Which one of the below statement is correct?
a. iand ii b. iand iii
c. iiandiii d. i, ii and iii
Read the paragraph below and answer the question no. 4 and 5.
Mr. Nasiruddin had sown rice seeds in 3 floating seedbeds of 1 sq meter area as
per advice of the Agricultural Officer due to the onset of early flood in the
month of Ashar.
4. How much of rice seed Mr. Nasiruddin planted in 3 seedbeds.
a. 2.5-3.0 kg b. 5.0-6.0 kg
c. 7.5-9.0 kg d. 10.0-12.0 kg
Forma-10, Agriculture Studies, 8

74 Agriculture Studies
5. Due to the production of seedling by Nasiruddin in this method-

a. Get the yield in right time b. Get early yield of rice

c. Get more yield from rice d. The quality of rice will be good.

Creative questions

1. The lands of Mr. Monindra Roy were flooded by sea water due to the breach
of embankments in 2007 CIDR. He sought advice from agricultural Officer as
he did not get good yield after the repair of the embankment. The Agricul-
tural Officer then advised and make understand Mr. Monindra Roy as what
crops to be cultivated, what management steps should be taken etc. Mr.
Monindra now became a model farmer abiding by the advice of Agricultural
Officer.

a. In which region of Bangladesh salinity is higher?
b. Why is salinity reduced after rainfall? Explain.

c. What type of crops were cultivated by Monindra?
d. Analyse the causes Monindro’s success.

2. The farmers of Lalpur village were seriously affected due to low rainfall since
several years. In this situation they went to Krishibid Mr. Mjan for advice. Mr.
Mijan explained the crop cultivation techniques to be followed under rain-fed
condition. According to the advice they collected organic wastes and new
varieties of crops. They escaped from the problem following the advice of
Mr. Mijan.

a) What is Dapog seed bed?

b) What problems are created if the soil moisture becomes deficit?

c) What are the causes of waste material collection by farmer? Explain.

d) Analyse the crop production technologies under the new management 2°
system. Rg

Chapter Five
Agricultural Production
This chapter descusses the production technologies of wheat and mushroom;
harvesting and grading of agro-products. The mixed culture methods of fish
culture among fish production (rui, katla, mrigel) and shrimp culture are
described. Cattle rearing and its disease management on domestic animals are
discussed here.
YY Ce YE MACS
X | _&
\ T Fig: Shrimp
Fig : Wheat
(Ka fxs
ou Nj :
YanmABo *
N( wes Cie ge ——
Mm WZ
Fig: Mushroom Fig: Cow
At the end of studying this chapter, we will be able to:
e explain crop cultivation methods.
¢ explain the importance of mushroom culture.
e explain the mixed cultivation methods of fish culture.
e describe shrimp culture methods
e Explain the cultivation method of domestic animals.
e Analise the management and control of disease of these domestic animals.
= ° Explain the harvesting and grading of agro-products.
Ss

76 Agriculture Studies
Lesson-1: Cultivation method of wheat
The major source of food carbohydrate is cereal grain crops. For this reason,
cereal grain crops are cultivated as food crops throughout the world. Wheat is
the main staple crops in many countries of the world. Wheat holds the second
position of food crops being next to paddy in Bangladesh. Wheat is cultivated
in almost all districts of Bangladesh. However, it is cultivated more in the
districts of Dinajpur, Rangpur, Thakurgaon, Rajshahi, Pabna, Bogra, Jamalpur,
Jessore and Kustia. There are many high yielding varieties which were approved
for cultivation in Bangladesh. Kanchan, Akbar, Agrani, Prativa, Sourav, Gourov,
Shatabdi, Pradip, Bijoy were found to be very popular among the available
varieties.
Time of sowing: Wheat is an winter crop. Winter season of Bangladesh is of
short duration. For this reason, wheat seeds should be sown in time to harvest
a good yield. The most suitable time of sowing wheat seed is between first
week of November to second week of December in our country. Wheat grows
best in loamy soils of highland and medium highlands. But the yield of wheat
becomes low in saline soils. Kanchan, Akbar, Prativa and Gourab gives better
yields where wheat can not be sown in later part of the season due to delayed
rice harvest and thus late land preparation.
Seed rate: It is considered satisfactory if the germination of the wheat seed is
more than 85 percent. About 120 kg of seeds are required to be sown per
hector of land. Many seed born diseases may be prevented if the seeds are
treated before sowing in the field. Seeds may be treated mixing 3 grams of
Provex- 200 per kg of seed.
Methods of sowing Seeds: The land should be well prepared giving 3-4
ploughing and planking or laddering when the land reach the ‘jo’ stage. If
sufficient moisture is not available, then irrigation should be given once and to
ES)
ES

Agricultural Production 77
be ploughed at the 'jo' stage. Wheat seeds may be sown as broadcast or in line.
If it is broadcast sowing then seeds should be sown during the last ploughing
Operation and the seeds must be covered by soil through laddering. In case of
line sowing, the seeds should be sown in narrow furrows made by small hand
hoe after final land preparation at a line to line distance of 20 centimeter. The
seeds should be sown at a depth of 4-5 centimeter deep furrows which should
be covered by surface soils. Arrangement should be made for protecting the
seeds from birds for a period of 15 days.
Methods of applying fertilizers: Two-third of the recommended urea and all
the Triple Super Phosphate (TSP), Muriate of Potash (MOP) and Gypsum fertiliz-
ers should given at the time of final ploughing in case of wheat cultivation
under irrigated condition. The rest one part urea should top dressed at the time
of giving first irrigation in the field. For non-irrigated wheat cultivation total
quantities of urea, TSP, MOP and Gypsum should be applied at the time of last
ploughing of land preparation. The recommended doses of fertilizers needed
for wheat cultivation are mentioned below—
po rrigated Non -irrigated |
[MOP kg

Irrigation: Two or three irrigations should be given according to the texture of
the soils. First irrigation should be given at the 3-leaf stage of the seedling,
second irrigation at the time of ear emergence and the third irrigation should
be given during grain formation.

2%

&

78 Agriculture Studies
Weed control: Weed vitally shares the fertilizers and irrigated water of the main
crops. Weeding should be given before top dressing the urea fertilizer. Irrigation
should be given after top dressing. At least 2 weeding operations should be
done to keep the wheat field free from weeds.
Crop harvest: The leaves of the plant start yellowing at the onset of wheat grain
maturation. The grains will come out during thumb-palm rubbing at maturity.
At this stage wheat plant should be harvested by cutting after which it should
be dried, threshed and winnowed.
Work: Students will write the process of wheat production as individual
work and present it in the classroom.
Lesson-2: Intercultural operations and other technologies of wheat
cultivation.
Wheat cultivation in zero tillage: The harvest of Transplant Aman is delayed in
many areas. As a result time land preparation become a limiting factor for
sowing wheat seeds. In this situation zero tillage cultivation of wheat may be
adopted. If sufficient soil moisture is available after harvest of rice i.e. leg spots
during walks become prominent, then seeds may be sown directly on the soil
surface. Again if jo' situation is absent then seeds may be sown after giving a
light irrigation. At first wheat seeds should be soaked in cow dung water
suspension for several hours. Then the seeds need to be dried extracting seeds
from the suspension. It creates a wrapping layer of cow dung over wheat seeds.
As a result birds do not eat the wheat grains after seed sowing and do not dry
due to sun radiation. Fertilizers may be applied using two methods when wheat
cultivation is done in this system-1) Fertilizer broadcasting during sowing of
seeds, 2) Fertilizer broadcasting during first irrigation after 17-20 days after
seed sowing. It is needed to control weeds 25-30 days after seed sowing.
—
g

Agricultural Production 79
Wheat cultivation in minimum tillage: Seeds of wheat may be sown giving two
ploughing using country plough. The land should be ploughed just at the jo’
stage after the harvest of transplant aman rice. Again if jo’ situation is absent
then seeds may be sown after giving a light irrigation. At first one ploughing and
one laddering should be given. All the fertilizers and seeds should be
broadcasted after the second ploughing and laddering. First irrigation should be
given at 17-21 days of seed sowing. Urea should be top dressed at the time of
first irrigation. It is found better if weed is controlled at 25-30 days of seed
sowing.
Disease control in wheat cultivation: Insect-pest and disease infestation are
not found to be a great problem in wheat cultivation. However some fungal
disease may appear. Besides rat infestation is a significant problem many times.
Leaf rust disease, leaf spot disease, foot rot disease, loose smut and black spot
diseases are the major fungal diseases among others.
At first small round yellowish spots are visible on the =
surface of the leaves. At the later stage the colour of i
the spots become rusty brown to blackish. Reddish rust a
powders are found on the hand fingers when the
diseased leaf is rubbed. The symptoms of this disease F
are first appearing in the older leaves after which it r
spread to all leaves and the stem. In the leaf spot () !
disease symptoms first appear in the lower leaves in Fig : Leaf rust disease
the form of small oval spots. Then the spot expands in
size and causes blight of the leaves. The causal organ-
ism of this disease survives in the waste crop residues WAY
and stay in the seed. Yellow spots are produced at the etn
base of the plant at soil level in foot rot disease. “et y Dp
Then the colour of the spot becomes deep brown and Wr )
encircles the surrounding of the infected portion. Then  Fig:Loose smut disease
the plant dries out and dies.

xs

8

80 Agriculture Studies
The symptoms of leaf rust disease are visualized at time of ear emergence of
wheat. The infected ears are found to be wrapped by a thin membrane at the
initial stage. Later the membrane burst which are seen as black smuts. Brown or
blackish spots of different sizes are found to occur on the wheat grain seed
cover due to black spot disease.
Black spots extend up to the embryo of the seed and gradually the whole seed
is infested by this disease.
Integrated control measures should be taken to prevent these fungal diseases
of wheat. The disease resistant varieties of wheat such as Kanchan, Akbar,
Agrani, Prativa, Sourav, Gourab, should be cultivated. The seeds should be
collected from disease free wheat plots. Wheat seeds must be treated before
sowing in the field. Fertilizers should be applied following balanced formula-
tion.
Rat pest is the main enemy for wheat cultivation. The infestation of rats initi-
ate from the time of ear emergence. It causes serious damages at the ripening
stage of wheat. Hand made or homemade poison traps or purchasing this type
of traps from the market may be used for rat control. These poison trap materi-
als are kept at the movement ways or newly dug holes of rats near rat furrows
on soil surface. Besides poison traps rats may be controlled using other traps
made of bamboo or wood.
Work: Students will divide in groups and discuss zero tillage wheat cultiva-
tion and minimum tillage wheat cultivation and present it in the classroom.
Newly learned: Zero tillage method of wheat cultivation, minimum tillage method
of wheat cultivation, leaf rust disease of wheat, loose smut disease of wheat.
°9
Ss
AQ

Agricultural Production 81
Lesson 3: Importance of mushroom cultivation

We know that fungi are responsible for so many A =

plant diseases. But all the fungi do not cause any CCS
disease. There are many fungi who are beneficial Cae
for us. Mushroom is such a_ type of fungi Sao
which is fully suitable as food, it is tasty and have Om >
medicinal qualities. Actually mushroom is kind WS

productive part of saprophytic fungi which are Fig: Mushroom
edible.

Many people mistake thinking that mushroom and naturally grown toxic fruiting
bodies swamp fungi (umbrella of toads) are same thing, which grows here and
there. The thing is: mushroom is a type of vegetable grown in safe and clean envi-
ronment from the seed or spawn developed through tissue culture. Mushroom
itself is a kind of tasty food, and also it increases the taste of other food when
used or mixed with other food items. Taste of mushroom is similar to meat. Most
delicious Chinese type and other meals of 5-star hotel level are produced with
mushroom. However, mushroom is used for cooking country methods for meal
items like vegetables, fry, soup, polao, biriani, noodles, shrimp, and small fish
preparations. Mushroom may be eaten as fresh, dried up and ground powder.
Mushroom is top level crop when considered for nutrition point of view. Because,
it contains very essential food elements, such as: protein, vitamin, and minerals
at a very high level. Every 100 gram mushroom contains protein 25-35 grams, all
vitamins and minerals 10-15 grams, carbohydrate and fiber 40-50 grams, and fat
4-6 grams. The protein of mushroom is of very high quality grade. This protein
contains all of the essential 9 amino acids. Eating of this protein reduces the
danger of high blood pressure, heart disease, obesity. Because, this protein do
not contains any harmful fat. Besides, the fats of mushrooms help in increasing
the activities of calcium and phosphorus in developing bones and teeth. Mush-
room carbohydrates contain so many types of chemical elements which work for
remedy from complex diseases.

Vitamins and minerals create resistance power against disease in the body. Our
body has a need for specific quantities of vitamins and minerals. We can meet up
that required vitamin and mineral needs by eating mashroom daily. Mushroom
Forma-11, Agriculture Studies, 8

82 Agriculture Studies
is found to contain thiamin (vitamin B-1), riboflavin (vitamin B-2), niacin etc
and minerals in sufficient quantities such as: phosphorus, iron, calcium,
copper etc. Mushroom works both to prevent and cure many diseases such
as: diabetes, heart disease, high blood pressure, anemia, dysentery, dropping
of hair, cancer, tumor etc due to high quality food values.
A healthy typical human needs to uptake 200-250 grams of vegetables per day.
We usually eat 40-50 grams of vegetables (except potato) per day. It is very low
considering the total requirement. For the reason we frequently suffer from
different diseases due to deficiency of vitamins and minerals. The cultivable lands
are reducing very rapidly in Bangladesh. Most of the lands are now used
for rice cultivation. It is very difficult to increase land for vegetable cultivation. In
the situation mushroom may be a very potential crop. Mushroom is such a type
of crop which does not need very high fertile soils for its production. It may be
cultivated in house in racks. It can be grown in a very short period of 7-10 days.
The climate and weather of Bangladesh is very suitable for cultivation of mush-
room. The raw materials for mushroom cultivation namely rice straw, saw mill
wastes, sugarcane stubbles, rotting leaves etc are chief and easily available.
Mushroom cultivation is commercially very profitable. Because, mushroom
requires low capital and labour investments. The invested capital can be recov-
ered within a very short period. On the other hand more production and profit
and high market rates may be obtained per unit of land. So, the unemployed
youth can find their job works very easily through mushroom cultivation.
The family nutrition can be met side by side it is possible to be benefited financially
through the cultivation of mushroom in every house.
Work: The class teacher will show through a poster or video the importance of
mushroom cultivation and a success story of mushroom producer in the class
room. Accordingly the teacher will give direction to the students to write in class
Exercise Khata and present about the importance and nutrition of mushroom as
individual and group works.
Lesson- 4: Cultivation methods of mushroom
There are many species of mushroom cultivated in different seasons. Milky, Rishi and
Straw mushroom may be cultivated in summer season, while Sitake, Button, Simaji and S

Agricultural Production 83
Inoki may be cultivated in the winter season. The year round Wester mushroom is
mostly cultivated in Bangladesh. There are some differences in the cultivation methods
of various types of mushrooms.
yw CH, ek 5D>>
Fig : Wester mushroom Fig : Milky white mushroom Fig: Button mushroom
Here in this lesson we will know the cultivation
methods of Wester mushroom.
Preparing spawn or mushroom seed: Mushroom C)
seeds are produced in the laboratory through <I
tissue culture methods. Packaged seed is available [w= ma A yocROR
in the market for purchase by mushroom farmer ye IES
which are known as commercial spawn. However, (32 3% oes Nee
farmers themselves may also produce spawn
locally using the straw method. Mushroom farm- Fig : Commercial spawn
ers have to produce the spawn collecting mother
spawn from the market in this case.
Preparing the culture house: Sufficient number of windows should be kept in
the mushroom culture room for air and oxygen movement. There should be
shadowed light in the house. Arrangement should be made so that the tem-
perature of the culture house remains within the range of 20-30 Celsius. Mush-
room favours higher relative atmospheric humidity. The relative humidity of the
culture house should be in the range of 70-80%. Enormous carbon dioxide is
produced in the culture house due to respiration high population of microor-
ganisms. The carbon dioxide gas is found to accumulate in the lower layer of the
a house as it is comparatively heavier. For this reason, the lower part of the
S thatch or wall should be kept open.

84 Agriculture Studies
Collection of Spawn: Spawn seed prepared in poly pack system should be
collected from reliable farms after construction of the culture house. The main
characteristics of a good spawn that it will be white and the packet is uniformly
and fully filled with fungal mycelium. Arrangement should be made to cut the
collected spawn packet as soon as possible. If there is any possibility of late
cutting of packet then it should be removed from the sack and should be kept in
a separate cool place of the house.

Cutting the packet: The mushroom spawn packet should be soaked in water after
cutting it in correct method before setting in the culture house. The cut should be
made along the shoulder and including corners making a size of 2 inch long and 1
inch radius. The white portion of both side of the cut piece should be scratched
with a blade. Then the packet should be soaked in water for 5-15 minutes. After
soaking and draining out the water the packet should be placed on the floor or
racks in line for its culture.

Aftercare: The seed spawn should be placed at a distance of 2 inches on the floor
or racks in line. Water should be sprayed in the house 2-3 times in winter and 4-5
times hot seasons as per need to maintain the relative humidity 70-80% around
the spawn packet. Spraying should be done keeping sprayer nozzle about one
foot above the packet. The packet or sack may be moistened to control the
humidity and temperature placing news papers below and above the packet.
Other cares: The germination mushroom seed will initiate producing a pin like
embryos within 2-3 days if care is taken properly. The small embryos should be
pruned keeping 8-12 big embryos at both sides. Mushroom may be harvest within
a period of 5-7 days. The harvested mushroom should be kept at rest. The cut
side of the mushroom again should be scratched with a blade next day followed by
spraying. Mushroom may be harvested 8-10 times from each packet. About 200-
250 grams of mushroom may be harvested from one packet.

Mushroom Harvest and Preservation: Mushrooms should be softly pulled by
hand for harvest at the stage when it becomes sufficient large but the stalks and
veins do not seem loose. The mushroom to be marketed putting it in polyethylene
bags after cutting and grading. The polyethylene bag should be made air tight
through proper sealing the opening. This mushroom may be eaten 2-3 days keep-
ing it in cool dry place. Mushroom was found to remain good 7-8 days in freeze. S

Agricultural Production 85
Work: The students get divided into two groups. Discuss about the cultivation
methods of Wester mushroom and present separately in the class session.

New learning: Saprophytic fungi, Productive parts, Culture house, Spawn.
Lesson -5: Harvesting and grading of horticultural crops
Fruits, vegetables and flowers are rapidly perishable products. About 50% of
the products are stated to be damaged during processing, grading and
marketing through indigenous country methods. This is serious loss on
economic and nutritional point of view. The fresh appearance, respective
tastes, colour, flavour and other qualities of all the products may be fully
maintained taking integrated management practices from harvest to
marketing stages. As a result product degradation is reduced and high market
prices are ensured.
We harvest fruits, leaves, twigs, embryos, roots, stems, buds etc of horticultural
crops for our use. Commercial maturity of crops is mostly considered for its
harvest time decisions. The commercial maturity of an edible part of the crop
means that stage at which it can be eaten keeping intact its food value, flavour
and other characteristics. For example, we harvest and marketing at different
stages of growth of cucumber, gourds, brinjal/eggplant, country bean, okra,
leafy vegetables etc. Fruits may be divided into two groups. There is one type of
fruits in which transformation of carbohydrate to sugar is stopped. The exam-
ples of this type are pumelo, lemon, grapes and litchi. This type of fruits must
be harvested after its ripening. Again mango, jackfruit, papaya, banana, wood
apple etc continues transformation of carbohydrate to sugar, spread flavour
and attain colour. This type fruits may be harvested before full ripening of the
fruits.

The horticultural crops must properly be harvested, cleaning, pruning, grading,
packing transporting and marketing for getting good market price. The fruits
may be degraded due to loss of water due to evaporation, transpiration,
respiration making it wrinkled if the harvested products are not properly
processed. Increased temperature increases the rate of respiration and

damages cells and tissues of the fruits. Infection by pathogenic microorganisms

so may cause diseases and damage the fruits.
S
N

86 Agriculture Studies
We have to take the following steps to protect the products from different
types of losses:

1. Crop harvest index/indicators: We consider the commercial maturity and
have to harvest in right time.

2. Methods of harvest: Products of horticultural crops are harvested mainly in
two methods, a) By hand and b) By mechanical tools. The following points
must be kept in mind while we harvest horticultural crops.-

a) Harvesting should be done very carefully so that no damage happen
during that operation.

b) Avoiding damages during harvest by hand nails, knife and other equip-
ment such as lesion on the skin, twisting of the stem, lodging on the soil,
mudding of the fruit surface, sunning etc.

3. Crop storage containers: The productsiatter ; | aT me
harvest should be kept clean containers. frame rin
The container must be such that it does not Hin Sst a
make any damage to the products. We usu- & ull Hi Hei iti it HT iil
ally use jute sack, plastic basket, bamboo or WLU lM
cane basket for storing horticultural ; ;

Fig : Plastic basket
harvests.

4. Carrying from field: Much care should be taken while carrying horticultural
production from field to the place for grading. The container should not be
forcefully thrown elsewhere. The products should not be packed so tightly.
The transport vehicle should be driven slow enough so that no destructive
jerking of the products happens.

5. Temperature: The products after harvest
from the field must be protected from APR
direct sun. Sun radiation increases the ‘ ror So SS/a2 >)
temperature within the fruits causing Nae Hd
damage of the quality of fruits. Horticul- SS ee,

: ——SSSs

tural crop products should be harvested in SSS”

the morning or evening. The products Fig : Bamboo basket

should be taken from the field as soon as

it is harvested. x

g

Agricultural Production 87
6. Grading of products: The unwanted and inert waste materials at first should
be screened and removed from the harvested and transported products.
Thenthe products should be graded according to size and shape into several
categories. Finally the products should be packaged for marketing. We usually
pack products in sack, polythene sheet, plastic basket, bamboo and cane
basket and paper or wooden box. The packaged products must be kept in cool
environment until it is transported to the target market.
Work: The students get divided into groups. Discuss the sequential steps
starting from harvest of horticultural crops to marketing of the products and
present it in the class session.
New terms learned: Commercial ripening, Grading of products.
Lesson-6: Harvest and grading of field crops.
We have already known about field crops in class six. There are many steps
which are required to be sequentially followed from crop cutting after ripening
to the hands of consumers. The products may be degraded or damaged in
terms of quality due to lack of appropriate caring methods. As a result the farm-
ers do not get fair price of the products. The integrated method involving all the
steps from crop cutting to marketing can significantly reduce the post harvest
losses, as mentioned below:
1. Timely harvest of crops: Grains must be harvested at full maturity of the
crops. That is the crop should be cut after full ripening. However, the weather
of time should be seriously considered. For this reason crop can not be
harvested during wet stormy weather. Besides it can not be threshed,
winnowed and dried during the period. The harvested crops if stacked may be
rotten due to higher temperature raised in the compact stack and produce
odour. However, in case of possible storms or floods, the crops required to be
harvested before full ripening of the crops.
Irrigation in the crop field must be stopped 15-20 days before harvest. It will
control physical growth of the plants and enhance maturity of the crop. Rice
oo May be harvested when the colour attain golden colour or about 80% of the
S grains found to be matured. The pulse and oil seed crops should be harvested

88 Agriculture Studies
when the plants become yellow or starts dying. The crops may be harvested
when the grains mature. But if the crop is over matured then some grains may
be shattered during crop cut and transport. Rice and wheat crops may be
harvested by cutting it with the help of sickle or other similar tools.

2. Threshing: The harvested crops may be rapidly threshed if the harvested
crops are well dried after cutting. The grains are not damaged during threshing.
Peddle thresher and powered mechanical threshers are utilized for rice and
wheat. Again these crops may also be harvested beating it over drums or mat
floors manually. The threshing floor should be fully cleaned before starting crop
threshing. The pulse and oil seed crops must be fully dried before threshing
after harvest. Threshing is done by cattle if the volume of the harvest is large.
Otherwise threshing may be done using strong sticks or bamboo stems (lathi).
3. Winnowing: The threshed materials should be lightly dried after separating
it from the harvest waste inert. Then the grains are winnowed by bamboo trays
(kula), air or power driven fans. The straws, empty grains and other inert waste
materials are removed from the harvest products due to winnowing.

4. Crop drying: The crop grains should be well dried after threshing and win-
nowing. The moisture content of grains is reduced to certain level through
drying. The grains should be dried for 2-3 sunny days until it makes a Kot’ sound
when cut by teeth. The moisture of the grains reaches the range of 10-12 per
cent at this stage. The grains may be degraded, infested by disease, rotten or
damaged in the godowns or stores if its moisture content is higher.

5. Transport: The grains when hot after drying should not be pored in to sacks
or containers. It should be transported to the godowns or house stores after it
is fully cool using jute or polyethylene or synthetic sacks. The worn out sacks
should be avoided for carrying grains. Transportation may be done by powered
vehicles if the product volume is higher. Much care should be taken during load-
ing and unloading grains from the vehicles so that the sacks are not damaged.
6. Storage godowns: The room space or place where products are kept for
different tenure of the time is known as godowns. The sacks or containers are
kept over a bamboo or wooden made framed floor mats (matcha) in the
godowns or house stores. Grains are mostly kept in jute sack, polyethylene ©
lined sacks, bamboo made containers namely dol’, soil made container motka, R

Agricultural Production 89
plastic drum, tin drum in our country. Godowns always must be kept clean. It
will reduce pest and rat infestation. The insect-pest infestation was found to be
reduced if azadactrin or neem leaf is placed at different layers of the grain prod-
ucts. The godowns need to be frequently visited to check up the conditions. The
moisture of the grains should be tested and may be again sun dried if needed.
Zt if B i by iS)
eae = 2S ae |
ae 2 =o
cre ce
SSA SS
Fig: Dol Fig: Storing in jute sack
Work: The students get divided into groups. Discuss group wise all the steps
starting from crop harvest to storing into godown and present it in the class
sessions.
Lesson 7: Advantages of mixed culture of fish and its suit-
able pond for mixed culture fish
Culture of different species of fish in the same pond is called mixed culture of
fish. Fishes that are not carnivorous in nature, do not compete for feed, lives in
different layers of water and takes feed from different layers can be cultured in
the same pond. Carp type or Rohi type fish are suitable for mixed culture such
as Silver carp, Rohi, Katla, carpio etc. Indigenous carp type fishes such as Rohi,
Katla, Mrigel are notable. They are highly suitable for mixed culture in pond.
Forma-12, Agriculture Studies, 8

90 Agriculture Studies
Advantages of this type of fish culture are given below—
1. They consume feed from different layers of pond such as Katla intake feed
from upper layer, Rohi from middle layer and Mrigel from bottom layer.
2. They are not carnivorous
3. Have good immunity
4. Fast growing
5. Fingerlings are easily available in the hatchery
6. Can grow with low cost supplementary feed
7. Tasty to eat and high market demand
Uf Ay
N “€ a WY
Katla == Shes. - ez =e Silver
= BRD Sey carp
Wooo oe eR LL
\ ee -—-
Mrigel 3 = ee eee oS
‘ — ee iy GPx ‘i Shrimp
Fig : Ideal pond for mixed fish culture

Work: The Student will attend group work on advantages of mix culture,

write it on the poster paper and present it in the class room.
20
S

Agricultural Production 91

SS its aaa heatennennns a "oD

ZAR SERRE RH OT

LABS‘ SRC UR a
Fig : Ruhi Fish
Sa. RENE, Ser:
STR HOR ORCS Gt, Re aR RR Re
y wf < a 7
Fig : Katla Fish Fig : Mrigel

Advantages of mixed culture:

1. Fishes are living in different layers of water and they consume feed from
different layers. For this reason, all water body of pond and all feeds in the
pond are utilized properly.

2. Feed are not pilled in a particular layer and no wastage of feed. As a result
the environment of pond becomes good.

3. Disease infestation is less in mixed culture.

4. Overall production is high.

New Word: Carp fish, Hatchery

Lesson 8: Ideal pond for mixed culture

The following points should be considered in selecting ponds for mixed culture-

1. Pond should be free from flood. For this purpose the bank of pond must be

high and strong enough.

co 2. Average water depth of pond should be 2-3 meter and during dry season
8 depth of water will not less than 1 meter.

92 Agriculture Studies
3. Loamy, clay loam or clay soil is best for preparation of pond. Because water
holding capacity of that soil is high.
4. There should not be any big acre
lh PC
tree on the east, west and ee
south bank of the pond. ot ee
5. The pond will be located in ~ ~ -
open area for easy access of ie i ge
light and air. Aye "
6. Size of pond should be 30-50
. Figure: Ideal pond for mixed fish culture
decimal for better manage-
ment.
7. There should not be any carnivorous fish and harmful insect.
8. The pond should be free from weed.
9. The bottom layer of the pond should not be too muddy.
Fish lives in water. The water quality of pond directly affects on aquaculture. The
following characteristics should be considered for the water quality of a produc-
tive pond -
1. Depth of water: Plankton is the natural feed of fish. Sunlight is necessary for
the production of plankton. If the depth of the pond water is more, then the
sun rays cannot reach the bottom of the pond. In that case sufficient plankton
will not grow. On the other hand, if the depth of water is low, the temperature
of the water rises and weed may grow at the bottom of the pond.
2. Turbidity of water: The floating soil particles and mud are responsible for the
turbidity of water. On the other hand pond water may turbid after raining.
Turbidity prevents the sun rays from entering in to a deep layer, and as a result
no natural feed is produced for fishes. It damages the gills of fish. In order to
prevent this problem application of 240-250 g of fitkiri per decimal per 30 cm
depth of water or 1.2 kg straw per decimal will be helpful.
3. Colour of water: The occurring of deep green colour of water or algae layer
of the pond is harmful for fish production. If some tiny bag containing 12-15 gm
tute is kept in per decimal water body, it will be mixed with water with the help &
of wave and will prevent algae bloom. There may be a red layer on the top &

Agricultural Production 93
water of the pond due to excess iron or red algae. It reduces the oxygen content
of water. Algae bloom can be removed by drawing twisted straw or banana
leaves rope over the top of the water. If the colour of water is light green,
reddish green and brownish green then it indicates adequate natural feed of
fish ‘plankton’ has grown.
4. Temperature: The amount of dissolved oxygen increases with decreasing
temperature of water and the rate of feed consumption of fish reduces. On the
other hand the rate of feed consumption increases with increasing temperature
of water. For this reason reducing the application of fertilizer and supplemen-
tary feed during winter season. 25-300 temperature is best for ruhi type fish
production.
5. Dissolved gas: Fish takes the required amount of oxygen for respiration
from dissolved oxygen of water with the help of gill. The oxygen content of
pond water is reduced due to excess rotten characteristic of animal/ plant and
algae, cloudy environment, turbidity of water, excess iron etc. present in water.
At the same time the amount of carbon di oxide and others poisonous gas
increases. When oxygen level reduces in pond water, fishes come to the top of
water and takes feed with gasping. In order to remove this situation beating
pond water with bamboo and swimming in the pond may be helpful.
Work: The student will draw an ideal pond for mixed culture and list out the
characteristics of water of a productive pond and submit to the teacher.
New words: Plankton, Turbidity of water, Gill, Fitkiri, Red algae.
Lesson 9: Preparation of pond for mixed culture
Agricultural land should be prepared through ploughing, irrigation, application
of fertilizer etc. before planting of seedlings for crop production. In the same
way pond should be prepared before releasing fish fry to the pond. The steps of
preparation of a pond for fish culture are described below—
o 1. Reconstruction of bank and bottom of the pond: The bank of the pond
8 should be reconstructed if there is any breach over here. Pruning should be

94 Agriculture Studies
done if there is any big tree on the bank of the pond. It helps to make available
sunshine to the pond and natural feed will be produced. Poisonous gases will be
produced if there is an excess mud at the bottom of the pond. For this reason
pond should be dried for several days at every 3-4 years and the excess mud
should be removed.
2. Weeding: The aquatic weeds such as water hyacinth, khudipana etc. absorb
nutrients from plankton (natural feed of fish) and prevents to fall sunshine to
the pond. So, all aquatic weed should be removed from the pond.
3. Eradication of carnivorus and other unwanted fish: Shol, Gojar, Chital, Boal,
etc. carnivorous fish engulfs cultured fish fry. On the other hand unwanted fishes
NN
\
CEE PETER NT TO) JAY
F S : Adee ua {il thf
Cart, Wn, Mul fue Bf
(il UI (7 OL a MOSZ)
(| a “aa a; J
“Qty eta ingen. wily
LO pas *
MM itis Sy
Fig : Boal Fish
Fig : Chital Fish Fig : Shol Fish

compete for feed with cultured fish. These unwanted fishes may be controlled
either by drying of the pond or by frequent netting, if the water content of the pond
is lower. About 30-35 grams of rotenone powder mixed with water is to be spread
over the pond for one fit or 30 cm depth per decimal of pond water and subse-
quently stirring of water. After a while all fishes should be collected when they will %
float on the top of the pond. Dead fish using rotenone are safe for consumption. &

Agricultural Production 95
4. Application of lime: About 1-2 kg lime powder per decimal of pond should
be spread at the bottom if the pond is dry. If there is water in the pond the mea-
sured amount of lime is first dissolve with water in a pail or drum and then
cooled and the lime solution is uniformly spread to the pond. Lime purifies the
soil and pond water and also increases the fertility of the soil. Lime also
removes poisonous gas and turbidity of pond water.
5. Application of fertilizer: Natural feed grows in the pond after application of
the fertilizers. The fertilizers should be applied after 7-10 days of lime applica-
tion. Among organic fertilizer 5-7 kg cow-dung or 3-4 kg litter and among inor-
ganic fertilizer 100-150g urea, 50-75g TSP and 20-30g of MOP should be applied
per decimal of pond. After 5-7 days of fertilizer application, pond water should
be tested either natural feed grown or not and after that fish fries should be
released in the pond.
Work: Students will test the presence of natural feed with the help of
teacher in any adjacent pond.
Testing natural feed in the pond water: After 5-7 days of fertilizer
application it should be tested whether natural feed developed or not in the
pond water. For testing, a 20 cm diameter black and white tin plate (Secchi
disk) should be hanged with a thread and immersed in pond water. If the
plate is invisible at 25-30cm depth of pond water, it indicates that adequate
natural feed has grown. The test can be done in another way. That is- one
should immerse his hand in pond water up to his elbow. If the palm of his hand
is invisible, it indicates that adequate natural feed has grown. Otherwise small
amount of fertilizer is applied over the pond and again it should be tested 2-3
days later. _
A
(? ne dS 2 See Fe
= 2 af
x Fig: Secchi Disk test Fig: Hand test
& New words: Secchi Disk, Hand test

96 Agriculture Studies
Lesson 10: Collection of fish fries and care after stocking
Collection of fish fries: Fish fries should be collected from any adjacent govern-
ment or nongovernment hatchery or nursery pond. The fish fries may be trans-
ported in aluminum or earthen pots in shorter distance. For a long distance, it
may be carried in polyethylene bags with oxygen supply. The fish fries brought
from hatcheries should not be directly released to the pond. The fish fry polybag
or the container should be floated over the pond water for about 15-20 min-
utes. At that time water of the pond should be given in the container or polybag
in small lots. This operation will gradually equalize the temperature of the con-
tainer water and the pond water. After that the polybag or the container should
be gradually poured into the pond water by slanting it slowly, and the fish fries
will be released into the pond water. The fish fries of 7-10 cm can be stock 25-40
per decimal. The fish fries have to be released in the pond in morning or afternoon
in cold weather. 7-10 cm Size 25-40, fish fries stock in the pond within per hun-
dred. Katla 10 -16, Rui 7-12, Mrigel 7-12 fish fries may stock in the pond. If
other foreign fish are cultured with these, in that case silver carp 7-12, Katla 3-4,
Rui 5-8, Mrigel 6-10, Carpio 1-2 and Grass carp 2-4 to be released. Moreover
this 10-15 thai puti frie can be released per decimal of pond.
Care after stocking of fish fries
1. Application of fertilizers: If there is no sufficient natural feed in the pond the
fish fries will not grow properly. So, the fertilizers should be applied every day or
every week after stocking. Fertilizers should be spread over the pond by dissolv-
ing with water.

S

Agricultural Production 97
&

YS YY 2 C— a
££ Sy le Sy AYA.
ee_ SES BS 2a es
Peeters. Fret ress. pete

Figure: Techniques of releasing fish fries to the pond
List of fertilizer applied to the pond
Dose (weekly per decimal)
Cowdung or 2-2.5kg or
Chicken-duck litter 1-1.5kg
2. Application of Supplementary Feed: Every day supplemental feeds are
applied after stocking. For making balanced feed fish meal, mustard oil cake,
wheat bran/rice polish, flour and vitamin mineral premix are mixed in the
proportion of 20: 45: 4.5: 0.5 and supplied to the fish. The mustard oil cake to
be used should be kept moist in water for about 10-12 hours. Moist mustard oil
cake and other ingredients should be mixed properly and it may be applied to
the pond giving it a shape of small balls. The required and measured whole feed
may be divided into two parts and one part may be given in the morning and
the rest portion should be given in the evening. On the other hand fish feed
prepared in feed mill available in the market may also be supplied to the fish. It
is good enough to supply 2-5 percent supplementary feed of total fish weight
present in the pond in summer season and 1-2 percent supplementary feed of
total fish weight in winter season.
Forma-13, Agriculture Studies, 8

98 Agriculture Studies
3. Disease management of fish: Different types of diseases attack the fish
during fish culture. Fishes may attack with pathogenic microorganism and also
die if the environment of the pond is not good. As a result fish cultivation
becomes unprofitable. Necrosis of fish, tail rot, fin rot, swelling of abdomen and
mite may attack the fish during cultivation. When fish is attacked with disease it
swims abnormally on the surface of pond water, decrease feed consumption or
stops feeding, colour of gill becomes pale and necrotic symptoms on the skin
are seen etc. If any diseased fish is observed in the pond it should be removed
as soon as possible.
Primarily 1kg lime or 25-35gm potassium permanganate per decimal may be
applied to the pond or the infected fish should be soaked with salt solution (10g
salt dissolved with 10 liter of water) for one minute and again it should be
released in the pond.

regarding mixed culture of fish and give group work to the students.
Harvesting of fish: Ruhi, Katla, Mrigal etc. usually grow very rapidly up to one
year. After that, the feed consumption increases but reduces growth rate. For
this reason, it is very important to harvest the fishes at the right time.
Otherwise the cost of production will be increased. Ruhi and Mirgel fishes may
grow up to 700 grams to one kg in a period of 9-12 months and Katla become
1-1.5 kg in a period of 7-12 months.
New Word: Potassium permanganate
Lesson 11: Selection and preparation of pond for Shrimp culture
Shrimp is an important fisheries resource in the economy of Bangladesh. 80%
of the export income from fish and fish products comes from frozan shrimp.
The position of shrimp sector is just after garments industry, regarding earning
of foreign currency. The raw materials in shrimp industry like prawn fries are
available in hatchery and natural sources in the country. In this industry we earn
more by investing less. We can earn foreign currency, generate employment
Opportunity and improve socio-cultural condition by expanding shrimp
culture, There are 67 species of shrimp in the reservoirs of sweet and saline
water of Bangladesh. All of these species could not be cultured profitably. In our Ss
country the important commercial fresh water prawn species is Galda »

Agricultural Production 99
and saline water prawn species is Bagda. The size of head and body of Galda is
almost equal. Male Galda has two pair leg and which is comparatively large. In
case Bagda prawn, the head is smaller than body. At present, yearly shrimp
production in Bangladesh is about 75 thousand metric ton. Here we will learn
about cultivation techniques of fresh water Galda shrimp. In spite of single
culture, Galda may also be cultivated with carp fishes.
Selection of pond for Galda farming: Galda can be cultivated in small, large or
all types of pond. But large pond is better for Galda farming. The pond should
have the following characteristics for Galda farming-
1. The pond should be open enough to reach sufficient sunlight.
2. Loam, clay loam or clay soils are suitable of shrimp culture.
hee GAS
Kec <ed
=< ’
Figure: Galda shrimp Figure: Bagda shrimp
3. Depth of pond should be 1-1.2 meters.
4. There should have irrigation and drainage facilities.
5. The pond should be free from flood.
6. Pond should be free from pollution.
Work: The students will write down the “importance of shrimp as an eco-
nomic crop” and present group wise.

Preparation of pond: We already discussed about preparation of pond for fish
culture in previous chapter. Pond preparation for fresh water shrimp is same as
previous discussion. Different steps of pond preparation for fresh water shrimp
are discussed briefly :

x 1. The bank of the pond should be reconstructed if there is any breach over

& there and excess mud should be removed from the bottom layer of the pond.

100 Agriculture Studies

2. The predator and uncultivable fishes may be eradicated from the pond
either by drying the pond or by using rotenone.

3. Floating and other aquatic weed should be removed from the pond.

4. Lime is applied at the rate of one kg lime per decimal of pond. Lime reduces
acidity of soil and water, removes turbidity of water and also increases
efficiency of fertilizer.

5. The fertilizers should be applied after 7-10 days of lime application. We
already learnt from previous chapter about the amount of fertilizer to be
applied.

Lesson 12: Stocking of prawn fries and management after stocking

Usually 3-5 days after application of fertilizer the colour of the water becomes

light green and then stock should be done. Shelter of Galda prawn should be

established before stocking. The prawns change their sloughs after a sudden
period of time. Usually prawns grow by changing their sloughs. The prawn
becomes weak after changing of sloughs. At that time prawn needs safe shelter.

For this reason dry branches of coconut, palm, date palm and pieces of bamboo

may be fixed in the ground of the pond where shrimp take their shelters in

those places.

The size of prawn fries should be 10-15cm collected from natural sources or

hatchery and released very carefully after adjusting with pond water. Stocking

should not be done during heavy rains or sunshine. In case of single culture

40-120 prawn fries can be released per hectare. In single culture 40-120 prawn

can be relesed per decimal of pond in case of mixed culture 48 prawn, 6 silver

carp, 7 Rui, 7 katla, 1 Grass carp and 1 thi puti for fries can released per decimal
of pond.

Observation of water: Pond water should be observed regularly after stocking

of prawn fries. After 2-3 months of stocking if the colour of pond water

becomes deep green or the prawn shows abnormal behavior then the pond
water should be changed.

Application of fertilizer: Application of fertilizer is necessary to produce natural

feed in the pond. For this reason, 150-200g cow-dung, 3-5g urea, 1-2g TSP and

0.5-lg MOP per decimal should be applied daily. Fertilizer should be applied in

the morning before falling sunlight to the pond. The application of fertilizer x

should be stopped when the colour of water will deep green. “

Agricultural Production 101
Feed management: The growth of fish becomes satisfactory if supplemental
feed are applied along with natural feed. In order to prepare balanced died, rice
polish or wheat bran, oil cakes, fish meal, oyster shell meal, salt and vitamin
mineral premix should be mixed and it may be applied to the pond giving it a
shape of small balls. The feed should be applied to the pond water at the rate
of 3-5 per cent of the stock weight every day. Snail or oyster flesh cutting into
small pieces may be applied in the pond daily in order to enhance the growth of
shrimps. The ball size wet feed should be given in a feed through placed in the
pond. The required and measured whole feed may be divided into two parts
one part may be given in the morning and another in the evening.
List of feed supplementation for shrimp

[sino | __Feedingredions | Amount G6)

ee

4 [omerstetmet | 8

i

[6 | vharinmineratpremie Yas

Work: The students will make group wise discussion on the importance of
natural and supplemental feed for shrimp culture and present in the class.
Prevention of diseases: Shrimps may be attacked with diseases through polluted
environment, stocking of diseased prawn fries, high temperature etc. But
prevention of disease is always better than cure. The chance of disease reduces
if stocking of healthy fries and good management can be ensured. There are
some diseases which can be found during cultivation of shrimp such as black
markings in slough, tail and gill, softness of slough, algae layer in shrimp body,
white muscle and yellow muscle etc. Pond water should be changed as soon as
possible if any disease observed during shrimp culture. In order to remove this
~ problem one kg rock lime per decimal may be applied to the pond.
FS New word: Shelter of shrimp, Fish meal

102 Agriculture Studies
Lesson 13: Collection and selection of fish
Fish is a rapidly perishable product. After harvesting of fish, proper care should
be taken during collection, selection and preservation to reach the fish to the
consumer with maintaining its quality. Decomposition starts rapidly in fresh fish
if care and preservation is not done properly. Careful handling is necessary
during collection and selection of fish so that it cannot be damaged. The
equipments used for handling of fish should be in such type that it may be
cleaned easily and it cannot damage the fish. Damaged, rotted or diseased fish
should be removed rapidly. Fishes should not be kept longer time under direct
exposure of sunlight. In case of large fish, blood should be removed if
necessary. For this reason, flow of water may be applied to the fish. The
chances of bacterial infection will be reduced if we soak the fishes with water
containing bleaching powder. For this, 25-30mg bleaching powder should be
dissolved in 1 liter of water. If bleaching powder is not available, clean tape or
tube-well water may be used. Selection should be done according to species
and size of the fish. Again it can be graded in several grades according to the
quality of fish like-
ene | mon | Mice | ot | te |
condition grade
Bright and Rigid and Deep red | Bright, glittery and lens
el ee
normal colour
Brightless, light | Rigid and Brown or | Colourless eye and Medium or
2 reddish yellow _| elastic pale places inside, eye lid satisfactory
eee eS fa cee
Reddish yellow | Muscle little | Brown and | Colourless eye and low quality
. Be ee
losses opaque, little and
elasticity bloody
Work: Teacher will collect different specimens of the same fish and the
students examine the quality of fish and divide the fishes in different values
or grades according to quality. =
gs

Agricultural Production 103
Generally icing is done for the preservation of fish after harvesting and before
marketing. In our country broken ice of ice block is used for fish preservation.
Equal amount of ice and fish is enough for the preservation of fish in winter and
almost double amount of ice is needed for the preservation of fish in summer
season. In our country fish is transported in traditional system using bamboo or
coarse mat made basket, in this way the basket is to be filled with fish and ice in
several layers and lastly the basket will be tied with the help of bamboo slips or
coarse mat and then placed in wooden box for transportation. Chilling van is
better for fish transportation in long distance. Heat insulator ice box is needed
for fish transportation in relatively nearer distance.
New word: Bleaching powder, infection, elastic
Lesson 14: Care and rearing system of cattle
In order to make livestock production in terms of meat or milk profitable
suitable rearing system should be followed. Generally traditional cattle rearing
system is followed in our country. No definite system is followed here. In
general the farmer rears their animal in cattle shed some times keeps in
tethering or allows the animal for pasturing. So, there are three systems by
which animal can be reared these are
1) Rearing in animal shed, 2) Tethering outside the shed, 3) Rearing in
pastureland
Rearing in cattle shed: Animal can be reared in full confinement by making
modern animal shed. Total number of animal should be kept in mind during
preparation of the cattle shed. Single rowed house may be constructed if the
number of animal is 9 or less and make double rowed shed if the number is 10
or more. During preparation of shed there should have the arrangement for
feed alley, manger, cubicle, gutter and central alley for movement of animal.
Require amount of feed such as green grass, straw, concentrate and water can
be provided to shed. Animal can be reared by this system if there is no sufficient
pastureland or open space for tethering. In this system animal get less light-air
S and deceive from sunlight.

104 Agriculture Studies
Tethering outside the shed: It is an alternative way of rearing if it is not possible
to supply the green grass to the animal shed. In that case animal can be tethered
in road side, homestead garden or field where natural green grass is available.
Owner should keep in mind that the animal should be tethered with peg very
carefully otherwise it will destroy the crop of others field.
Rearing in pastureland: Generally people, in the countries where they have
sufficient agricultural land, cultivate high yielding fodders for their animal.
Typical pasturelands are only present in the developed country. Animal takes
their required amount of grass from pastureland by grazing. In that case
concentrates are provided in animal shed.
aS ee
( IN eae ty) DS wh |Th V (oy A SAN, A ‘
Ni y * SOS aa
Fig: Rearing in animal shed Fig: Tethering outside the shed
ES EI ig a BE BE
Fig: Rearing in pastureland S
g

Agricultural Production 105
Work: Mention the cow rearing system which is followed in your locality
and present the advantages and disadvantages of this system in the class.

Care of animal: Proper care should be taken during rearing of the animal. Care

means overall management of animal. Milk production of dairy cow reduces if

proper care is not taken. Special care should be taken in case of calves, growing
cows and pregnant animal. The following points should be considered for
proper care of animal-

1. Regular cleaning of shed by removing all dung and urine from dwelling place

of animal.

2. Fresh feed should be provided and refusal feed should be removed from the

manger.

3. Ensure sufficient clean water supply regularly.

4. Regular washing of animal to keep the animal clean if necessary brush may

be used during washing.

5. Special care should be taken during breeding, whole pregnancy period and

during delivery of animal.

6. Teasing of dairy cow is strictly prohibited during milking.

7. In case of calf special care should be taken and it should bear in mind that

the calf get required amount of milk from its mother.

New words: Traditional system, care of animal, pregnancy period, delivery

period.

Lesson 15: Ideal animal shed for rearing of cattle

Usually the importance of shelter for animal and bird is similar to human. Cattle

shed should be constructed for higher production and keeping animal in

healthy environment. The comfortable shelter given during feeding, resting is
called animal shed or byre house. It is better for animal health if sometimes the
animals are kept in open space instead of keeping 24 hours in confinement.

Forma-14, Agriculture Studies, 8

106 Agriculture Studies

Selection of suitable place for an ideal animal shed: The farmers should

considered the following factors regarding the preparation of cattle shed for

both family and commercial farming-

1. Shed should be constructed in high place.

2. Should be considered the number of animal.

3. It should be far from dwelling place.

4. The soil should be able to absorb water easily or should have proper drain-
age system in farming area.

5. Surrounding of animal shed will be clean.

6. It should bear in mind that sunlight will be available over cattle shed.

7. Feed and water arrangement for animal should be kept in mind.

8. For commercial farming, transportation and marketing facilities should be
considered during preparation of shed.

If a single or herd of cattle are reared in shed, management will be very easy

and production cost will be reduced.

The advantages of rearing of animal in shed is discussed below-

1. Individual and proper care of animal is possible.

2. We get more milk and meat from animal.

3. Animal can be protected from excess sunlight, rain or storm.

4. It protects from insect and wild animal.

5. Milking can be done easily.

6. Animal become docile by keeping animal in shed.

7. Prevention of disease is possible.

8. Easy to treat the animal.

9. Easy to clean the cattle shed.

10. It becomes easy to manage dung and waste materials.

11. Less manpower is required and production cost is reduced. 2

g
12.

Agricultural Production 107
Usually the size of animal shed depends on the number of animal to be kept. If
the number of animal is 10 or more then doubled rowed house is better but if
the number 9 or less then single rowed is enough.
[I> aay gn OS gee OSE
Figure: Single rowed animal shed Figure: Double rowed animal shed.
Work: The students will divide themselves into groups and write the
importance of ideal animal shed and finally present in the class.
New word: Proper care
Lesson16: Feeding management of cattle
Generally cattle take large amount of roughages for being ruminant. It should
provide green roughage, straw and concentrate as feed. Normally concentrates
are not provided to the indigenous cow due to their low milk production. But
high yielding cross breed cow produces more milk and for this, required
amount of concentrate should be provided along with green grass and straw.
Green grass: Green grass is the main feed item of cow. But we have always short-
age of green grass for animal in our country due to absence of pastureland and
open field. For this reason, we have to cultivate high yielding improved variety of
fodder in fallow land, bank of pond, road side, brink of rail line and edge of
embankments etc. Napier, Para, German, Guinea and indigenous grass can be
% cultivated as improved fodder. Tree leaves (foliage) such as ipil-ipil, mango tree
& leaves, banana leaves, jackfruit tree leaves, water hyacinth can be fed to the

108 Agriculture Studies
animal instead of green grass. Without thrown away, garbage of kitchen
vegetables and covering of fruits can also be provided as feed to the animal. 3-4
kg of green grass per 100 kg body weight should be provided to the improved or
cross breed dairy cow. So, daily 12-15 kg green grass should be supplied to the
cattle according to their weight.
Straw: In our country cattle cannot be reared only with green grass. So rice
straw should be supplied along with green grass. 1 kg of rice straw per 100 kg
body weight should be supplied to the improved or cross breed dairy cow. So,
daily 3-5 kg rice straw should be supplied to the cattle according to their
weight. If we soak the rice straw in water after cutting them to soften then it
will be advantageous to the animal during ingestion and digestion. Instead of
individual feeding straw should be supplied by mixing with oil cakes, bran
spume of boiled rice and 200- 300g molasses. This mixed feed improves cattle
health and increases milk production of dairy cow.
Concentrated feed: Grains and their byproducts are used as concentrated feed
for livestock. The amount of concentrated feed supplied to the dairy cow daily
should be divided into two parts, supply one part in the morning another in the
evening before milking. 2 kg concentrate is supplied for first 3 liter of milk
production and another ikg concentrate should be supplied for next every 3
liters of milk production.
Work: How much concentrated feed will be required if a Jersey cow produce
12 liters of milk daily? Calculate individually and present in the class.
The lists of concentrated feed given below:
N

Agricultural Production 109
Maize Oil cake
Bone meal Broken wheat
Mineral salt: 100-120 g salt and 50-60 g bone meal should be supplied toa
dairy cow regularly.
Water: High yielding dairy cow can take up to 40 liters of water daily. So, suffi-
cient drinking water should be supplied regularly.
New words: Roughage feed, concentrated feed, Cross breed cow, molasses.
Lesson 17: Diseases of cattle
Cattle helps us lot. But cattle may attack many diseases as human. The milk and
meat production and work ability reduces in diseased animal. Many animals
may die due to lack of proper care and treatment. So, the farmers should have
general knowledge about diseases of animal. Disease and its prevention will be
discussed in this lesson.
Disease: Any deviation from normal health is called disease. Diseased animal
will take less feed. The diseased animal will show drowsiness. Difficulties may
be in urine and stool passing. In many cases temperature of animal increases
and the hair may straight over skin. The diseases of animal can be divided into
four groups, such as-
a) Contagious diseases z :
b) Parasitic diseases ad vd eo
c) Mal-nutritional diseases ~~ es :
co d) Other diseases °
S a Figure: A sick cattle

110 Agriculture Studies
A. Contagious diseases: The diseases which are transmitted from diseased
animals to healthy animals are called contagious diseases. These diseases are
caused by bacteria and virus. Contagious diseases are more dangerous than
others. Contagious diseases which are caused by viruses are more harmful such
as foot and mouth disease, rabies, cowpox etc. Important contagious diseases
caused by bacteria are black quarter, anthrax, swelling of udder, calf
pneumonia, diphtheria etc.
Foot and Mouth Disease: All pair hoofed animals can be affected by Foot and
Mouth Disease. It is a contagious viral disease. Normal animals are
affected through saliva, feed and air. | W
Symptoms: Papules are found in hoof, mouth and (ply, PRN
in tongue. Papules turned into abscess and saliva WQ iy eso
secrets from mouth. Temperature increased and i aa La nie
‘iH we SY
loss of appetite. Animals become weak gradually. Eb ANY il
Sometimes death occurs. Death rate of calves or a
young animals is high. Fig : Foot and mouth disease
Black Quarter: This disease affects the animal at six months to two years of age.
It is a bacterial contagious disease. This disease spreads through wound and
feces.
Symptoms: Black Quarter affected animals show the following symptoms.
1. Shows lameness.
2. Swelling found in different region of body and feels pain.
3. Swelled region become rotten and affected animal die within few hours.
4. Infected area makes a kind of sound when pressed.
5. Body temperature rises upto 104-105° F.
Anthrax: Anthrax is a contagious disease caused by bactera.
co
Ss
a

Agricultural Production 111

Symptoms: Symptoms of Anthrax disease are as follows:

1. Anthrax affected animals fallen
down to earth fi. GE =

2. Body temperature increases upto See
104-105°F and hair becomes Sita Will ila WE (Mees
straitght. Se a

: ; ; Vfiwke © Z

3. Blood is seen in natural openings 4S
(Mouth, nose and anus) of dead Fig ainthrasaffected cow:
animal.

B. Parasitic diseases: The small creature which takes shelter in large animal

body is called parasite. They live and take nutrition from host body and also

bred here. Parasites are classified into two groups such as-

i) Ectoparasites: Such as lice, mosquito, fly, tick, mite etc. They live over the
skin of host and do harm by sucking the host blood.

ii) Endoparasites: They live inside the animal body and usually they are known
as worm. Worms looks like as leaf, tape or round this is why they are known
as flat worm, tape worm and round worm. They take their nutrition from
host body and the animal become diseased or weak.

C. Mal-nutritional disease: The diseases may occur in livestock due to

deficiency of any of basic nutrients such as protein, carbohydrate, fat, vitamin,

mineral and water is known as mal-nutritional disease. The requirement of
vitamins and minerals in human and animal body is lower than other nutrients.

Deficiency of these two elements is mainly responsible for different

mal-nutritional disease such as- lowering vision power, retarded growth,

roughness of skin, late risen of tooth, bowness of bone, milk fever etc.

D. Other diseases: Other diseases like flatulence, diarrhea and indigestion etc.

are generally caused by irregular feeding, providing stale or rotten feed and

polluted water. Special attention regarding this is necessary during supplying
feed to the calves
Work: The students will list out the causes of disease group wise and present in
the class.
S New words: Contagious diseases, flat worm, tape worm and round worm.

112 Agriculture Studies
Lesson 18: Disease management of cattle
Disease management is very important for a farm. Diseases of animal can be
managed through prevention and control. Measures that are taken to avoid
diseases in a farm are called preventive measures. After spreading of disease in
a farm treatments and other measures may be taken for controlling of diseases.
Ways of prevention of disease of animals: There is no alternative of hygienic
management to keep the animals in healthy and productive. There is a proverb
in medical science "prevention is better than cure". So, there should have ade-
quate preventive measures of diseases in the farm to maintain continuity of
production. The preventive measures that have to be taken in a farm given
below are-
1. Regular cleaning of cattle shed and surrounding of shed and keep them dry.
2. Prevent entry of dog, cat and other wild animal to the farm.
3. Human entrance should be controlled.
4. Regular vaccination of diseases.
5. Timely administration of anthelmintics to control parasitic worms.
6. Supply balanced diet to the animal
7. Cleaning of feed and water through regularly .
8. Supply fresh feed and clean water to the animal.
9. Separate the animals with different age if possible.
10. Prevent animal from heavy hot and cold environment.

animal farms and assign students individual work or group work.
Measures have to do after spreading of disease: If there is any disease seen in
animal control measures should have to be taken without being afraid. The
following points should be followed during spreading of disease -
1. If any symptom of disease is seen in the animals sick animal should be

kept separately from healthy group.

2. Treatment of diseased animal. eo
3. Observation of diseased animal in separate house. S

Agricultural Production 113
4. Examine blood, feces and urine of sick animal if necessary.
5. Do not market the diseased animal.
Work: The students will divide themselves in groups and find out the measures
to be taken for prevention of disease and group wise submit to the teacher.
New words: Contagious diseases, flat worm, tape worm and round worm.
Lesson 19: Collection and selection of egg
Egg is a fragile and perishable product. Two types of egg are produced in home
or in farm. Eggs that are used for chick production are called hatching egg and
that are used for consumption are called table egg. Cock is required for the
production of hatching egg but it is not required for the production of table egg.
Collection of egg: After laying of egg, it should be collected, selected and
preserved immediately. Hens that lay eggs in cages can not break the egg and
eggs remain clean. Hens that are reared on the floor lay eggs in the litter instead
of laying box. Sometimes it becomes a habit of these hens. Eggs on litter
become dirty and difficult to clean. Besides this, due to thin shell there is a pos-
sibility of breakage of eggs on the floor. Another problem of laying eggs on the
floor is consumption of egg by hens itself. If once it starts it becomes a vice. Egg
of hen should be collected twice a day. Egg should be collected at 12.00 pm and
4.00 pm. But egg of duck should be collected once a day. Because, duck lay eggs
within 9.00 am in the morning.
Apx--SES YAO
WSR OO Valen en
SISTA LE 2 E 3 es
Warr A hy BA Joe SIS
NSE a re te Anca an eae,
Fig: Collected eggs in a basket Fig: Selected eggs in a tray
Forma-15, Agriculture Studies, 8

114 Agriculture Studies
Selection of egg: Selection of egg is done after collection. For hatching egg,
extra large, tiny size egg, round shape egg and long shape egg should be
discarded. Dirty egg, cracked and thin shelled eggs are not selected for hatching
purpose. Table egg can be washed with water if it is dirty. After collection of
table and hatching egg it should be kept in plastic tray. When eggs are kept in
the tray, large end of the egg should be kept in up and small end down. After
that eggs are kept in a cool place. Hatching egg should be stored at 50-55°F
(10-12°C) temperature to prevent it from spoiled. Table egg can be stored in
earthen pot or by dipping in oil for long time. But the hatching egg can be
stored up to 3-5 days at summer and up to 7 days at winter.
Work: Teacher will show a video on egg collection and selection or supply
eggs to students. Students will be asked to write the characteristics of good
quality egg and present in the classroom.
Grading of egg during selection: Eggs are sold as hali (4 pieces) or in dozen in
our country. Eggs are not sold on weight basis in the market. Large size egg con-
tains more nutrients and that’s why egg should be sold on weight basis. During
selection of egg, it is categorized according to size and weight in the following
way:
Grading list of Egg (Chicken)
‘SeratNo[ Sie | Weight ofan as om |
1 | aralage | Morethansogm |
3 | Mesim [ae s2am |
seat atom
New words: Hatching egg, table egg, litter
S

Agricultural Production 115
Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. Which is the main feed of cattle?
a. Straw b. Green grass
c. Concentrated feed c. Herbs
2. What may be controlled by spraying water in the mushroom culture
house?
i. Humidity
ii. Temperature
iii. Carbon dioxide
Which is correct?
a. i. b. ii.
c. iandii d. ii and iii
3. In which fruit groups’ formation of sugar from carbohydrate after harvest
is stopped?
a. Banana, lemon, litchi b. Wood apple, banana, grapes
c. Papaya, grapes, pumelo d. Grapes, litchi, lemon
Read the following paragraph and answer the question no. 4 and 5.
Mr. Hafiz cultivated mixed carps in a pond measuring 40 decimal of 1 meter
water depth in front of his house. But he could not harvest expected yield
though he had taken appropriate measures.
o9
Ss
XN

116 Agriculture Studies
4. How many numbers of fries of 70-10 cm length Mr. Hafiz can release in his
pond?
a. 2000 b. 2100
c. 2200 d. 2300
5. What is the cause of not getting the expected production from the pond of
Mr. Hafiz?
i. Low production of natural feed
ii. Water quality was not good
iii. Area of the pond was large
Which is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iii
c. iiand iii c. i, fiand iii
6. What is the name of packaged seed of mushroom culture?
a. Spawn b. Spot
c. Milky d. Button
Creative questions
1.
GREE E. Es
<a Vegetable garden Pies : ~
ol bay eats L ABE soe Y)
i y : So Cowshed // es: seat os
“as _ a ¥ . _ mk L-  PFERES wa A
W. W. Tree
2
Fig: 1. Fig: 2. s

Agricultural Production 117

a) What is mixed culture?

b) Explain one advantage of mixed culture of fish.

c) Which one pond in the picture above is suitable for mixed culture of
fish, explain the causes.

d) Whether the two ponds of the picture are equally profitable? Show
points in favour of your answer.

2. Mr. Amal established one dairy farm with 5 crossbreed cows after taking
training from youth development programme. He was not getting expected
milk after taking sufficient care of the cows. In this situation he took the
advice of Livestock Officer on healthy rearing methods and implemented it.
After that each cow is now giving 12 liter milk every day. Now he is a
successful dairy farmer.

a) Which breed of cow eats more feed?
b) Why is the cowshed to be made on high land? Explain.
c) Calculate how much concentrated feed is required for each cow of Mr.
Amal per day?
d) What were the steps that Mr. Amal took for which milk production of his
cows reached the expected level? Make an analysis.
2
Ss
N

Chapter Six
Forestry
Agro forestry is an age old and traditional land use system. In recent years this system
is known as agricultural science and agricultural technology. Agro forestry is a
combined production system of agricultural crops and forest trees, where a farmer can
get higher production and benefit by using land properly. This forestry system is also
environmentally friendly. It is obligatory to increase forestry produces in planned way
in the whole country. For this we need enough knowledge and skill about agriculture
and social forestry. We need to be aware of the importance of this type of forestry. We
need to increase forestry by direct participation of this forestation to keep the
environment sustainable for livings. In this chapter you can understand and improve
your skills about nursery preparation and its contribution. Above all, you can identify
the importance and problems of agriculture and social forestry and ways to solve
them. You can also prepare the social forestry and agro forestry model; can plantation
trees in the edge of roads and embankments.
Ce 3 Ed. ek Tree
St Se oul LS f Animal
Animal a JI EEE re =
food seg RE ee “e

PSS =]BSse=sSaS=f

SBE Es WOT, BSP ADS.

ae she ww \ ; < Dy Sek Agricultural

DBR g SB %e SN At 1M ty SOx crops

ORES SEN ON iu, Soe

Fig: Agro forestry

After reading this Lesson we can-
e explain the techniques of nursery preparation in the field of agriculture.
© prepare the seedlings in the poly bag.
* explain the importance of agro forestry. ~
e explain to solve the problems of agro forestry. s

Forestry 119
e draw the model of social forestry and agro forestry.
e describe the model of social forestry and agro forestry.
e explain the necessity of mixed tree plantation.
e describe the methods of tree plantation in the edge of roads and
embankments.
Lesson 1: Nursery and nursery in the agriculture
Nursery is a centre of seedling production where seedlings are produced and
taken care of until transplantation in the main field. You need practical
experience and efficiency about nursery. For this visit a nursery with your
teacher in available time. Watch video of nursery in your classroom. If video of
nursery is not available, observe nursery picture in the chart. Answer the
questions of your teacher about nursery.
_ i ee —
Nursing of seedling a aca a tee
in the nursery (S, Se DISSE
(watering by water cane) : fos ese , TREE
pee get See eee Seedling in
Een Pt Bot Seg aaa eS ae the polybag
Sass Be an aed 7S ae
a on aye gi oe ie diy
Fig: Permanent nursery
The forests produces are at in the risk of destroy due to meeting demand of
ever increasing population. For this the environment is going out of habitation.
To escape from this danger effect of increasing population, we need to protect
co trees and start afforestation. We need healthy seedlings for any kind of
& afforestation. For this we usually depend on nursery.

120 Agriculture Studies

Types of nursery

1. Depending on constancy nursery is two types, like-

(a) Permanent nursery (b) Temporary nursery

A. Permanent nursery: The nursery in which seedlings are produced year after

year is called permanent nursery. The communication facility of this nursery is

well. Permanent nurseries have in both government and non-government

sectors. Many kind of improved seedlings are distributed from permanent

nursery every year.

B. Temporary nursery: Department of Roads and Highways transplant

seedlings of different trees in both sides of new roads. For this temporary

nursery is to be established. Where woodlots or massive afforestation is being

raised, temporary nursery is constructing there which reduce the transport

cost of seedlings. Healthy and vigorous seedling is got easily.

2. Depending on medium, nursery is two types-

a) Polybag nursery, b) Bed nursery

A. Polybag nursery: Seedlings of different plants are grown and taken care of in

the polybag is called polybag nursery. Polybag seedlings are transported easily

in the safe place. As a result they may be kept unaffected at the time of natural

calamity.

B. Bed nursery: When seeds are directly sown in the seed bed of nursery and

produce seedlings is called bed nursery. Sometimes, seeds are sown in the nurs-

ery bed and shift them in the polybag after germination. Some other nurseries

are: home based nursery, species based nursery and use based nursery.

Work-1: Complete the nursery related following maps in two poster papers in
groups. %

S
AQ

Forestry 121
Rain tree Timber tree producing
nursery
Species Use
based nursery based nursery

Necessity of nursery in the field of agriculture

1. Healthy, vigorous and different age group seedlings are available in the
nursery for transplantation.

2. It is easy to take care of seedling in the nursery.

3. Nursery is the best place for seedling production of the species of garjan,
telsur, shal trees, because, the seeds of these timber trees are to be
kept in germination within 24 hours after collection.

4. It is necessary to germinate seeds of jack-fruit, champa etc. immediately
after collection of seeds from fruit; otherwise, the germination per cent of
these seeds will be drastically reduced. Nursery is necessary to produce
seedlings of these trees.

5. Nursery is the appropriate place for production of seedlings with less labour
and capital.

6. Seedling distribution and marketing is easier.

Work-2: Discuss in groups and list down the importance of nursery.

Lesson 2: Techniques of preparation of nursery

Proper planning is the first step for the preparation of nursery. Depending on

some rules and characteristics, this planning should be done. For the

Forma-16, Agriculture Studies, 8

122 Agriculture Studies
establishment of a permanent nursery, the following points should be kept in mind:
1. Site selection 7. Roads and paths
2. Measurement of site 8. Management of irrigation
3. Fencing 9. Management of drainage
4. Land development 10. Nursery block
5. Office and living space 11. Nursery bed
6. Electrification 12. Visitors path
The soils of the selected nursery site should be fertile and sandy-loam. The
nursery place should be in high, leveled with proper sunlight and aeration.
Irrigation facility should be well managed. Good communication facility would
be available for goods and seedling transportation.
The following number of scedlings to be transplanted in one square metere
(10.75 sq.ft) shed bed or pot bed-
10cm °
. Number of seedlin:
= Size of the polybag per polybag 8
£ 15emx10cm 65
5 oan
ao 18cmx 12cm 45
25cmx 15cm 26
Fig: Polybag
Distance of seedlings | Number of seedlings per square
in seed bed meter (10.75 ft”)
Nursery block, bed and visitor's road
Divide the area of nursery into some blocks where seedlings are produced.
Prepare some beds into east-west direction in each block. Keep 25 cm area in
between two beds. Keep visitors and sub-visitors road as possible in different
blocks. The main visitor's road should be 2-3 m and sub-visitor's road shouldbe &

Forestry 123
1-2 m wide. The main visitor's road should be made in such way that the
vehicles might run easily. It is kept in mind that the seedling trolleys might move
easily along the sub-visitor's road.
——————> Road «— Sees
| Cds Homestead
[|
en} | g
|
Ld
| VX Z
-
—_—_—— Road Road «——_____——+
Le
| a
Cd a 2
hs 3 C
| | Goes i
)}| Do [oe
_=—
VE BP BEE Beye BY
Road ,
Fig: Planning of nursery (Model)
Work: Draw a permanent nursery plan in poster paper in groups and
present in the classroom.
Lesson 3: Prepare seedlings in polybag
Procedure of classroom group preparation and direction of seed sowing into
~ polybag by hand and preparation of seedling
S$ 1. Divide students into possible different groups and select group leader.

124 Agriculture Studies

2. Each group leader should collect necessary supplies for preparation of
seedlings.

3. Fill up a polybag by each group with soil mixtures following the recommended
procedure.

4. Sow seed into polybag and observe.

5. Ask the teacher when the group report of seedling preparation procedure
would be submitted.

6. Complete this part of reading in the field.

Subject: Seed sowing in the poly bag and preparation of seedling

Materials: Seed, loam soil, cow dung, compost, poly bag measuring 15 cm x 10

cm, watering cane.

Working procedure:

1. Crush the soils.

2. Mix 3/4 of soils with 1/4 cow dung or compost together.

3. Prepare eight holes in two rows including one at lower side of poly bag.

4. Pour soils gently into poly bag.

5. Arrange the poly bags under shady and plain place.

6. Prepare two holes on the top of the soils in polybag using finger. Put one
seed in each hole.

7. Cover the seeds with fine soils. Spray water lightly with watering cane.

8. Write down the date of seed sowing on the practical note book.

9. Give water into polybag using watering cane everyday morning and
afternoon.

10. Write down the date of germination in the note book.

11. Observe the seedling up to 15 cm long.

12. Write all the reports of this experiment in your practical note book.

Prepare working procedure and submit it to the teacher. S

Forestry 125
Pictures of procedures of seedling preparation in poly bag.
sieve @K Soil
3 i A chenaet ea Lap
\ ie chy
Fig: Sieving of soil particle for polybag Fig: Filling soil in polybag
_—_ Fine soil - ——— Plant
7 eS Seed OS ete de
Fig: Sowing seed in polybag Fig: Plant implantation in polybag
trp—_--______&,
Days Capstitct to I ofl y-
WAC OVA ey ae Si ke
\csa2222 = ans SOFT arn
Fig: Method of arrangement of Fig: Bamboo shed over the poly
Polybag in the bed of nursery bag bed of nursery
2
=~
S
N

126 Agriculture Studies
Work: Students will carefully observe the procedure of seedling prepara-
tion in polybags and describe the procedure of filling soil in polybags and
sowing seeds.

Lesson 4: Importance of agro forestry

Agro forestry is a type of land production management system. Afforestation

may achieve by this system in a planned way. Trees, crops, livestock's and fishes

are grown sequentially by this system in a same land. One component of this
system may create limited or no pressure on the performance of other
components. All the components collectively enrich the environment. This type
of forestry is economically profitable. Diversified land use might possible by this
forestry.
Work:
(1) Observe the picture supplied by teacher and say why it is called agro
forestry?
(2) Discuss in groups and say why agro forestry is important.
XY oF" 4
ais f Bias Tree
£9 CHE, | ~PP@
OES, NM AES ae AN Sy VV
A: U7, hl 5 awl ZZ ws "EO AVL. Fruit cultivati
Aa 1h tlie Oe ONE". Ds NEIMAN AOI” uit cultivation
MW EMA GA, ene
a eee “ Ss a te _—
ee Es ig REIN NNN
Se ee Se Ae = tt — ay a . ae
= a = he ot = = Exe > con 7 Fish cultivation
Fig: Model of combined production system of trees, crops and fishes. §

Forestry 127
Ever increasing population is an important problem in our national life. Our
land is limited. This limited land is not capable of meeting the demand of this
huge population. So, the afforestation will not be limited only within forest
areas. It is now time demand to accept the agro forestry as modern production
technology. Agro forestry is necessary to expand in farmland, edges of roads
and embankments, in and around homesteads and institutional premises. For
this a revolution of sustainable and massive agro forestry system should
necessary be taken place around the country.
Agro forestry can play an important role to meet up diversified problem in our
life. Check out the following subjects with your own list and discuss -
Importance of agro forestry
1. Agro forestry can help to resolve the demand of food.
2. It facilitates for making house material and furniture.
3. It solves the fuel wood crisis.
4. Can cultivate different crops and trees in the same land.
5. Increase income and employment opportunity and reduce poverty.
6. Local material can be used.
7. Reduce soil erosion and improve soil fertility.
8. Environment becomes suitable for living for the living creatures.
9. Protect from natural calamity.
10. Create food and habitat for animals and birds.
11. Maximize the rainfall.
12. Protect from drought, flood and land slides.

2 Above all, agro forestry can begin the revolutionary change in the production

& system and economic growth of rural community.

128 Agriculture Studies
Lesson 5: Problems of agro forestry and its solution :
Agro forestry is a land use system, where-
1. Trees are deliberately grown with crops and/or animals in a same land
management unit.
2. Herbaceous crops are grown together with trees.
3. Improved production and assistance may obtain from agro forestry
rather than sole agriculture and forest.
Work -1: Problem of agro forestry and solution.
Wi PAR crop orc
ee a
Bur x y ay ee: Tree
SS OND nS . Be —— Animal
Animal = ys, LEE a
food cai Yn er a ae ot. ibe P.
CA GEE We Se
Gae8 a Ne Mn Ny & @ Ew Agricultural
WD OO
ORES D E SN WH ONG crops
*Gee 6 BL WW Vi, SSS
1A a fe eo WA 4 TEN ND
Fig: Agro forestry
Problem of agro forestry
Agro forestry is known to be a profitable technology all over the world in the
recent years. But there are huge problems in agro forestry. Now check the ,,
S
N

Forestry 129

following problems and solution of agro forestry with your opened list-

1. The necessary land for agro forestry is reducing.

2. The fertility of land is decreasing because of the use of chemical fertilizer and
pesticide.

3. The production is diminishing by the attack of insect-pest.

4. Lack of quality seed and fertilizer .

5. Problem with maintenance of agro forestry.

6. Lack of irrigation during the dry season.

7. Lack of preservation facilities of productive goods.

8. Products cannot be supplied properly due to weak communication system.
So, the products are perished and the farmers become bound to sell their
products at a cheaper rate.

9. Lack of experience and efficiency of farmer about agro forestry.
10. Lack of agro-based industry.
11. Lack of preservation facilities of agricultural phoducts for rural area.
Solving the problems of agro forestry
Our land is limited. It is now time demand to accept the agro forestry as
modern production technology. To expand the cultivable land where Social
forestry is being introduced, this land needed to be brought under agro
forestry. The farmers have to follow the crop rotation system and increase the
use of organic fertilizer. So that the fertility. of the land improves. By using light
trap, handmade trap, neem etc control the harmful pest. If the production is
damaged by natural disaster the Government will take responsibilites to
minimize the loss of farmer steps should be taken so that the farmers get the
actual price of their products. The Government has to take necessary step to
train up the farmer about agro forestry. The communication system should be
developed all over the country. Beside this, sufficient number of cold storage
have to be established to preserve the agri product.

Forma-17, Agriculture Studies, 8

130 Agriculture Studies
The Government, Non Government organization, N G O, concern authoriety
should take necessary steps to solve the problem of agro forestry.
Observe carefully the model of agro forestry. Express your own opinion about
different aspects of agro forestry. Have you witnessed agro forestry pracically?
Tell about the characteristics of agro forestry if you have seen. Why is agro
forestry profitable? Prepare a list of some obstacles of agro forestry in our
country. Discuss in groups and find out the solutions to the problems.
Lesson 6: Description of the model of social aforestation
Social forest
The people of a community create this forestry with their own attempt for
making environmental-friendly atmosphere. This type of forestry can be
created in the fallow lands of homesteads, institutions, roads and
embankments, coastal areas, hilly areas etc.
Model of social forestry in roads and embankments
In Bangladesh, one or two row model of tree plantation are observed on the
sides of roads and embankments. The number of rows depends on the slopes
of roads and embankments.
One-row model
Trees are planted along the road side following this model when the roads are
narrow. Same distance is maintained between trees.
Two-row model
This model is followed if the sides of the road and embankment are spacious. It
is mandatory to follow accurate model.

S

Forestry 131

Plantation of trees at the edges of road

Techniques of tree plantation: There are inadequate spaces at the edges of

road. So, trees are planted following narrow line. Trees are planted maintaining

2m x 2m distance at hilly areas in afforestation program.

Points to be considered during selection of trees

Trees containing little and narrow leaves are to be planted at the edges of

road and embankment. Multilayered agro forestry model is good for roadside

plantation. For this a shrub layer of different plants are necessary under the
tree. Otherwise light or bush shaped trees are necessary to select.

Techniques of tree plantation

1. One row of tree is planted by the side of road which is restricted for
pedestrians walk. Sometimes more than one row of trees might be
planted depending on place and availability of land. If two rows of trees
are planted, the distance from tree to tree will be 1.5-2.5 m.

2. Trees are planted in line on the slopes of embankment. The second row will
start from a place when inthe middle of two plants of the first row maintaing
the same distance between trees in first row.

3. One row of trees is planted at the downward of road. At the end of slope
of roads, mander, jarul, hijol etc. trees are planted.

4. The second row of plants will start from the middle position between first

two plant of the first row. So, if the plants are planted keeping two metre of

distance, the actual distance of the plants will be 2 metrex 1 metere.

Resultantly, the soil will be more resistant to erosion and the embankment

will not collapse.

Tree selection

1. It is not wise to plant dicotyledonous and heavy branched trees at both the

29 sides of embankment. Because if the trees are high enough, it may breakdown
ES by heavy wind flow and may increase soil erosion beneath the tree.

132 Agriculture Studies

2. It is wise to select trees which spread its root around vast areas. Examples
are coconut, betelnut etc. monocotyledonous trees. Spreading roots of
these trees reduce soil erosion.

3. The trees which are used for fodder purpose are to be selected for
plantation at the sides of embankment. Because these embankments
might be used for the shelter of domestic animals at the time of severe
flood.

Lesson 7: Description of tree plantation method along
roadsides and embankments
Line afforestation method
In this method generally one, two or three rows of trees are planted in the
edges of road and embankment sides. This method is called line afforestation
method. Line afforestation or strip afforestation is an important production
technology of social forestry. Sissoo, akashmoni, arjun, mehogony, jarul, siris,
rain tree, sonalu, krishnachura, neem etc. trees are planted in line
afforestation method. Other than Forest Department, different NGOs are
creating line afforestation in the vast areas of the country with the help of the
programme of FAO and by their own activities. The programme of line
afforestation in the name of Thana afforestation and Nursery Development
project are on-going with the participation of local people since 1990. The
three traditional line afforestation methods are:

Model-1. Afforestation in the big roads, railways and embankments

Model-2. Afforestation in the approach roads and village roads

Model-3. Afforestation in the highways and high railways

5

Forestry 133

Description of Model-1

1. The line of arhar plant will be below 30 cm away from the edge of
roadside/embankment.

2. The first line of tree seedlings will be planted 30 cm away from arhar line at
downward slope where seedling distance will be 2 m.

3. The second line of tree seedlings will be 1.5-2.5 m away from first line
(depending on width of slope) where seedling distance will be 2 m.

4. At the end of the slope of roads/embankment, more than one rows of
dhaincha will be sown.

5. If the width of slope of roads/embankment is more than 3 m, tree
seedlings are planted maintaining three or more rows.

6. A hole of measuring 30 cm x 30 cm x 30 cm will be dug. In each whole 1 kg
of cowdung, 25 gm of TSP and 25 gm of MOP will be incorporated with
the soil.

7. In total 1600 seedlings are planted in one kilometer length road under this
model.

Selection of species

In the first line, decorative, shadowy and timber tree seedlings like-mehogony,

raintree, sissoo, segun, mango, jack-fruit, date palm, palmyra palm etc. are

planted. First growing fuel and pole tree seedlings, for example- akashmoni,
arjun, babla, sissoo, ipil-ipil, raintree etc. are planted in the second line.

2

Ss

N

134 Agriculture Studies
=== Last edge of Road
; } 30cm
; Rows of Arhar tree
} 30cm
Line of tree seed ling
} 30cm
Rows of Dhaincha
AA si Pl Urict
—-4t---—1-— -—-- SER errs —— Rows of Arhar tree
Ss a as es es a
a ee ee --- - ode Line of tree seed ling
, 30cm
-- # --— Soe Cae Me sf Rows of Dhaincha
Fig: Model of one row tree plantation in the edges of roadsides/embankments.
; Last edge of Road
} 30cm
: ‘ Rows of Arhar tree
30cm
First line of tree seedling
1.5-2.5m
2nd line of the seedling
' , } 30cm
—_ Rows of Dhaincha
i A
“—— “—— “— —— a 7a") Rows of Arhar tree
-——S - -- <—— -—— —, First line of tree seedling
$ee se ee)
ae ie ett beat ol ae —, 2nd line of the seedling
ais — one mae & § = Rows of Dhaincha ®
=
Fig: Model of two row tree plantation method in the edges of roads/embankments. S

Forestry 135
Work: Draw a two row model of roads/embankments afforestation in
groups on the poster paper and present.

Lesson 8: Tree plantation in the roads/embankments or

school premises.

Site selection:

The edges of roads and embankments or premises of schools and its

surrounding places

Necessary materials:

1. Spade, khunti, shabol, knife, cowdung, chemical fertilizers etc.

2. Practical note book, pencil, pen, rubber, eraser, scale etc.

Working procedure:

1. If the afforestation area is the premises of school, pruned the branches of
big trees near the planting places. No need to cut branches of trees if the
places are near the road/embankment side.

2. Collect the vigorous seedlings of selected trees.

3. Dug a hole maintaining appropriate measurement.

4. Mix cowdung and chemical fertilizer with the soils of hole and left it 15
days by the side of hole.

5. Put the mixed soils into the hole again.

6. Dug a hole measuring the area of mud bole containing seedling.

oo
S

136 Agriculture Studies
7. Remove the polythene from mud bole with knife.
8. Place the mud bole of seedling into the hole, put soils and press it until
compact.
9. Now pour water to the hole.
10. Write down the whole procedure in your practical note book. Bring it to
your teacher and take signature.
Importance of tree plantation in road and embankment sides
1. Protect the roads and embankments from soil erosion.
2. Produce animal food.
3. Greening of roads and embankment sides.
4. Increase national production and income.
5. Create employment opportunities.
6. Make habitat for birds and insects.
7. Keep the environment cool and create favorable weather for rain.
8. Conserve the environment.
Work: Make poster paper in groups mentioning the necessity of
afforestation in the roads and embankment sides and demonstrate it in the
class.

. . . We will plant trees in the

We will protect roads and We ; will protect soil both sides of road and

embankments by tree erosion by tree plantation bank d

plantation. in the sides of road. em alt mentvand protect
environment.

Model poster-1 Model poster-2 Model poster-3
Lesson 9: Preparation of agro forestry model and its
description
Agro forestry is a system where trees, crops and livestock's are deliberately |
grown in a same piece of land. This system does not harper the production $

Forestry 137
of other components. It has no harmful effect on environment rather than
improve it. This system is economically profitable. There are many possible
scopes of agro forestry in Bangladesh. These are - homesteads, fallow lands
around homesteads, crop lands, fallow and marginal lands, eroded and newly
afforested lands, road, railway, and embankments sides, banks of ponds and
small waterways and coastal areas.

Points to be considered during preparation of agro forestry models/pictures
for the selected areas in a local community:

1. Status of land

2. Social and economic conditions

3. Characteristics of soil

4. Demand of farmers

Description of some prospective agro forestry model/pictures:
1. Trees and crops cultivation in agricultural land: Agricultural crops are
grown with trees sequentially in a same piece of land.

A. Trees are planted maintaining specific rows comparatively in low land
and agricultural crops are grown in between vacant spaces of rows of
trees.

Forma-18, Agriculture Studies, 8

i ee
SKE KE EE
enV EV eve
RVG Kav¢e
PY 2 KEE

Forestry 139
B- Trees are planted making rows around the agricultural crops near ails.
Crops Rows 1 trees
§2 SRS? SP SP? FP
cae 0 ie Oe Oe Os
Se AR AA AA ae
ge” WA AY S&P
Fig: Boundary plantation in the crop field
C. In this model, farmers plant trees in the crop field in a haphazard manner.
Crops Trees
~ Fig: Scattered plantation in the crop field

140 Agriculture Studies
2. Alley cropping: Alley cropping is a promising production system among
various agroforestry models. In this system, crops are grown between hedge
rows of planted legume trees or shrubs at a certain distance.
Rows of crops Rows of trees
SP LE LPPLES ET
PLP PLL OF
PP LVVER VET
phbehn ma
J 2 y bs
SP SPM NN PP NAN SP
a DOLE
Na Me VERT
Fig: Alley cropping
3. Crops, trees and livestock's (Agro silvopasture): In this system, crops are
grown in a same piece of land with trees and animals.
Sai TREN NR dw Oe, tg)
Ae CMON WINE ates
tt SS % pi
REL A & WB, Sa Animals
be Fa “at has by MA aX, WOE ot g
BE aoe Pitts uy Wee Nt ee SAN uy
AEN oo ez i
te @ Vink 0 ‘ih Ce Bs ee Agricultural crops
AeA Wh“ 2— Animal food
ERE & BNE Ct, SRR NA eg
Fig: Agro silvopastoral system s

Forestr
¥ 141
4. Fisheries, trees and crops (Aqua-horticulture): In this system, vine type
vegetables are grown on the scaffold at the slope of ponds along with fishery.
Aquatic plants are cultivated at the edges of water and fruit trees are planted at
the banks of ponds.
VA
ZN E> ere dal Trees
aA, Se
i \ ae 2 V7 aaa 4 AAS Crops
My oat Wee SD) ee ens Vegetables
Fig: Aquahorticultural system
5. Homestead agroforestry: It is an unique example of agrosilvopastoral
system where different shade loving and shade tolerant vegetables, other
food crops are grown along with livestock, poultry as well as various species
of fruit, fuel, fodder and timber trees.
a oe as WP» a “ gy Fl
Home State“ Gee Baas eee — Jackfruit tree
DE ke [Eee eee”
Kgs aay F LOO®D QO #74 — Vegetables
ern ep | & Seeceueg Garden
were - ‘ | SPae AP BH Se We Nad
iS Fig: Homestead agroforestry
8

142 Agriculture Studies
Work: Draw a model in groups of agroforestry system in the poster paper
that is possible to implement in your locality and present.

Lesson 10: Necessity of mixed-tree plantation
Cultivation of mixed-tree
Cultivation of mixed-tree is one kind of agro forestry system. Under this
afforestation method, various types of trees are grown together. Many kinds
of fruit trees, forest trees and medicinal plants are grown combindly in a same
piece of land in this system. Sometimes, a variety of agricultural crops are
grown together with these trees. Livestock's and fishes are also cultivated
with mixed-tree plantation. Mixed-trees are possible to cultivate in and
around homesteads, boundary of play ground, premises of schools and other
institutions, in the crop fields, banks of river, bills, ponds etc.

Mehogony tree Bot tree

Jack fruit tree Si 2 WAR Ye, Mango
Q Q Si SG (a A ag ia wt
aoe eRe sige Bote ya wee
Ce SW
WW SS Se ee
sx we CE ce a ae Z|
Fig: Mixed-tree plantation S
N

Forestry 143
Selection of locality of mixed-tree plantation
Medium low and low land
The trees which can tolerate flood water periodically or can tolerate stagnant
water can be planted in the low land. Examples of these trees are- hijol, raina,
jarul, mander, koroch etc. This type of trees can be cultivated in the haors,
bills and their adjacent low lying areas.
Medium high and high land
Medium high and high land areas are suitable for cultivation of different types
of trees. Mixed-tree cultivation is possible in this area with various kinds of
trees including mango, jack-fruit, palmyra palm, date palm, mehogony, shal,
segun, bel, tamarind, amloki, horitoki, bohera, etc. These trees are used to
cultivate in the greater district of Dhaka, Mymensingh, Rajshahi, Rangpur.
Different kinds of crops like-cotton, pineapple, orange, banana etc. are
cultivated in the vacant spaces of mixed-tree plantation.
Work: Prepare an answer script of the following two questions about
mixed-tree cultivation by group discussion and present.
1. Make a list of the names of mixed-trees in the poster paper that
are cultivated in your locality.
2. Mention the disadvantages of sole forest tree cultivation instead
of mixed-tree in your locality.
Necessity of mixed-tree cultivation
1. It can identify various tree species under different localities.
2. The demands of the local people can be meet up by mixed-tree
oo
S cultivation.

144 Agriculture Studies
3. Improve livelihood standard by increasing income.
4. Improve biodiversity of the locality by creating habitat of animas, birds and other
faunas.
5. Create environmental stability in the locality.
6. Generate employment opportunity, increase income and reduce poverty.
7. Mixed-tree plantation must play vital role for meeting up demand of fuel,
nutrition, food, cloth and shelter etc.
8. Cool environment and increase rain.
9. Protect live and wealth from adverse natural calamity like-flood, cyclone,
drought, tidal surge and reduce soil erosion.
Work: Complete the following table about mixed-tree plantation.
Food Cloth House construction Furniture Medicinal
producing trees [producing trees material producing trees| plants
producing trees
1. 1. 1. 1s 1.
2. 2. 2. 2. 2.
Exercise
Fill in the blanks
1. ___.._............ land use might possible by forestry.
2. ------------------- is the best for ------------------- of the trees. «
Ss
AQ

Forestry 145

3. Cultivation of mixed-tree is one kind of -------------------- system.

4. Generally -------------- and ------------ of trees are planted in the edges of
roadsides and embankments.

Match the word/ part of sentence of the left sides with the right sides

1. Nursery is a improve environment

3, Poljbag seediingsare multilayered agro forestry system is good

centre of seedling production
3. Agro forestry
transported easily

4. Beside roads seed production centre

Multiple questions

1. Which plants are to be planted at 30 cm away from the edge of
embankment?
a. Arhar b. Tree
c. Crop d. Dhaincha

2. The problems of agro forestry-
i. unwilling of peoples participation
ii. lack of necessary lands
iii. lack of expert coach

Which is correct in the followings?
a. iandii b. iand iii
c. jiandiii d. i, iiand iii

Forma-19, Agriculture Studies, 8

146 Agriculture Studies
Read the following passage and answer 3 and 4 no. questions of the
following:
Supti Rani works in a NGO. She has been assigned responsibility to plant
trees intwo kilometers long village pakka road. She planned to transplant
broad leaved trees along with other trees.
3. How many segun tree seedlings are needed for Supti Rani?
a. 800 b. 1600
c. 2400 d. 3200
4. How will the planning of Supti Rani create pressure on the other trees?
a. increase photosynthesis of other trees
b. retard growth of little trees
c. reduce crop production of the land
d. restrict growth of soil microorganism
Creative questions:
1. The homestead area of Haripad Sarker is one acre. There is a pond and
some raised fallow lands in his homeyard. But he has no agricultural lands.
He feels problem in educating his children as well as to meet up family
expenses. However, he has taken initiatives for increasing production
buying two cows and a variety of seedlings.
a. What is agro forestry?
b. Explain the necessity of mixed-tree plantation.
c. Describe the agro forestry model based on the homeyard of Haripad
Sarker.
d. Analyse the activities of Haripad Sarker for the improvement of his
economic conditions. s
8

Forestry 147

2. There is a big canal running by the side of Barisal High School. Head teacher
took initiative for social forestry programme in the school premises near
the bank of the canal The students of this school succeeded in
plantating various tree species following appropriate rule. They
arranged a rally making various posters containing self-motivated slogans
about social forestry.
a. What is nursery?
b. How does tree cool environment? Explain.
c. Explain the techniques of student's success.
d. Evaluate the students’ activities of self- awareness for the people of

locality.

Short answer questions
1. What do you mean by polybag nursery?
2. What is agro forestry?
3. Write down the steps of tree plantation in the roads and embankment
sides.

Descriptive questions
1. Write down the importance of agroforestry.
2. Write down the steps of making seedlings in the polybag.
3. Describe the techniques of tree plantation in the roads and

embankment sides.
4. Mention the necessity of mixed-tree cultivation.
a
& The End

Academic Year

9-10 Agriculture
IIH 27 Vik so HaTHACPS GAs Setort wow
cera AIT Aare aeics ACY COT
= aiate Set te erat

aiat 6 Fle fidtecra Soar Kober afeaia 6 ofScatcea GAT UPI eee CFDA
Sos Wwa- (Bret BF, 98 Wt ASA) cory aT
ence!

