Arts and Grafts
> = , = = =
Sv a 19 a ap os
St lei DTT
HW | Uy a)
(} NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a Textbook for classes nine and ten from the Academic Year 2013
Arts and Crafts
Classes Nine-Ten
Written by
Hashem Khan
Adeline Malakar
A.S. M. Atiqul Islam
Sanjib Das
Edited by
Mustafa Monowar
Translated by
Shah Alam
Biplab Kumar Das
NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka
[All rights reserved by the publisher]

First Edition : December, 2012

Revised Edition : August, 2015

Reprint : August, 2017

Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh
For free distribution by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Printed by :

Preface
The aim of secondary education is to make the learners fit for entry into higher
education by flourishing their latent talents and prospects with a view to building the
nation with the spirit of the Language Movement and the Liberation War. To make the
learners skilled and competent citizens of the country based on the economic, social,
cultural and environmental settings is also an important issue of secondary education.
The textbooks of secondary level have been written and compiled according to the
revised curriculum 2012 in accordance with the aims and objectives of National
Education Policy-2010.Contents and presentations of the textbooks have been select-
ed according to the moral and humanistic values of Bengali tradition and culture and
the spirit of Liberation War 1971 ensuring equal dignity for all irrespective of caste
and creed of different religions and sex.
The present government is committed to ensure the successful implementation of
Vision 2021. Honorable Prime Minister, Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina expressed her firm determination to make the country free
from illiteracy and instructed the concerned authority to give free textbooks to every
student of the country. National Curriculum and Textbook Board started to distribute
textbooks free of cost since 2010 according to her instruction.
Arts and Crafts increases observation ability about nature, environment, life and
life-style. This subject also helps understanding other subjects. For example, this
subject helps acquiring applied knowledge and efficiency of General Science,
Geography, Medical Science, Engineering Science, Architecture etc. By learning this
art, sense of discipline, sense of proportion, aestheticism, patriotism and human values
will develop and grow in the learners and they will become creative. Hopefully,
objectives of the new Curriculum have been properly reflected in ‘Arts and Crafts’
Textbook.
I thank sincerely all for their intellectual labor who were involved in the process of
revision, writing, editing, art and design of the textbook.
Prof. Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh.

CONTENTS
[ome | mma fa
Two The Great National and International Artists and
Artworks 12-33
Fine arts and crafts in Bengali Rural Life 34-42
sk Practice from Practical Objects and Memory 75-80

Chapter One
Fine Arts
faye ety Ke
Het ts
Vaiaes KY >
OR a! RR
XU YON an
PN Be Ag ser
Baton?) Qe
The journey of Fine Arts started in the hands of primitive people
After completion of this chapter we will be able —
e to describe the evolution of Fine Art.
e to describe different branches of Fine Art.
e to explain the importance of practising Fine Art.
e toexplain the importance of arts and crafts.

2 Arts and Crafts
Lesson : 1
Fine Arts
You have already been introduced to Fine Arts in class-VIII. In order to know something
about Fine-Arts we, at first, have to know its origin. It can be said that Art is old as
Human Civilization. It starts its journey when cave dwellers started living in groups to
make different modes of communication with each other. Variety and vastness of nature
create mysterious feelings in human mind. Ancient huntsmen not being able to solve
those mysteries, found satisfaction of their thirst depending on magic and superstition.
With the belief of hunting animals easily the primitive used to engrave variety of
pictures of animals, animal hunting on caves walls with sharp stones or animals bones.
Those pictures, painted on cave walls, were the first and foremost art of the world.
As time goes on, civilization advanced. Man by controlling nature and environment, has
made his livelihood easy, beautiful and prosperous. When it became easier to
accomplish the basic needs of human life some sorts of impression and imagination
turned in the shape of art. Art of poetry, fiction, for example, were formulated just after
the invention of language. And consecutively music was composed too.
Those paintings, poetry, songs which were originated with the combination of
imagination and creativity are called arts.
In a word, the entire activities in human mind are called arts.

Activity : Ancient Cave dwellers’ belief in illusion originated Fine Arts. Write

ten sentences in favour of this statement.

Lesson : 2
Classification of Arts
Generally art is, in fact, divided into two main branches. It has its different media. It is
amazing that the ancient huntsmen introduced almost all modes of arts. Ancient
“Hemosephians’ drew pictures of different wild animals with astonishing skill. They
were very keen observers. They also had clear idea about animals and were able to paint
flawlessly on stones and bones. Each and everything could be identified just at a glance of
their paintings. There were some pictures in which portraits of human were painted in
animal forms. There were some pictures in which human bodies with horns on head and
tails on back were painted as though men in the shape of deer were jumping up and
down. We knew from their paintings that ancient people used to express their delight by
making different gestures of bodies and jumping screaming around the animals the
preyed. From that communal activities art of dance and music evolved. Wearing furry
skins and horns of hunted animals, they used to copy walking, jumping and running of .,
those animals. It is thought that they used to put into practice those tricks to join with a S

Fine Arts 3
pack of animals to prey them easily. The art of theatrical performance started from that
commotion though primitives used to take those policies for their survival and collection
of food.
Activity ; The size and motion of ancient animal pictures painted on cave-walls
were flawless. Write your opinion about how they could paint flawlessly.
Lesson : 3
People of Stone Age not only painted pictures but also Vs. .
made solid human statue. It is called sculpture. Most of On CA
the sculptures were human figures and almost all of perce or oy
human figures were of females. Primitive society was AN oe
matriarchal. Women were team teachers. Mother was Ff ar EE
thought to be the origin of being. That means, the team 4 We sie = em
was evolved from her entity. So they thought female err es ae:
sculpture as a sign of mother-being. By engraving hills or gf 4 Fa ane 5 aS
splitting separate stones they made these sculptures. >" “Albiaee ae
Besides these, they used to build sculptures of animals Yau... 3 eae
and birds with the horns and bones of ‘Byshon’ and y en ‘ enn Bae }
other animals or stones. They used to make to earthen PR MEEN EE Fs |
pots and paint on them with various tools invented by ues eA
them. They used to make jewelry with bones of fish, 4 & “4
shells, and teeth of deer and decorate them too. In this f. RS ue A
way they made the foundation of crafts. The first iy Wey
initiative for building houses started with wild animals’ i
bones and skins, wood, reed, stones or clay. And the art Female Statue; Symbol of Fertility
of architecture evolved. Thus almost all branches of art e.g. painting, crafts, sculpture,
pottery, architecture, dance, music, act (theatrical performance) etc. achieved and
practiced by human being commenced in ancient people’s hands.
Activity: Be in a group of 5/6 students and explain the following statements by
| group discussion.
‘Almost all modern arts are commenced in ancient people’s hands.’
Lesson : 4
We have known in class VIII that all kinds of arts are divided into two main branches.
The first one is Fine Arts. And the other one is Crafts. The expression of human creative
o mind is called Fine Arts. It is, infact, born in the pleasure of arbitrary creation of human
s mind. It’s aim is to soothe our eyes and mind. The birth of fine-arts is in the human

4 Arts and Crafts
feeling of happiness, unhappiness, suffering, and pain and so on. On the other hand,
Crafts are born to meet the necessity of the use of common commodities. That means
crafts are not created only to give pleasure or to sooth eye though it is a form of art. It is
essential in everyday work. We use crafts differently in different needs. But all great arts
created by human are the parts of fine-arts.
The following graph presents different branches of art.
Arts
Arts
Activity : Make a number of groups of students and write down names of three
prominent artists of every branch of performing art through group discussion.
Lesson : 5
The above graph shows that art is divided into two main branches.
1. Fine Arts 2. Crafts
Fine Arts are again divided into Performing Arts, Humanities, Drama, Poetics and
Poetry. Among them Performing Arts is an important branch.
On the other hand, the branches of Crafts are Ceramics, weaving, carpentry, leather,
jewelry, household utensils- brass, copper, aluminum, hand-tools etc. There are more
things in crafts which I identify as ‘Folk-Arts. S

Fine Arts 5

For example- picture telling stories, toy elephant, horse, human body, birds made with

clay and wood, terracotta, Nokshi kantha, painted fancy pitchers, pot- etc. So it is

clear that the area of both the branches of art is very large and extended.

Lesson : 6

Importance of Exercising Art

We have already known that the pictures, painted by ¢.-——— i

wild, furred and bearded people of the ancient age, EL Mt aE ESTEE

are the oldest arts of the world. Those who painted { Se, ee FAB ED

those pictures, departed from the world thousands of = **RA71\\ Gaye sears Hi Me

years ago, But the pictures, painted by them (/\\} Pail 5%, 3%

survived. These statues, pots and tools not only ,% epee ts My ‘

survived but also disclosed before us the unknown Dies \ iy a8

chapter of the history. In those days language was “psi ae

not invented, let alone alphabet. That is why it is not ie

possible to discover the written evidence of those

days. The history of human civilization would be Te leat Hasna

incomplete if the life style, behavior, clothing of

those ancient cave dwellers were not known. We ;

have not got the written history but their arts and GES Cee oe,

crafts are the evidences of their history. We came to PSI

know the ancient people’s straggle of life, clothing, (es id poe,

thought and belief through their paintings. \ = Re pee Bt RE? “i

Thus we came to know about the Paleo lethic age, \egre aie

the Neo lethic age,the age of agriculture and about \ cease

all ages by observing commodities left by them.

That means we have become familiar with the The Oldest Earthen Pot

history of a particular civilization from the

commodities like tools, utensils, clothes, jewelry etc =

used by the people of that age. Those commodities i

used by human race are now called crafts. So we see a ii a.)

that, human civilization and arts go forward hand in ff (A Lal

hand. Therefore, it is remarked that art is as old as aay Sagem, i Be 1 aed

human civilization. We have actually known the #i@mpS 4 | D.

history of human civilization through those arts and “Set aeguua =
« ctafts. Thus we can realize the importance of the Mad Cums tertee ee ES
$ study of art. Relic ‘Dolmen’

6 Arts and Crafts
Lesson : 7
Arts and culture show the identity of a S .
society, state or nation before us. Art ii Sf fase ce SES
conceives a particular age too. We get 2 =) Ro i S45
many features of that age from their arts. oS: ‘SS a
used to paint inside walls of temple and. ~-., * “yee eeemae
pyramids. The pyramids are the burial 9%...” ase ae ea
— som tecin tdeaniie le The Largest Egyptian Pyramid, Hight-480 feet
stone made tombs. The Egyptians used to draw thousands of pictures on the walls and
coffins inside the pyramids. The empty space inside the pyramid was filled with
paintings and there was not any unoccupied space left. In those frescos there were fun
picture of animals but most of them were of male and female bodies and that of kings,
queens, gods and goddesses. Most of the pictures tell stories. The stories were clearly
comprehended if you keep a close eye on them. We in fact, came by the history of
Egyptian civilization and culture by paying attention to those paintings and frescos.
Those distinctive paintings and crafts, used by them, informed us about the cloths, kings-
queens, people and their livelihood, law and order, culture and belief of that age. The
pyramids are wonderful specimen of Egyptian architectures.

Activity : Write your own idea about Pyramids in ten sentences. Draw a picture

of a pyramid next to your answer.
Lesson : 8
7 tor ON OY ae

We also got excellent testimony of [aS “Peas a ieee a
arts and architectures in Greece and |." * ees _— oo ae
India. The Greek and Indian literature = ERS 3 pe A :
of the middle age is the pride of the aiaw ~ [pst af = wk
world. Cave art of ‘Ilora’ and ‘3 A d {' . ry ay | oad
‘Ajanta’ demonstrated ancient Indian . ie. oe &
arts. Book art or Mughal art displayed : r¥ Ih, gk 3
much of the Indian social and : i ‘OY s
political history. Besides, different | BRU rs is
sculptures and architectures of that Relief Sculpture on the Walls of Ajanta Cave 8

Fine Arts 7
time are now the pride of India. The ‘Taj- Mahal’ of Agra is the wonder of the world. So
the importance of the study of art is unlimited. Human civilization, in fact, advances
through the practice of art. As cave- dwellers learned to make houses with trees, leaves,
animal bones and skins, and the branches of trees, the architecture reached the present
state only due to the culture of new sense of beauty. Men wanted to see their houses
decorated with art. They desired to make them more and more charming, The same
thing happened to their clothes. The barks of trees, leaves and animal skins were enough
to hide the nudity. But now we are wearing new dresses of different fashions. We are
looking for newer designs and fashions. These are the reasons we do have attraction to
art in order to enrich our own country, culture, taste, sense of beauty and national
heritage. Through painting and art like music, cinema or literature, the creativity of
human beings is discovered. It also unfolds human talent. Painting or practicing art is
important to make one society beautiful, our life decent, happy and to express our own
feelings and thoughts. ‘Shilpacharya (Master of Art) Zainul Abedin and his co-artist
were successful to make our country people conscious about art and so exercise of art is
now being given importance in our country.
Activity : We can present our country and culture before the world through the art-works.
In which media except art and sculpture, do you think, we can do that?
Lesson: 9
Painting or other art help build up life properly. So if a child is inspired to paint from the
very childhood, he may have good taste along with the development of his knowledge.
He will be able to show his taste in his work by judging what is good or bad. It is
possible to cultivate lots of qualities in a man through the exercise of art. While drawing
a picture of a village in a scrapbook, a child wants to present everything of the village
like— village house, trees, rivers, boats, people, life stocks, flowers, birds, and so on. He
tries to depict the place of houses, trees, the movement of rivers, number of boats on a
river, position of green crops fields , life stocks resting in the yard, village lass carrying
pitchers etc elaborately and perfectly. Through the drawing of the view of a village
child learns how to arrange and decorate everything nicely in a very small space and thus
learns discipline. The child also thinks about the selection of colors and the colors of
nature. Thus his power of observation, thought and attraction to beauty increase. In this
a Way painting not only enhances the sense of beauty, humanity and love for a man but
s also makes him enterprising and confident. He is not scared of taking responsibility when

8 Arts and Crafts
he will be grown up. If he becomes a director of a company or organization where
hundreds of workers work, he can run the organization with disciple and perfection. It
will be easy for him to distribute works to right person as he achieved this caliber
through the practice of painting since childhood. Practice of painting easily makes a man
a good citizen. That is why painting is included in syllabus as a compulsory subject long
ago in the developed countries.
Lesson : 10
Important Branches of Arts : Painting and crafts
Painting or embodying sculpture
and craft are very important part of
the domain of art. Paintings and AU ae
crafts are important also in our NUON)
social life. Painters and craftsmen NW SS
play very vital role in different ND) a
fields of works in a society. The [= Ss £ v
fields of works, where artists do \e
artworks as their profession are the —— b=
work of blacksmith , pottery , LN =
weaving, work of goldsmith , NX. = ————ey

: C— a AA
carpentry , crafts with bamboo and N ==] == 2
cane and so on. There is a heritage \ === SSF
of practicing art among the _—_—_— ———
common village folk  like- . ea oA )
embroidered quilt, making mat, ——— y Dg —
‘Jainamaj’ ‘Shatoronji’, hand fan $6==—, Gee =
as well as waving and sewing (=2 SN = p=N
which we call folk art, crafts and SS EF bee —=9)
cottage industry. At present — B =| ——
people’s attraction for folk art and _ ae a3 =e
crafts is increasing. In modern Hin __ —_——-
life artists are —_ responsibly dN Ce SSP
contributing to different fields of naaee wai) Ce | Vee);
work. Artists are essential for  SMILULIDS ae — es
publication of books and Different Kinds of Crafts S

Fine Arts $
newspapers. In different disciplines of education like-engineering, medical science,
architecture, various fields of science, history, geography, painting is playing very
important role. A set designer is needed for making almost all the television programs.
Without a painter and a set designer it is impossible to make any drama or movie. In the
field of industry like aeroplane, ship, motor vehicle , bus, train, television, radio, utensil,
lock and key electric light, fan, bottle, tin, pen, pencil, knife, scissors furnishers etc
painters are really indispensable. Packing of different commodities and advertisement we
need artists. Garments industry and fashion houses also can not be continued without
painters, So the study of arts and crafts is very important.

Lesson ; 11

We have already known vast and various things about art from the above discussion.
Painting, sculpture and crafts have developed area of art for thousands of years. We got
to know the artists who contributed in this field through their art works in class VI, VU,
and VIII. Only in Italy a number of classic artists like Chimabue, Jonto, Perujino,
Raphael, Michelangelo were born. The painting about the stories of Bible in Sistin
Church in Vatican City drawn by Michelangelo, Provided the world of art an invaluable
asset. He completed this last lying on the back upon an a frame of wood. He hanged the
canvas on the ceiling and completed this painting lying on the back. Michelangelo
mainly was a great sculptor. When the picture in church was completed all the people in
Rome came out to see it. Till now thousands of art-loving people visit Rome just to see
that picture of Sistin Church. Other great artist Leonardo-Da-Vinci was also born in
Italy. ‘Monalisa’ painted by him is a world famous art. If is now preserved in ‘Lauver
Museum?’ in Paris in France.

One of the other greatest artists was ‘Rembrandt’. His famous painting is ‘Rater Pahara’.
‘Paul Cezanne’ was another famous artist. Looking at his painting we may think as if we
were wondering in the fields, lands, and mountains in that picture. Many of you probably
have heard the name of “Vangogh’. He was born in Netherland. French artists “Paul
Gauga’ and ‘Vangogh’ painted pictures together for few years. Both of them are famous
in the history of painting. Matisse is another artist. One of his famous paintings was
‘Dance’. One of the greatest artists of the 20" century was Pablo Picaso. ‘Babies and
Pigeons’, ‘Mother and Child’, ‘Dream’, ‘Pigeon’, ‘Guarnica’ etc are his famous
paintings.

Forma-2, Arts and Carafts

10 Arts and Crafts
On the other hand the father of modern sculptures Auguste Rodin along with the
sculptors like Henry Moore and others enriched the world of art with their sculptures.
The artists of Asian sub-continent contributed to the world-art. The world of painting is
enriched by the art works of Abanindranath Tagore, Rabindranath Tagore, Nandalal
Bose, Jamini Roy, Abdur Rahman Chukhtai and also in our country Zainul Abedin,
Quamrul Hassan, §.M. Sultan, Shafiuddin Ahmed etc.
On the other hand, crafts also enriched the world of art with their own distinction in
different countries.
There are so many great artists and artistries in the world that it is impossible to write
about all in this limited space. So only a few names of artists and arts are mentioned
here, You will know about these vast areas of world of art in different books in upper
classes when you will grow up. You also will know about some artists in short in the
next chapter of this book.
Sample Questions

Multiple choice Questions
1. All kinds of arts mainly are divided into —

a. Two branches b. three branches

c. Four branches d. seven branches
2. Most of the sculptures of the primitive people were-

a. Statue of animals b. Statue of Masculine body

c. Statue of birds d. Statue of feminine body.
3. Pyramids are building with huge stones —

a. Triangular shaped temple b. Triangular shaped grave

c. Rectangular shaped building d. Huge stone made statue. S

Fine Arts 11
4. Michelangelo basically was a great —
a. Sculptor b. Painter
c. Architect d. Singer
5. Music, drama, paintings and sculptures are
a. branches of Humanities b. branches of performing arts
c. branches of poetice d. branches of poetry
6. Primitive Society was
a. mother dominated b. father dominated
c. brother dominated d. sister dominated
Answer the following questions
1. What do you mean by art? What is the oldest art of the world?
2. Write in brief about the two main branches of art.
3. Show the branches of art in a graph.
4. Explain the necessity of practicing Art.
5. Explain your idea about old Egyptians Art.
6. Make a note on your own idea about the role of paintings and crafts in different
fields of society.
hac]
5

Chapter Two
The Great National and International Artists and
Artworks
id a Wa i ae ; li
“Moi Dea” painted by Zainul Abedin
After completion of this chapter we will be able —
e to describe about the world renowned arts and artists.
e to describe the great artists of Bangladesh.
e to explain the influences of liberation war and culture on Bangladesh arts,
=
8

The Great National and International Artists and Artworks 13
Some of the renowned arts and artists of the world
Lesson : 1
Tisian (1488 -1576)
Tisian was born in the natural beauty and charming
environment of Alps in Italy. His father was a high- } 4
official in Army. That is why they were famous as a c
a cultured and aristocratic family. Since he
childhood Tisian was thoughtful and poetic in *
nature. This is because of nature environment | Very)
streams of hills, leaves and flowers of trees, forest 4! ¥ yl : 7
of pine and open sky of his birthplace. All these oti ‘>
elements inspired him to be inclined to painting 4 i , ¥
picture. His father wanted him to be a lawyer and 4 —
so he was sent to Venice. But he took first lesson of
painting with his friend Guorgon at the age of 20. Artist Tisian
Within a very few days Tisian established himself as a painter in upper class society with
his talent and nobility. Tisian had skill in both the forms of portrait and composition.
Tisian was the greatest among Venetian painters and was patronized by aristocratic
society. In those days Florence of Italy was famous for arts and similarly Venice was
popular enough as international trade center. He was given the imperial post of art.
Along with his talent of arts Tisian was very amiable as a man. He was very conscious
about the standard of his wisdom and art.
q Tisan had wonderful mastery over colors. He lost
‘| his mother at the age of 6 months and that is why
i a! he could not hide this pain in his heart until his
oT adulthood, At the end of his life he drew the
iy famous painting “Mother”. He in his imagination,
cm (A 5 tried to install departed soul of his mother in
t ere if j Marry, the mother of Jesus Christ. Just before his
iy ua a! death he dreamt his mother as if she were calling
i him .And so he said to his friends and pupils,
: 4 “Mother is calling me. I’ll very soon leave you.”
\ This artist died of plague at the age of 99. He
a finished driving “Mother just before few days of
2 his death. Few more of his great aris are — Dance
Pathe pete by isin and the shower of Gold, Bach us and Arden,

14 Arts and Crafts
Salome and head of John etc preserved in London Imperial art Gallery.
Activity : Write about Tisian’s painting ‘Mother’.
Lesson : 2
Rembrandt (1606-1669) a,
Rembrandt was born in Leyden, the center of art, =
literature and culture in Method on 15” se a
July1606. His father was a wealthy man. He , a iP, e
expected his son would receive higher-education oe a A
and establish himself as an eminent citizen in a, is 4
Leyden. But Rembrandt did not show any interest Sy oe, |
in such a traditional education. He used to draw Pe OF is
pictures of animals in his books. Knowing the y i
attitude of his son the father sent him to a local artist .
named Jacob Van at the age of 13. Later on i
completing education successfully along with Artist Rembrandt
portrait painter Deter Last man Rembrandt came back to Leyden in 1624 and started his
own business from ‘An Artists circle”.
Rembrandt satisfied the eyes of common
ry om audience within a very few days at the age of
oe : 25. He became renowned as a competent
ie Re nature-painter. His business was established
vi ) ‘ within a very short time. He started getting
lh yA orders of painting from government and
me. ’ private organizations. He became famous not
Ry =) only as painter but also as a teacher.
- sy, fea Rembrandt also had wonderful skill at
iy | | il e i } teaching. Rembrandt once was attracted to the
) (AAS ‘“Mugahal’ paintings and copied a number of
j f \ : ; paintings of that method. But those works
f= Way . were not as standards as the Mughal
* : X : paintings. Nevertheless Softly company in
ea = London bought the portrait of ‘Shajahan’
‘Flora’ painted by Rembrandt painted by ‘Rembrandt’ for Tk 1,75,000 only
due to his glorious achievement. But the real ‘Mughal’ paintings of India have never %&
been sold for one percent of that amount of money. 8

The Great National and Intemational Artists and Artworks 15
Rembrandi was bold and self conscious in painting, Dramatic use of light with the
subject made his painting a special. He was the artist of the time. We came to know the
wonderful skill of art in rhythmic presentation of deep tone and correlated composition.
Rembrandt drew thousands of picturea m ciching, drawmg and painting tighter doring
his professional life of 38 years,
Some of his mentionable celebration arts are The Blindness of two bit, The raising of
‘Lazarus Christ at Emmans (Painting on religious subjects and presented in (Lauvre
Museum), Samson's, wedding feast (on sovial festivals) and an old man in through
(portrait composition) and “Flora”, This great artist died in 1669.
Leason : 3
Henri Matiese : (1869-1954)
Matisse was born in 1869 in northem France. At
young age Mathis practiced different methods of
‘ . at drawing or sketch. In every method he investigated
AS, exercised Persian art. Other time he started painting in
5 ee the mode of child-drawing but understand that this
\ ee ReaME wore the obstacles for the child drawing. That in why
Sa 4 Oh: took such a method which engaged ‘through,
— \ Eel there was no rhythm, standard and harmony of
keeping harmony with surroundings in sketching. The paintings took two- dimensional
from dus to the minimal use of light and shade.
He was spontaneous in subject selection. He could make a simple subject a great one
with his skill. The device of artists does not depend on the subject of painting but it
Pa depends on his own experience. To an artist the external aspect does not matter. The
= teal aspect is that which is reflected in the mind of an artist.

16 Arts and Crafts
In Matisse painting external SS Ps
aspect was disregarded. He dG KN =)
used red, blue etc of his own . ‘ai
in portrait, The color was ; iN
deep and bright. ‘The dance’ { ya
was Matisse’s one of the \ \ A f nh i f
greatest paintings. It is now » a “7, F
kept in Mosco. This painting 4 + =e in ee
was drawn in bold line and y * ta af re as Sig a
wash. A group of males and fy "a erm eo Sm
females were dancing round in uae ih)
a circle. The Personalities here “The Dance” painted by Henri Matisse
are symbols only but artists aim
was not to show the external appearance of the body. He made this painting to expose
the eternal harmony and movement of the dance. Matisse’s painting “Head of Women”
was a successful example of the method of drawing picture in minimum use of color ,
lines, technique and labor. He was died in 1954,
Lesson : 4
Paul Cezanne (1839-1906)

,
Paul Cezanne was born in a province on the
bank of Rona in Paris in 1939. His father was a :
banker. Financially he was well-off. When he q
first moved to Paris, he could not cope up with aay >
others due to his shyness. So the people around @
him thought that Cezanne was a very boastful i. aN s
person. He studied art almost ten years with the i #
help of his father’s financial support. But he \ js
could not resist himself from the thirst for i
drawing. Cezanne’s personal life was very ~ <
simple, easy but filled with many blows and
counter blows. He always used to do hard work. m
He had never got any reward or recognition for
his artworks in spite of his many sided > °
experimentation with painting. He returned to Paul Cezanne §

The Great National and International Artists and Artworks 17
- = his birthplace after he had
~— ¥ completed his education and
hp \ teaching in Paris. He was living on
gf _ | his father’s monthly donation of
ist. =~ — twelve thousand pounds. He did not
= > \% B= SSC*éiike to ellis paintings. Hee painted
Pra 2 é ei. ja « ~» to catch nature and life in color
Sd PR 7 ss ___ from the deep feelings of his heart.
ies = . Sometimes he used to paint pictures
_s & ai out door and threw then into the
i 4) ¢ bush after completing and came
at ~s =~ back home without any picture.
teen Tig ous That is why his wife followed him
SHILIGS' seein ky Coen secretly to collect those pictures and
hid it in a corner of the home. It can be said that he did not paint for living rather he
lived for painting. He made a foundation of a tradition of painting which is called Post
Impressionism. One of his remarkable paintings was ‘Playing Cards’. He died in 1906.
Lesson : 5
Auguste Rodin ws Chae 7
(1840-1917) a q
Auguste Rodin was born at Parri in France in i |
1840. He was not in good health in his child- i ee ‘ <n) rey
hood. He had a lot of red hair in his head. W ¥ a.
Rantha a was very shy and modest boy. He ‘ , ies a
could not mix with his noisy mates. But he | ee a;
had a mad addiction to draw picture alone. He ee pe oes 4
had a special weakness to art from his early ae ry, *
boyhood. He could not get himself abmitted =
into school by drawing picctures accordingto | : ;
the instructions and picture of his textbooks. | é
As he could not bear the expenses of buying
color, brush and canvas he decided to become
a sculptor. It was because he could get the soil
free of cost. Sculptor Auguste Rodin
Forms-3, Arts and Carafts

18 Arts and Crafts
Rodin studied in a_ private

Boarding school for two years.

But he did not like to read Latin - =

and other traditional subjects. At ‘ a

last his father admitted him in a a 4

drawing school because of his a ee , i

attraction for drawing. The gh aaa = as

name of his teacher was Horas te i : = ea
Lickok the Boybodro. Lickok ay ik 2 a
was a very efficient teacher. He i vo a i =
published a book on his teaching ele alll
method in 1847. There he says, A :

“At first I try to develop the Fiat ES z
personality of my pupil, so that _ : at 4

he can learn to see life with his ce ek aR
own eyes. And then becomes :
devoted himself to draw by <= ——
taking help of his memory.” The sculpture ‘The Thinker’ is made by Rodin
Rantha got engaged himself to make sculptures. But he did not confine himself into the
classroom only. He went to Luvr and discovered the ancient sculptures. He went to the
Imperial library and draw pictures of the carve works. He went to horse market and made
live sketch of horses, At this moment Rantha joined manufacture the Gobliy. At he
beginning Rantha had to solve his problem himself. He worked with tremendous morale,
perseverance and confidence. During this time he roamed about the whole town and drew
pictures of different idols and people. Rantha passed his youth in work and remained
beyond the notice of human society. In this period the poetry of Beaudlare and Dante was
his constant companion. Rantha loved work madly althrough his life. Though many of his
contemporaries compared him with the impressionist of his time, he was a symbolic artist
too. Dialogue and motion were the features of his sculptures. But he maintained the
grammatical rules of sculptures skillfully. The sculptures were lifelike and emotional. He
says, “The real beauty of art is to express the truth. If any one wants to make his seen
objects beautiful like a fool, or hide the ugliness of reality or internal bitterness; it is called
ugliness. And there will be no pure expression.” He further says. “Greatest work of art
exposes everything about human beings and the world. Though it informs us everything,
there is something which remains unknown forever. Every great work of art has this 2
mysterious quality.” 8

The Great National and International Artists and Artworks 19
Rodin always accepted the elements of his work easily. He never tried to hide it or ran
away from it. If we look at his works we will find that they have directly come out of the
ancient stones or soil.
Michelangelo left some of his work infinished due to adverse environment and
conditions; not for limitations. But in case of Rantha any signs of incompleteness was the
conscious creation of the artist and it conveys special expression of the artist himself.
Rantha was never satisfied with mere description. He was always a step ahead it. His
works were multidimentional. We get reality, romanticism, expressionism, Impressionism,
and mysticism mixed with sexuality.
His greatest works are- The thinker, Kiss, Balzak, The Sirens, The Secret, Eternal spring,
Eve, Three shades etc.
Rantha thought about sculptures althrough his life. He believed that thinking is the main
struggle of man. Rantha died on 17 November. He was buried at Morte on 24 November.
The Sculpture This thinker was placed on his grave according to his last desire.
Lesson : 6
Ramkinkar Baij
(1906-1980)
Ramkinkar Baij was born on 26 May in oa) fe
1906 at jogipara in the district of Bakura in ey,
West Bengal in a tribal family, His father yi) 3
was Chandicharan and his mother was i = z =
Shampurna Devi. His father was a barber — J
and earned the bread with this profession. . * j
They were very poor. In his childhood he ie oi : 7 "i
saw the potters drawing pictures. Seeing = aes :
them he also drew of his own accord with } ee 4
brush. On the way to his maternal uncle’s % ae Ca ‘
house at Kadakuli in Bishnupur lived the a
carpenters. At that time Ramkinkar his first Lai a
lesson of making idol from a carpenter ==
named Ananto sutradhor. Moreover, the art |= ?
works of the temple of Bishnupur attracted nl
him. He started his career by copying

S artwork of burnt soil and stones of the

‘temple. According to the artist Ramanando Ramkinkar Baij

20 Arts and Crafts
chaterjee of Bakura the future of this youth was ra :) > Ree are
bright as his artwork was attractive. He took ar ‘ oO ae , oe
Ramkinkar from school and admitted him inthe [47 eB). me thay. wed
shantiniketon in art and handed him over to aqgget er = ae aes
Nandalal Bose. He received little education. fg) | Wie fe a
This shows that he had no interest in iq) |) )-qeie ileus
institutional education. His real attention was in ee re 4 ie 2 2 ‘i . :
making idols and drawing pictures. He thought |” “% Nee oF Spay x,
that he would grow up with his own character. “ds | | te Ye gs
This was his ideal and thought. For this reason, [Pga) eons
Ramkinkar was the Indian Shaotal sculptor. He KL ae eRe.
was one of the pioneers of modern Indian [iy iis =e . ae]
sculptures. He studied western art and applied fee lie Bee eco fered
the technique in his sculptures, He is the father [ie J : pat ¥ & x. o

of modern Indian Art. He is also considered one = yy ee oR Sey ats
of the greatest artists of India. Motion was one J fs 7 eee
of the characteristics of the works of (eee. = Be: —
Ramkinkar, Every figure of his picture and  aimlihah/se <= gaaiamens
sculpture is dynamic. Nothing is static. Almost — The sculpture ‘Sujata’ is made by Ramkinkar
all of his big sculptures are in open places.

The future of Ramkinkar’s professional life was determined in 1934. He was appointed as
permanent teacher in the Art Building. He finished many works in 1935 and 1936
respectively. Among the significant works of this peniod are - Relief, Shaotal Couple,
Krishna Gopini, Sujata etc. From 1937 he took the job of teaching his students modeling.
The middle of this year can be called the beginning of Ramkinkar’s oil color chapter.
From 1937-1942 he finished many important oil color works. Mahatma Gandhi, Buddha
and Sujata, Hate Shaotal Dampoti, Kajer sheshe shaotal Romoni, Shilong series, Autumn,
Fuler Janmo, Notun shoshso, Binodini, Woman and Dog, Summer are his famous oil
color works. During this years he also finished many significant sculptures. This is the
greatest period in his life as an artist. Among the famous sculptures of this period are,
Shaotal family made of concrete, Statue of Tagore made of plaster, Head of a woman with
cement and Batidan etc. He called ‘Sujata’ placed under the Eucliptus tree his favourite
work. He said “That moves and speaks”. Ramkinkar fondly expressed and upheld those in
his paintings and sculptures whom he had seen everyday in different moods and different
works about whom he had thought of.

Ramkinkar had great attraction for acting and music. Many dramas had been staged in
Shantiniketon directed by Ramkinkar. He was a lifelong bachelor. The absent-minded
artist could not make a family. He worked relentlessly for the goddest of art till the age of cS
70 and died on 2 August in 1980. st

The Great National and International Artists and Artworks 21
Lesson : 7
An introduction to Bangladeshi Renowned Artists
Modern art starts its journey in Bangladesh in 1948. It was then Pakistan and this area of
Pakistan was called East Pakistan which is now Bangladesh. As a result of parting of
India into two countries, many Muslim citizens from different provinces of India came
to Dhaka, the capital city of East Pakistan. They formed new administration, educational
institutions, industries and new habitats in this new independent country. Some of the
prominent painters migrated to Dhaka from Kolkata. Zainul Abedin later on titled
*Shilpacharya’, Quamrul Hassan, Anwarul Haque, Shafiuddin Ahmed, Shafiqul Amin,
Khaja Shafique Ahmed along with others were among them. They founded an art
institute with their initiative and hardwork for the study of art. The name of that institute
established in 1948 in Dhaka was Government Institute of Art. The first session started
only with 12 students. The duration of the course was five years. The first batch passed
out in 1953. From that time a few and fair numbers of students were passing every year
getting education in Fine Arts. Many of those young artists then were going to the
wl — eS
8 Faculty of Fine Art, University of Dhaka

22 Arts and Crafts
developed countries in Europe, America and Asia to receive higher education. After few
years of returning to the country they expanded art of the country through their
exhibitions of paintings and sculptures with new experience and new ideas. Many of
them joined at this art institute. The senior renowned teachers were developing the study
of art getting more young teachers as their associates. Step by step the artists were
successful to make people realize the importance of paintings and other arts. Eventually
tastes in different social classes started improving. The artists began to manufacture
many commodities of everyday life with beauty and grace. As a result lots of works are
created for artists in different organizations and the area of work is enlarged. Nowadays
in present society an artist is as important as a doctor, engineer and scientist. Artists are
engaged in many important fields of works. Nowadays artists are required in many
important works in the society. They are needed in almost every work like art, culture,
education, business and administration. Artists are using their perception of beauty in
production of television programmers, cinema, news, photograph, cartoon, publication,
graphic design, poster, advertisement, industrial products, packaging, fashion and design
in garments industry, design in furnishers and so on.

From the beginning of its journey in 1948 the Government Art Institute became a large
one. At present this institute offers education in different subjects as a faculty of Fine-
arts under Dhaka University. There was only one art institute for the study of arts until
1971. The demand of artists increased as the field of arts expanded after independence of
Bangladesh. As a result, Faculty of Fine Arts was founded in Chittagong University. A full
government art college also was established in Chittagong. Now both Fine Arts
Department of Chittagong University and Government Art College together became a
complete institute under Chittagong University. There is a department of Fine Arts under
the faculty of arts in National Poet Qazi Nazrul Islam University at Trishal,
Mymenshing. Recently department of Fine Arts has been founded in Jahangir Nagar
and Jagannath University too. Moreover, University of Development Alternative and few
other private universities offer the study of Fine Arts. In addition to that there are

some private art colleges in different cities like - Dhaka, Rajshahi, Bogra , Jessor and
Narayangonj. Moreover there are many institutions including children Academy for
children to draw pictures.

There many painters and sculptors now in Bangladesh. The exhibitions of arts are being
organized nationally and internationally. Bangladeshi artists achieved name and fame for
the country in many advanced countries of the world. These valuable arts have been kept
in famous museums and libraries.

‘Bangladesh Silpokola Academy’ organizes the exhibition of arts of Bangladeshi Artists at national sx
level. International art exhibitions and conferences are arranged biannually. The little of S

The Great National and International Artists and Artworks 23
that exhibition is ‘Asian Biannual Exhibition’. The artists from many countries
participate in this exhibition. The good reputation of Bangladesh has been affirmed in
many developed countries for organizing the ‘Asian Biannual Art Exhibition’.
There are lots of painters and sculptors now in Bangladesh. It is not possible here to
write about all of them. Some of the renowned artists are discussed briefly in the
following chapter. You will know about other artists gradually.
Lesson : 8 NPP ern
Shilpacharya Zainul Abedin =
Zainul Abedin painted many beautiful and mentionable 9 goa em
pictures. These are now precious arts of Bangladesh “" OWEF
and famous in foreign countries. Zainul Abedin was the ( > -
founder principal of the first institute of arts. He taught \ oas
many artists of Bangladesh practically. He created jobs —
for artists. He could make people realize that artists are J,
needed for proper running of the society. He founded /
art schools and institutions for children. He was awarded \ A$
with the title of ‘Shilpacharya’ (Master of Art) by the :
people of Bangladesh to show honor to him for his —_Shilpacharya Zaimul Abedin
contribution in the field of arts.
He was born on the 29 December, 1914 on
if ey Mymenshingh. He got admission in Kolkata Art
. «a School after he had completed primary education.
i E He became well-known as a brilliant student
a. within a very few days. He was appointed as a
Rus NS i teacher after his education there. He passed with
ee eM distinction in 1938.
a Zainul became very famous as a painter at very
# foo bs: young age. A fatal famine appeared in Bangla in
r 7 ra ‘ 1350, Bangla year. The scarcity of food took place
due to the negligence and inhumanity of British
‘Crow’ drawn by Zainul tulers.
The young artist Zainul was shocked at the death and precarious condition in the
sx streets of Kolkata, Hate for British government was born in his heart and he became
§ furious in his mind against British rule. He drew lots of pictures with bold lines on the

24 Arts and Crafts
death and vulnerable condition of people. Later on these were acclaimed as ‘Famine
Paintings’. And his name became well-known in all parts of India overnight.
The distinguished persons out of India
iter. also praised Zainuls paintings in
i —— fire s newspapers. Zainul Abedin got a life of
a * i Ny, aM i 62 years. He was always busy with work.
airy All on a sudden he was affected from
re. US eed RY fi Fh irrecoverable disease of lung cancer and
“eH ~4l (2, died on the 28" may 1976. To the end of
wesad = ff ~ P< his life he was working for the foundation
—— feed of Folk Art Museum. The ‘Folk Art
_ Museum’ is situated in Sonargaon the
‘Cow’ drawn by Zainul Abedin oldest capital of Bangla. He started it but
could not complete.
He drew the Muktijudha based the liberation . :
war of Bangladesh. Some of the great arts Mh
of ‘Shilpacharya’ are ‘Durvikher Chitra-1943 i : |
(painting on Famine-1943),’ ‘Shangram’ Yen nce
(straggle), ‘Moi Dea’, ‘Gorur Gari’, ‘Goon (4h: BTA \ |
Taana’, ‘Shoutlt’, ‘Dumkar Chobi’ (60 feet us Y AK: Jee "|
height scroll), ‘Monpura-70’ (20 feet height = -"*S= EA
scroll). Collections of his paintings were in Napa Sa te Tee
national museum, in Zainul Archive in = = Qe 4
archives in home and abroad. He achieved © s™mne"!943" drawn by Zainul Abedin
lots of rewards, honor and respect during
his lifetime. He was invited to many
F countries of the world. Delhi
=| cry University gave him an honorary D.lit
| 13 degree. He was given the title of
GE Fa —— . ‘National Professor’.
ah ti ~<a Lesson : 9
Basler: <. Quamrul Hassan
< ft = — We He painted a great number of pictures
a . ; . during 50 years of his profession. He &
Pesaine 19S)" drawn by Zeta Sheds used to point everyday and the number 8

The Great National and International Artists and Artworks 25
of pictures were not one or two but unlimited. Let us count the number. If 5 pictures are
painted every day, the number of paintings will be 1, 000, 00 in 50 years of time. It has
not been heard yet whether there is any artist in the world who made as many drawings
as he did. His skill in drawing was incomparable. He ‘a
was also a founder teacher in the Art Institute. He
made many artists in young age with sincerity. Later in
life he founded ‘Noksha Kendro’ trying for long time. Om U
He was director of the center. He made numberless = .
new sketches accompanied by a group of artists, @ be
weavers and craftsmen. He was born on the 2™ : Y
December 1921 in Kolkata. He received education in he Yh
painting at Kolkata Art School. He was involved in the = a
movement named ‘Brotochary’. He was directly ‘i #7
affiliated with this movement from 1939 to 1948. “Self Portrait’ drawn by
‘Brotochary’ movement was a practice to be a pure Quamrul Hassan himself
Bengali and to inspire others to be so. Besides, he formed ‘Mukul Fouj’ to make children
pure Bengali and worth citizens. He was the commander General of that force (1946-
1951). He was also famous for doing physical exercise. He was awarded the little, Mr.
Bengali and got reward for his handsome body and health.
Quamrul Hassan’s most remarkable work of art was the beast like face of Iahiia painted
during liberation war. It was a poster picture. ‘These beasts have to be killed ‘was
written in this picture. The face of Iahia was painted in the shape of a beast. Iahia was
the mastermind of killing millions of Bengali and that poster was a weapon of

4 MD } we encouragement and inspiration for freedom
ti A \ XZ) ee fighters. So one picture worked equal to
os sa a millions of machine guns. Quamrul Hassan
gL Fay protested against improper act and injustice
—_— Wee eo eos 2 He died of heart attract at the program of the

=k a =
LW) AY sea seeieneunetes
‘Fisherman and Birds’ painted by Quamrul Hassan

Forma-4, Arts and Carafis

26 Arts and Crafts

" Abi
\/ 4 NN) SA a :
¢\ \ J ut A 7) ig
y)} LY Il FAW BA
Quamrul Hassan’s Drawing ‘Horse’ *Muktijuddha-71’ Poster
painted by Quamrul Hassan

rebel poets presided by him on the 22™ February 1988. Quamrul Hassan is the architect

of our National Flag and National Monogram. He did many remarkable works during his

life time. He received much honor, respect and awards in social and national life.

He was awarded ‘Ekushe Padak’. His famous paintings are- ‘Nobanno’, ‘Uki Dea’, ‘Tin

konna’, ‘Banglar Rup’, ‘Jele’, ‘Pacha’,’Naior’, ‘Shial’, ‘Bangladesh’,’ Gonohottar aage

0 pore’, etc. Many of his paintings are preserved in Bangladesh National Musuam.

Lesson : 10

Anwarul Haque

Artist Anwarul Haque was famous as a devoted artist :

and teacher of Fine Arts. He taught every student =

practically. He spent his whole life teaching at Fine }

Arts Institute. He did his responsibility as a principal

of Fine Arts Institute for several limes. He drew some )

painting whenever he got time. He was famous at

drawing beautiful picture in water color,

He was born in Uganda in Africa. He spent his \

childhood there. He received his education in art at ;

Kolkata Art School. Later he joined as a teacher there aster necaecat

at young age. After that he joined as a teacher at

Dhaka Arts Institute and till his death he continued teaching at the same institute, He s

died in 1982. a

The Great National and International Artists and Artworks vai
gO = on Lesson : 11
C a S. M. Sultan
( 8. M. Sultan became famous as an emotional,
f => indifferent and whimsical man and distinctive artist
of fine arts. The themes of his painting were rural
Sf life, agriculture, farmer, fisherman and hard working
> ) people of Bangladesh, The characters of his
i. paintings are not like real humen. They are sturdy
Cc MNS figures and
C ») \A ee look powerful. It is not tough for anyone to
ia aoe understand his painting because of his skills of
; drawing. We normally see the farmers as poor,
‘Self Portrait’ drawn by S.M. Sultan yyhealthy, weak from outside but it is not true.
NE
Moy?
aller. aA
‘
eae Ks
=<—— === =
~~" S —_——~ ~— — Ww = i _
| WN) 42
cs 7 z Ls
7
OAL es
ia) L s+ ss
e N ra a
~S _—_—_—
‘Cultivation’ drawn by S.M.Sultan
He depicted the persons in his painting in such a way that we see the farmers as mighty
38 and strong. The farmers cultivate land, produce crops and provide foods. They are, in
5 real sense, the strength of the country. Their internal existence is powerful. Sultan was

28 Arts and Crafts
born in Norail in the year 1923. He spent his childhood in his village. Later he learnt
painting at Kolkata Art School. After that he left home and traveled many placcs in
home and abroad. He used to paint pictures and sometimes exhibited them and again left
for backpack tour. He traveled many areas in India and Pakistan.
He also traveled many countries in Europe and America. His dresses were also different
from others. He had long hairs. Now and then he used to wear black long clothes, cover
the body with pale yellow sheet of clothes and ‘sari’ and ‘churi’ like a female. He led
his life like a mendicant. He to the end of his life lived in Norail, his birth place. He
founded a special school for children. The name of the school is ‘Shishushorgo’.
Children study, sing, live in nature and live with trees and animals. They learn willingly
without pressure. Sultan used to tend many kinds of birds and animals. He used to take
those birds and animals like his own children. He died at the age of 71 in 1998 in Norail.
His paintings are invaluable wealth of Bangladesh. Bangladesh Government honored
him with the little of ‘Resident Artist’ for his contribution to art. He was awarded
‘Shadhinata Padak’.

uddin Ahmed f ie! see Pe
Shafiuddin Ahmed was an ideal teacher of [iyi Bah fe x v
Fine Arts. He became renowned as a modest 1 3 f Be Fl 8 §
man of good nature and skilled painter. Ru € fe Pi “ell dere
He was a renowned painter in carving, E aoe Ee = Men k ‘a- :
etching dri-point and deep etching and gM S ety N ‘: ee
aquatint. He had been teaching since the [Pa aries 4 Aves a
begining of the art institute. He made many Fe" wy ae =a. A
famous painters of Bangladesh with has Poy Sail } i wat
talent, sense of art and education. He tila t . : :
continued teaching there for some days. ; } a
He became famous in all India as the artist [4 ¢ a- ‘2 -
of engraving and block. One of his pictures [Rupee -* Sere ut

‘ , F ow xs wt 3 ae tae
was ‘Santal Meye Gramer pathe’. Artist oe ae aa
Shafiuddin painted many pictures in oil ET a ms
color. Those were pictures on flood, fisherman, aoe Pal SS
fishing net and fish, boat, storm etc. about ee ee N 29
nature and also art on eye. Zainul Abedin Santal; engraving wood by Shafiuddin 8

The Great National and International Artists and Artworks 29
rightly said about him “Artist shafiuddin can perfectly assess the standard of art’. He
was awarded with many
kinds of reward and honour and was given ‘Ekushe padak’. This talented artist took his
last breath on the 20" May 2012.
Lesson : 13
Kazi Abul Kashem
Kazi Abul Kashem became famous as a successful artist of book designing. He enriched
books, cover pages of newspapers and illustrations of 40s and 50s of the twentieth
century. He was renowned for drawing political and social cartoons in pen name. He
wrote for children and got ‘Bangla Academy Award’ for his contribution to literature for
children. He was bom in 1913 in Faridpur. He did not get any opportunity to study at any
art school. He learnt drawing pictures by himself. He got gold medal from National
Library for drawing picture in children’s book.
<< DO Gs — ra,
Rs lB &
BY: GCN = ReVWraS wo) hei
_ —— KY i Qe A ;
a nae Ne
Wy aa —~—. ve Typ y/o 3
J |}. Sass A A oA Y
MEICT St . Ss ates
“Dopeaja’ on language movement 1952 painted by Kazi Abul Kashem
At present, the number of artists who has enriched Bangladeshi fine arts is great. Few of
them are mentioned below. Other contemporary artists who became famous are khaja
Shafiq Ahmed, Shafiqul Amin, Habibur Rahman, syad Shafikul Hossen and so on.
Besides them the artist who contributed to painting, sculpture and other arts are
so Mohammad Kibria, Aminul Islam, Qayyum Chowdhury, Murtaza Bashir, Rashid
&\ Chowdhury, Abdur Razzak, Devdas Chokroborti, Hamidur Rahman, Novera Ahmed,

30 Arts and Crafts
Syad Jahangir, Kazi Abdul Baset, Nitun Kundu, Jonabul Islam, Mir Mostofa Ali,
Shamarjit Roy Chowdhury, Hashem Khan, Rafiqun Nabi, Abu Taher, Golam Sarwar,
Mahmudul Haque, Kalidash Karmokar, Hamiduzzaman Khan, Kazi Gias, Swapan
Chowdhury, Syad Abdullah Khalid, Monirul Islam, Abul Bark Alvi, Shahabuddin
Ahmed, Abdus Sattar, Alok Roy, Monsurul Karim, K.M.A Qaium, Farida Zaman,
Shawkatuzzaman, Shamim-Ara-Shikder, Ranjit Das etc,

Lesson ; 13

Background of our Fine Arts and the Spirit of Liberation War

The tradition of our art has evolved mainly from our folk culture. Our folk culture has
been derived from the rhythm of our ever-existing colorful life of rural people and our
natural environment. So the pioneer painter Zainul Abedin depicted simplicity and purity
of common people. The forms of folk-arts, that he created, are obvious in his paintings.
‘Tin Mohila’ ‘Guntana’, ‘Bangladeshi Meye’ Majhi etc. To him the existence of nature
is adorable and soft. He observed outdoor world as a thing of tenderness and
gracefulness. Many of his co-artists Quamrul Hassan, Anwarul Haque, S.M. Sultan and
others enriched this form. Quamrul Hassan showed the folk tradition of Bangladesh in
his paintings. Folk tradition is alive in hearts, memories and old fictions of village.
Quamrul Hassan depicted these things in

his paintings. The old tradition of folk

culture is noticed in ‘Skora’, ‘Fancy pot’, po as

dolls, and his paintings. ‘Tin konna,’ Naior Vga ‘a ;
etc. The folk life has been projected in his em i, - f > a ene
paintings. Using bold color and style of (iy alas ‘| bi > ee ‘
expression was followed by keeping rhythm #gevjees| i P th,

with folk tradition. Quamrul Hassan painted Ares Soe WaOe Cie ag
the new dreams, sufferings, hopes and ff cf uh , q i. ‘ae
frustration breaking of old tradition. - od a TH

S.M. Sultan is another great artist in whose e _ as *
paintings Bangla, Bangali, and life style of JP 04. ita u
their forefathers are projected. His paintings ff \ -»!\y Pee) ioe
are not about external reality. He drew internal CO ——
existence of characters in his painting.

That means, he painted those strong and «cp op .6h Bangladesh” in Rajshahi University
sturdy farmers, with whose labor we liveon. Campus sculpture made by Nitun Kundu &

Fine arts and Crafts in Bengali Rural Life 31
The tradition of fine arts has descended from the continual journey of culture for
thousand years. Following the same tradition from the language movement in 1952
through the liberation war our independent sovereign country and our red and green
national flag have been created. We have got this mother land for the sacrifice of three
million martyrs. Besides drawing about the common people our great artists exposed the
face West Pakistani army deployed against our liberation movement with their brush
through poster, festoon, placard etc. We, for example, can see in Quamrul Hassan’s
poster. These beasts have to be killed Ei Janoarder Hatta korte Hobe. Thus after
the independence the spirit of our liberation war was exposed in sculptures and retics
life ‘Aporajeo Bangla’, Soparjito Swadhinota, Shabash Bangladesh, Jagroto chourongi
shagshaptak and Shahid Minar and the history and tradition of our country will be the
subject of art for years after years. There has been a great change in our art and literature
due to liberation war and in new situation after liberation war. Liberation war has been
presented with its multidimentional features in arts life our poetry, stories novels, dramas
and songs. Our artists have created a great number of art works on liberation war and
still they are doing it.
Activity : Write names of some sculptures made in the subject of liberation war
Sample Questions

Multiple choice Questions
1. Who is called ‘Dopeaza’ among the artists given below?

a. Rafiqun Nabi b. Hashem Khan

c. Kazi Abul Kashem d. Mustafa Monowar
2. Who Drew the Poster titled ‘Ei Janoarder Hatta Korte Habe’?

a. Qayyum Chowdhury b. Quamrul Hassan

c. Pranesh Mondal d. Nitun Kundu
3. What is the length of the painting ‘Nabanno’ drawn by shilpacharya Zainul Abedin?

2 a. 70 feet b. 75 feet
5 c. 65 feet d. 60 feet

32 Arts and Crafts
4. When was the Faculty of Fine Arts established?
a. 1948 b. 1957
c. 1952 d. 1970
5. Who drew the picture ‘Moi Dea’?
a. Quamrul Hassan b. Nitun Kundu
c. Hasem Khan c, Zainul Abedin
6. In which country was Rembrandt born?
a. Germany b. England
c. Italy d. Holland
7. Who is the artist of the painting ‘The Dance.?
a. Matis b. Rembrandt
c. Pablo Picasso d. Paul Cezanne
8. Who is the Father of Modern paintings?
a. Paul Cezanne b. Pablo Picasso
c. Matis d. Van Gogh
9. How many students were there in Government institute of Art in the opening
year?
a, 12 b. 15
c.14 d. 13
10. Who established the ‘Shishu Shargo’?
a. S.M. Sultan b. Quamrul Hassan
c. Shafiuddin Ahmed d. Anowarul Haque
Answer to write down
1. Describe what you know about the role of painters and Fine Arts of Bangladesh.
2. Who is called ‘Shipacharya’? Write about him in detail.
3. Which artist started ‘Brotochari’ movement? Write about his life and works on
detail.
4. An artist became renowned as a devoted teacher in Fine- arts. Who was he? Write
about him. R

The Great National and International Artists and Artworks 33

5. “He perfectly can assess the standard of art” to whom this remark was make?
Describe in detail about him.

6. What is ‘Shishu Shorgo’? Who has founded ‘Shishu Shorgo’. Write what you know
about that artist.

7. Write the names of 12 renowned artists. Write about one of them in detail.

8. Write about the father of modern Art Paul Cezanne.

9. Write about the subject matter of the work of Ramkinkar.

10. Evalnate Ramkinkar as the father of modern sculpture in the East.

11. Write down the characteristics of the works of Rahtha as a modern sculptor in the
world.

Answer in brief

1. write the name of 6 artists who founded the first institute for the study of fine arts.

2. What is the name of the first institute for studing Fine Arts. Which year was it
established?

3. In which area of social life the artists are needed?

4. Write in brief about the painting ‘Ei janoarder hotta korte hobe’ These beasts have
to be killed.

5. Who is the Father of modern sculpture? Write about him.

6. What is or who is ‘Dopeaza’? write in brief.

7. Write about Artist Rembrandt.

Forma-5, Arts and Carafts

Chapter Three
Fine arts and Crafts in Bengali Rural Life
oS <=>,
| Ca
_——$————
CESS
= FA
SF
—~ IS
ee ————————— hs Wan) \Z . AS,
——— > AMM, @ 2 7
After completion of this chapter we will-
e know the influence of fine arts and crafts on the Bengali rural life.
e know the role of fine arts and crafts in different professions.
© be able to describe the arts related to folk life. FS
N

Fine arts and Crafts in Bengali Rural Life 35
Lesson : 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6
Secular Life and Culture of Bangla
Folk life means the life of common people. The people who speak in Bangla language,
born in Bangla, live permanently in the area of Bangladesh are called Bangladeshi.
They, of course, have their own style of life. These styles exist in the use of arts and
crafts and other culture. But different communities have different life style. The rural
life, for example, is different from town life. Even in rural life, one community’s clothes,
houses, cultivations etc. differ from other because of different natural environments. One
the other, hand there is much similarity too. The use of fine arts and crafts is huge also in
aborigines and in tribal communities. It will be easy to understand this if some examples
are given here. Most of the houses in towns are built with bricks, iron and wood.
Furnishers and essential house holds commodities are made keeping similarity among
them. Arts and crafts are reflected on almost every thing like dinning table, chair, cot,
almira, closet, book-self, sofa-set, door, window etc. these house hold commodities are
given artistic look with different designs of flowers, birds, leaves etc on them. The
craftsmen engrave on wooden door, window, and cot to manifest pictures of different
subjects. Moreover, doors and other furnishers are given artistic look by drawing
geometrical designs and linings on them. Painters and craftsmen manifest artistic look in
different colors. They make block prints, painting leaves and natural scenes on curtain
on door and window. The projection of pictures is sometimes made by block of wood
and rubber. In other household decoration arts and crafts are used almost every where.
For example, painted wooden horse, elephant bride bride-groom, howl, birds, terracotta
board, tepa putul, elephant, horse, human bodies, flower vases, dishes of different shapes
and sizes, decorated pots, earthen plates, reticulate bags made by strings of jute
embroidered quilts etc. Most of the crafts are made by Bengali village people. Some of
them are made as a habitual practice of arts and crafts. So we have given a name of these
arts, Folk-art’.
On the other hand, the people who make pots, dishes and household utensils with
bamboo, cane, jute and knife axe, plough, spade, plate and bowl and pitcher with iron

FS and brass are called craftsmen.

N

36 Arts and Crafts
At present some specific commodities of folk-arts and crafts are made in special
arrangement in towns commercially to sell it in global market.
Arts and crafts became essential part of cultural life. We hang paintings by natural artists
and small sculptures made with concrete, bronze and wood made by conventional
sculptors.
Village : Village houses are different from that of city. The village houses are built with
mud, wood, line, thatching materials, jute-stalk, hay, ‘Golpata’ (big leaves of a small
tree used in thatch), leaves of coconut tree ete for professional and economic activities.
The village farmers, fisherman blacksmith, potter etc build their houses depending on
their need and environment. Though they were not expert in architecture, the sense of art
and beauty are noticed in their commodities and houses they live. Arts and crafts,
manufactured in their houses, are different in size and shape which are made with
bamboo, cane, wood etc.
Nowadays, Concrete houses are also built in villages to be protected from natural
calamities like storm and flood. Though these are concrete houses, they were built
paying heed to rural natural environment.
Arts and crafts are applied to some extent in every day essential commodities in different
profession of village life. Some of these commodities are also used in urban life, which
already have been mentioned here. For example- chopper, axe, spade, shekel, tool,
plough, yoke, ladder etc. These are made biting the iron by blacksmith. Yoke and ladder
are made with wood and bamboo. Basket, ‘Ku/o’ (winnowing far), creel of different
shapes and sizes are made with bamboo. Arts and crafts look very beautiful in the design
of fish creel ‘Chai’. It has been honoured as developed evidence of crafts. ‘Sheetalpati’
is mended with the bark of ‘Murta’ plant. Craftsmen make a pitcher and make designs
while mending ‘Shitalpati’.
There are aborigines and tribal people in different areas in Bangladesh. The tribes
‘Shautal’, orau, and Rajbongshi, live in Rajshahi, Dinajpur, ‘Garo’ and Koch in Mymenshing,
Sherpur and Netrokona, ‘Khashia’,’ Monipuri’ ‘Tripura’ in Shylhet. In Barishal the people
of ‘Rakhain’ Community live. A great number of aborigines and tribal people live in
8

Fine arts and Crafts in Bengali Rural Life 37
Chittagong Hiltracts. They are ‘Chkma’ Marm Tanesanga’ ‘Bom’, ‘Bomung’ ‘Tripura’
and so on. They live in high hills and villages. They make their living houses keeping
the harmony with nature which is the obvious presentation of architectures and crafts.
They cultivate crops on valleys of the hills. The name of their method of cultivation is
‘Joom.’ They especially females mend their clothes, dresses in their own houses.
Everywhere in the life of aborigine communities arts and crafts exist.
Practice and use of arts and crafts in Bangladesh is a secular culture. Bengali people of
different cultures, religions and communities have been using the commodities made by
artists and craftsmen in different fields of life. People of every religion make arts and
crafts.
Bangladesh is a secular country. Common people are non-communal. It is a long
tradition for the people of Muslim, Hindu, Buddhist and Christian to live together.
They help each other in their works. They do many works by sharing.
A Muslim, a Christian or a Buddhist farmer uses chopper, axe, ‘Khonta’ scissors made by a
Hindu blacksmith without hesitation. A Muslim, Buddhist or Christian does not have
any hesitation to cook in pots made by a Hindu potter, Every one of us drinks water from
earthen pitcher.
Gradually the demand of those arts increased in social life. They also have been mixed
with folk arts and crafts.
Now there is popularity of embroidered quilt everywhere locally and internationally.
That is why some professional artists engaged in making embroidered quilt. There are
not only rural women but also town women among them. Even the artists educated from
fine arts have taken this as their profession.
In rural life blacksmiths, potters weavers are professional craftsmen. Both self trained
artists and formally educated artists have taken craftsmanship as their profession. Artists
of the Department of Fine arts are contributing to folk-art in designing and decorating
differently which have achieved acclamation in foreign countries.

has]

Ss

N

38 Arts and Crafts
Tnstitutional practice of fine arts at its begmning was not thought to be the profession in
aocial life in this land. Day by day the painters and cultural activists have made the
__ “,
*
an | qT oe ! f
> 5 : i a " -_
= : oe y" | ip il ry!
i eM yy i? Ya A =~ ee me
oc alae us stk ex
@ PP & ‘ " = ) A> i
‘ 7 | ' =
On the occasion of Bangla Noboborsho ‘Mongol Shovajatra’ at the Faculty
of fine Arts preamises in the University of Dhaka
social people understand the necessity of arts and crafts. Architects, painters, cultural
archivists are as important as doctors, engineers, administrators, educationiats, scientists
in advanced society. Paintere and cultural activista have made the social people
understand the necessity of arts and crafts. Painters and craftsmen now have made lots of
advancement of fine arts and crafts. So as a subject it is very important ftom primary
education.
There are faculties and departments large im size in the four predominant universities.
There are department of Fine Arts and Crafts in some private universities. Besides, there
c)
3
rd

Arts and Crafts 39
are many institutes to practice fine arts and crafts. A great number of artists are involved
in teaching profession from elementary to tertiary education level.
Lesson : 7, 8, 9 and 10
The manifestation of creativity in arts and crafts occurred in Bangladesh long ago. The
paintings by Bangladeshi artists are honoured locally and internationally,
The consciousness of education and culture is increasing day by day. Many businessmen
earn their livings by selling Artworks. So cultural people are collecting paintings. They
are also collecting crafts. They are decorating their homes with paintings, crafts, and
sculptures. They are making their office premises with erecting sculptures, and
sapien role _ advertising agency: ASS ay ry i ¥ | ey
Artists are making the television Saray if é ire a
program more enjoyable by giving [fee cneeue me dh :
canvas. Painters are essential part for J lm Ts (i ? if
a newspaper, They are essential in | i? are * am” te) |

me ¢) GF sr RS a 4 :
vee, TAO
i SOE Waestti tls atl Terracotta
ae g sar 4h-s i pavilions, gate, stalls and decorate
cle i: re : aed in trade and industrial fare. The
ciMi Ya tt Pa beye ey oT etES PEND VSYT VET ENT Mat

= Nokshi Kantha
QQ

40 Arts and Crafts
of home, office, stalls and even super markets.
So it can be said without doubt that due to the expansion of arts and crafts, the
importance of artist as a profession is increasing. Young generation without hesitation is
taking arts and crafts as a profession happily and willingly
Lesson : 11, 12, 13 and 14
Different arts in Social life Cs.
Almost all kinds of arts related to A LD)
social life were discussed earlier. It Ys AWS
will be easier if we divide the topic 7 N SIS) NS Si
into some sections. [= WF ,
1. Folk-art _ \e
Doll made of clay, terracotta design, A Pings.
wooden elephant, horse, human body, TTIW
birds, embroidered quilt, terracotta, iineaateany
toy, ‘Shitalpati’ ‘Shokher Hari’ eT UL Ss
‘Golper Chittra’, ‘Gajirpot’ etc. — Cc )

YS H es
3. Crafts aq Sigg, 2 ae
Chopper, axe, spade, terracotta pot, =
earthen plate, dish, earthen ‘bank’ SS f_\
‘Motka’ etc. Bamboo made basket, a) ae a k :
case, dish, Huka, chai, straw-hat, EEE (erzas.
different kinds of designs to build Rey
houses, ‘Ghoti’ pitcher, golden and —— NDT Been
silver jewelry, dish etc wooden crafts AES ANA risieidie 2
are very popular in Bangladesh. s|eereretorece BHD
Designs on the doors and windows, Sy s A) Bae
cots natural scenery and almira are ————

Different kinds of Crafts S
N

Fine arts and Crafts in Bengali Rural Life 41
modest crafts. The boats of different sizes sailing in Bangladeshi rivers are made by
craftsmen.
The furnishers made with bamboo cane and sofa-set, chair, table, stool etc. are standard
crafts.
Rickshaw is made with bamboo, cane, iron and plastic. Rickshaw is famous all over the
world for its beautiful and aesthetic design. Art of Rickshaw was exhibited in Japan,
Britain America and Canada.
Rickshaw painting became famous internationally.
A great number of painting exhibitions already have been arranged in Bangladesh. There
have been many exhibitions on sculptures and modern crafts. The number of aristocratic
people and patrons of art are increasing day by day. They are collecting paintings,
sculptures and other products and decorating their houses, offices and commercial
places. Art is bringing happiness to them.
There are many art works made of leather in Bangladesh. Leather bags, shoes and
garments have demand both in the country and abroad.
Sample Questions

Multiple Choice Questions
1. The folk-art of Bangladesh is —

a. Nokshi Kantha b. Copper and brass utensils

c. Baskets made of bamboo and cane d. All the above
2. Which is the main festival of the Buddhists?

a, X-mas day b. Buddha Purnima

c. Durga-Puja d. Eid
3. Of what is tepa doll made?

a. made of earth b. made of plastic

c. made of iron d. made of wood
Forma-6, Arts and Carafis, Class-9-10

42 Arts and Crafts
4. Where is zoom cultivation practised?
a. on the bank of river b. in the plain land
c. in the mountain slope d. in the sea-beach
5. Who arrange 'Mongol Shovajatra'?
a. Faculty of fine art b. Bangla Academy
c. Shilpakala Academy d. Shishu Academy
Write down the Answer
1, The influence of Fine Arts and crafts on social life- how is this treated in cities?
2. Give a description of the necessity of arts and crafts in rural life.
3. Write briefly about the use and position of secular arts and crafts of Bangladesh.
4, Make a short description on Pohela Boishakh in Bangladesh and Bangla
Noboborsho (Bangla New Year)
5. Answer in twelve to fifteen lines
a. Village Boishakhi Mela ( Village Boishakhi Fair).
b. Celebration of Pohela Boishakh by Sayanot.
c. Procession for luck and fair in Fine Arts Faculty.
d. Professions artists are employed.
e. Folk-art and Folk-artists.
f. Crafts made with bamboo, cane and wood.
g. Importance of a painter in society.
6. Write short notes
Blacksmith, Potter, Nokshi Kantha, Boat race, Design, Ekushe February
Rickshaw, Wood Craft, Jute craft, Hatpakha.
oo
5

Chapter Four
Learn and Draw
+a > =
~ SOARS See. -
wr See Se WSs ‘
” o F. =~
Pe
After completion of this chapter we will be able-
© to explain the rules of drawing pictures.
* to deecrlbe ingredients for painting.
® to describe various medin of painting.
3

44 Arts and Crafts
Lesson : 1
The rules of drawing
We have come to know about the rules of how to draw the pictures .We have learnt that
we need to notice size, shape, proportion etc at first in order to draw a picture. All
substances of the world can be divided into three categories according to their shapes.
They are circle, triangle and quadrangle. One should first understand the shape of an
object before one decides to draw it. We will learn the introductory lesson about size,
shape, proportion and perspective for drawing in this chapter. Along with these, we will
also learn the significance of composition and light and shade, and their precise
application.
ZY &&> Gs
=,
is / as HlIKXS
"ZW ——_ a
Ky aX
2 ”
Size and Shape. How is the size and shape of the above objects? Are they &
tound, triangular or quadrangular? Notice those first carefully and draw. Rg

‘Learn and Draw 45
Drawing
To draw the picture of anythimg or any subject only with linss on paper or canvas is
called drawing. The drawing is done with pen, chareoal or brush. In fact, there is no line
on the body of any animal or tree, Let us exemplify a picture to make you understand the
lines of drawing. The picture is round it has its shape and size. It occupies 3 certain
space, We draw this picture on the plain of paper with the help of few lines, These lines
are the border-lines of our sye-sight. We see the frond side of the picture to a large
extent but we do not see the rest of the parts. We imaging the lmes on the points
wherefrom we can aee no more. In this way we are accustomed to sec hills, mountains,
Tivers, trees, buildings and all other things. We materialize everything on paper with the
help of imaginary lines here our eyes are detained. These pictures are made more
beantiful and flawless drawing the light and shade properly. It is not difficult to
understand the weight, shape and size of the picture through they are drawn on the plain
of paper with color, light and or mete linea. Say when we see the picture of a pitcher on
the plain of paper, it is not difficult for our part to understand that it is round in shape,
occupies a certain space and has a
weight. So we need to be aware of few ” -
Tecessary matters and Tules in order to A ‘ EN

2. Proportion. OD i,

3. perspective. Oi ies A >

4, Composition . Raye i

6. Color WH) | A IW lsu
everything that we see around us have Lr
their own shape and size . Some of : a %
them are round or tall while the others oe AL
notice carefully, you will see almost all 23
things fall in the above mentioned
categories. For example, flower, fruit, ' ( ii Y
tree are of round shape while house, Ae ws = »
quadrangular in shape. Almost all the

ee birds are of oval shape. (a different If the proportion can not be drawn properly, the
& type of round shape.) picture may be inconsistent like the above one,

46 Arts and Crafts
2.Proportion ; Proportion is a very important factor in respect of drawing pictures. A
Picture can’t be accurate without maintaining its proportion. Let us think of a picture.
The measurement of its mouth and neck will be of certain different extents in proportion
to its body. How much larger or smaller the mouth or the neck would be in proportion to
the body should be decided first after observing the picture closely. Similarly, the hands,
the legs, the eyes, the cares etc of a man in proportion to his body should be measured
first to draw the picture of the man, Again, there may be many trees, creatures and an
article in a natural scenery Everyone of them has its own size and measure. They should
be observed properly to understand their comparative sizes in order to arrange them in
big or small order,
Lesson : 2 and 3
2. Perspective: Perspective is needed to draw realistic pictures. A picture cannot
represent reality if its perspective is not presented properly. The perspective depends on
our eyes, seeing with those eyes and different posters of seeing. As for example, you
observe a drinking glass paying it on a floor. Standing at a certain distance, observe the
glass at different phases raising it. Draw the exact pictures of those different phases. At a
phase, keep the surface of the glass parallel to your eyes and draw the picture. Now,
compare the pictures of the glass at all position, The same glass has got different forms
ae S- because of the different posters of your seeing.
SE. Sitting at a particular place, put a book on your
f ‘ an reading table and observe close how the
} Naw : “| — position of the book is. Now, draw the picture
See aL ses of the book. After this, put the book at
Easy way of drawing different positions and draw those pictures.
pictures or any round obiect ~~ (_] Now, compare all these pictures together and
we 7 watch how the same book takes different
se tee ie a forms.
ee Take two more books of the same size and
if SS _] arrange them in an order so that one book
eS) 7 <—~ remains in the front and the order at the rear of
eS x ae ~ the previous book. Now, match the books
pe = ie > J closely from a particular place. The front book
vain *— will seem large than the middle book and the
til rear book will seem smaller Than the middle
\ 8 book. That means, the more an object place
parallel to our cyes habituated to sce in different? We are in fact. ‘
this way. Our eyes compel to see in this . S
way. a

Learn and Draw 47
Look outside through the window of your room. Playground, market, trees, road, human
being etc will come to your sight tighter. However, how large is the window? It would
be at best four feet long and three feet wide. Notice the rail-lines well. Two iron-lines.
Travelled up to long distance through the wooden slippers. The two lines have been said
in parallel distance close to each other. There is no scope of different distance even for
an inch any where. If there is the least of difference, the train will not move, Look
forward standing on such a rail-lines .
"eee Parallel cines of eyes o
Pay A“

The quadrangular box which is equal on all sides is an example of perspective.
You will have to stand at a place from where the rail-lines have gone a long way
straight. You must not stand at the point from where the lines have taken a tum. U will
see that the parallel lines have gradnally met at a point at a certain distance. You will
also see that the pillars for telegraph set along the rail-lines will similarly meet at the
Same point a parallel line. The sky over head, the trees, the fields and all other thins will
meet at that same point Parallel to your eyes. That means, the border line of your eye
side has ended at this point. This point called vanishing point. The parallel lines of the
eyes are called ‘Horizon-line’. You can understand the horizon line more clearly if you
see it from the bank of a big river or sea source.

Same book with different The shape of same book becomes smaller

shapes in different places and larger depending on distance and place

eo
8

48 Arta and Crafis

f eee | Rt

S14) ly, Arta A RBA 3 Hl onl pCa

PI || oa Pee | baa Es I

ono” oe
oe Sv ss “S202 WED
To observe the perspective clearly by standing beside the rail line

distance but also for color and light and shade. The color will be brighter and strong of at
the front side of a picture but it will be gradually lighter when it passea distance. For,
example , the front side laves of a tree will be deep green , the expression of the sun and
“the light and shade’ will be intense but the same tree at 2 hundred yards away will be
smaller in size, color will be of much lighter green mixed with the Sade of blue. The
light and shade and the intensity of the sun will be ntuch lesser, The perspective is the
proper partial of how much light the color will be. If the perspective of the picture is
eecurate the exact distance of hundred yards between the two tress can easily be
understand. A picture becomes lifeless if the perspective cannot be expressed accurately.
Lesson : 4
Camposition
Composition means essay. Say, an essay or a cow will be composed. The writer needs to
introduce all aspects of the cow in the essay with his language sc that an accurate idea of
the cow is available. The composition bears almost the same meaning for a picture as
well. Thing that you are going draw a picture of a cow. The composition for it willbeto .,
arrange the size of your cow in proportion to your paper and the point of placing the 3

Leam and Draw 49
Sa ee SSG CE Aah
VZ.e GE Pe =

Ws ke | nee f y BNEN :
Wore an , im. Ss S=sS ii SS etal
| 5) eo a, 8 ig
* se | Ae Tee
3, pe!
Most eet a, + Bees, 3
fa :

hye gy ‘ P
S\ ~ *® Min ‘

: fa || i iia %
reo: : a | Uh
oe AH! SS %

yr, fretsen Re A

a ae Nat Bac a ee :

Mears ecole) = 8 ae

Four types of composition and subjectivity are decorated in different views,
Which one is better end beautiful it is to be drawn.

blow on it. It will determine whether the cow will be big or small, whether it will be kept

or fight or left, or ‘up of down ‘, Above all, everything will be arranged in such 2 way #0

that the picture may lock beautiful. Making this mrangement properly is the

composition. When one decides to the composition of a picture, he needs to arrange the
objects of the picture Le. humans, animals and other things and their colors, ahape and
size, light and shade etc. For that reason, he may make three or four types of
compositions on small papers and keep all those tighter side by side in order to choose
the best one. The best composition should be used then to draw the main picture in
Foxme-?, Arts oud Caraita, Clazs-9-10

50 Arta and Crafta

Lesson : 5

Light and Shade

Light and shade is an important aspect of drawimg pictures. A picture becomes

meaningless if light and shade cannot be portrayed properly. Without it, a picture cannot

be attractive. We know that the sum rises m the east and sets in the west. So the position

of the sum must be noticed when we will draw the natural sscen way. How the sun-ray is

falling on the scenery to be drawn should be noticed. How the sum posits in the trees,

animals and other things how the shades of these cbjects fall on the land etc should be

The picture of static life, human or flowers in the vase etc are the themes for drawing

Picture sitting at home. Light will fall on these objects centering through the doors or

windows. How the light falls and how it gradually turns from lighter shade to deeper

shade are to be noted.

ea Sy) Ve Sn es = $ = a

Light and shade should be drawn properly in pictures, The upper picture show how the gun the
shads interplay. The lower picture shows the reflection of the 2

candle-light and the form of different shades. 2

Learn and Draw $1
The light and shads of a picture can be divided into three parts:
1. Excessive Light
3. Light shade and deep shade

The difference in light and shade also takes place because of color. If, in any picture,
there remain some objects of red, white, blue and black color side by side, their light and
shade will be different because of their being different in color. White drawing picture,
one should notice carefully there differences of color in order to draw them precisely.
Some examples of light and shade are given here. If you notice carefully, you will
Color
Color is the life of a picture. One must observe carefully the colors of the subject which
will be drawn as a picture, If the subject is of red color, it will not serve the purpose if
you use only red color. Color undergo changes because of light and shades, effected by
shade or by reflection. Re-color should be used by understandimg these changes and
differences. We say that our trees are green,
Picture should be drawn noticing the different of the light and shade. The light yellowish
green, green mixed with red and blue there are many more varieties in green. So,
drawing a tree, if you only use green color, it will not be sufficient. You will have to use
the exact variety of green that you see in the tree. Otherwise, the picyure will seem to be
life-less. You need to be conscious of using color. You have been in the mean time
introduced to the color which you will have to use for drawing pictures. The color which
you will use for drawing a picture must be put in practice for few daya so that you can
draw the main picture skillfully. If the use of color is not made properly, there are
chances of the picture to be spoilt.
Lesson : 6
Pictures made of cloth, paper 4
and wood; sculpture of water 1. @. Qsv
materials, Picture can be made PILZ og GN Nice
even without drawing it with /\ Li \/ <a OR,
canine ens We Re We a, I\ W Be
brush need not feel sad. | a Hl (ZY
Wooden Piece (chip) : => . ah
wooden pieces are available at

% the place where carpenters Sculpture made by iron wire and ruzh

N

52 Arts and Crafts
work. These pieces can be joined one
with another and thus arranging then in 4
different ways, you can make small ae ,
sculptures. Sometimes elephant, horse 7 IT es q
ot lmman can be shaped in this way, MT re OS h
Look at the example of the picture many = | & al ie
kinds of sculpture can be made joining , i
cut piece of wood. Caegs
One colored paper, such as yellow, blue, _
red ete are available in the market. Collage picture
Collect the old papers and magazines of home and abroad. You can easily make pictures
with this colored and ordinary papers by cutting and tearing them and then fixing them
with glue on another paper. It will be better if the paper on which the picture will be
made is a bit thicker. To make picture in this way, you need a small scissor, ablate, glue
and a few colored papers. Anyone can
Lf make pictures with there materials. In the
Aira JS same way, pictures can be made with the
fii Ce han POL colored pieces of paper. It is not difficult
AP it itice = to collect cut pieces of cloth. You can
Se ) Hl i Gs collect a lot of cloth of this sort from a
Se pee. le i — fas tailor’s shop. Picture and sculpture can be
Se ee bs Ge made of waste materials such as paper,
Se ys @= wood, cloth, broken pieces of china
herianctoneecateasy Tuma When ynsne te pe
— : paper, or piece-clo it
ess earls be convenient for you to draw the picture
Branch of tree : f you notice carefully you will see, branch of tree has similarity with
the shapes of many times available in our environment. You can have sculpture
trimming them or cutting them short. In the same way, you can make sculpture using
pebbles by drawing on them or fixing them together. You can also make sculpture by
winding cloth or the iron-wire or curling the thick wire with the hands,
Lesson : 7
The materials for drawing pictures
Usually the materials for drawing are pencil, ink, pen, water color, poster color, pastel,
color pencil, charcoal, Crayon, marking pen, different types of brush, oil color, paper
and canvas. In addition these many more materials one need such as casel table,
hardboard, clip, Knife, scissor, blade, glue, linseed-oil, tarpin-oil, etc. All the materials
are not needed to collect at once. You only need to collect the materials of the medium
eo
3
AQ

Learn and Draw 53
by which you will draw the pictures. We are describing here some media and their
materials.
Paper
In the past, papers suitable for drawing picture were produced in Dhaka and its adjoining
areas. The paper made by hand was called, hand made, paper. This paper is no longer
being made in our country for the last 25 or 30 years. However, ‘hand made’ paper is
being made in our neighboring countries. The name of India, Nepal and Myanmar can be
mentioned in this respect. Hand-made paper is most suitable for drawing water-color
picture. The paper which is easily available for drawing picture in Bangladesh is called
‘Cartridge paper’. Cartridge can be both thick and thin. Water color picture can be drawn
in thick and rough cartridge paper. Superior quality water color picture can not be drawn
in smooth paper. Many types of foreign paper are available for drawing pictures.
The Board, Clips and Easel for drawing picture
One or two boards made of wood or hardboard are necessary to put the paper of
drawing. Our indigenous hardboard are cheaply available. To make a drawing board,
we can cut it from a hardboard with a saw according to the size we need and then we
can rub its comers with sand paper. It is better if an ordinary board is of 45 x 60
cm. If it is possible, you can make big boards for drawing big pictures. Picture is drawn
on paper with water color, poster color, pencil, pen and ink, croon, pastel etc. This paper
is fixed well in the board. Two to four clips are needed to fix it.
Easel
Easel is the stand to draw pictures. Picture is drawn keeping the board on the easel.
Many times picture, may be drawn keeping the board on the table, hand or floor. If we
draw them using the media of water color, pen, ink, pencil etc. In that case, casel is not
of much use. But easel is a must, if we want to draw a picture using the medium of oil
color. Usually easel is made of wood and alluminium.
Lesson : 8, 9 and 10
Different media of drawing pictures
We may draw picture in different media such as pencil, pastel, pen and ink, water color,
oil color, poster color etc.
Black and white picture
Pencil : HB, 1B or B, 2B, 3B, 4B, 6B are inscribed on the wooden pencil. Light and
strong line is marked on white paper mark on paper. 2B is a softer than 1B and it marks
more darkest line.

oD

=

54 Arts and Crafts
In this way, 3B is farther soft and blank, 4B is softer and blacker than 3B, 65 is the
softest of all and it leaves the darkest and deepest mark on paper. Beautiful black and
white pictures can be drawn using these pencils only. Different forma and changes of
light and shade can be portrayed by rubbing the pencil and drewing small lmes from
different sides.

Ink-Pen : We call entrance black ink ‘Chinese U ZZ

Ink*, Perhaps the people of china first used this \ ; GLA
ink Though we are not sure of the first,

the present timea, it is understood that there waa \ ezr=

a dominance of the use of black ink. Picture can NN a

be draws with the help of black ink and ordinary SY Sy
rid. Lines are dominant in these pictures, 2<)~ >,

available in the market. You yourself also can

make pen. You can also beautiful pen by cuttmg

the famous artist of our counter has drawn many L%.

of his pictures using black ink and reed pen.

Black and White: Black and white picture | Yo Ql “Sh Fs
can be drawn in some other media such as Yo ee
charcoal, crayon and black marking pen. You Seat) race

may try to draw with the charcoal available in Is in a
suitable for drawing picture, A kind of soft and Be a ce, paca
thin coal is made for drawing picture. This is Ry: eerie

called charcoal. If you look for it in the shop of ee ee ‘i
are also made. A kind of liquid is needed to BY AV? Ni
be found in the shop of color. A kind of mall | =A] = ay ap
Msking pen of many color, including the black Firat one with brush, middle
one is found. Black and white picture can also on Oe ee
signature pen by drawing line after line. betteen cos youn
Black and white picture can be made in many other media in many other media. As for i
example, it can be done with black color, water color or with black and white poster 3
color.

Learn and Draw 55
The colors for drawing pictures
Picture can be drawn using various color. Let us first of all, know about colors which are
the media of drawing pictures. Yellow, red and blue- these are primary color. Orange is
made mixing yellow and red, red and blue are mixed to make purple, blue and yellow
are mixed which turn into green. So we can name orange, purple as green as secondary
(medium/ intermediate) color. Some other colors can be made mixing different
quantities of color with the three primary colors. For example, if you want to make
bright green color, you need to mix more yellow and less blue color. In order to make
maroon color you will have to mix red, yellow and blue proportionately. Though it is not
possible to make accurate black color from the primary color, approximate deep black
color can made. However, a fairly enough color picture can be drawn with the primary
colors- yellow, red and blue.
Water color : The color which is transparent being mixed with water and used to draw
picture is called water color. If the color dose not becomes transparent after mixing
water, it cannot be called water color. Transparent color is called water color. This color
can be used to draw pictures as an alternative to water color. Usually white color is not
used in water- color and one cannot rub the paper much with brush and color. If the
picture can be drawn in two or three washes, it becomes beautiful.
Poster color : Poster color is unclear water color. In case of unclear water color, the
previous color is totally hidden when another color is overlapped on it like the poster
color, there is another medium called ‘tempera’. When picture is drawn with ‘tempera’ the
color can be made lighter mixing white with other color. If white color is mixed with
water color, there remains no transparency. In case of transparent color, when a color is
overlapped by another, the color which is overlapped does not disappear. The existence
of both the previous color and next color can be felt. It is also found in the shape of
quadrilateral cake inside the box. This is also made in the form of a tablets. A kind of
powder is available in the color- shop; Thin powder can be mixed with water to make
water color. A type of colored paper can be soaked in water to make water color in order
to color photo. This color is also found in bottle. Some drawing inks found in bottle can
also be used as water color. Poster color is also found in glass- bottle in shop. However
this color is not transparent. No tart standing that- line was drawn in this method.
Water color, poster- color, tempera etc media are usually used to draw picture on paper
and these are the main media to draw pictures. There are some other media such as
color-making pen, chalk, candle pastel, color pencil etc.
Color Marking Pen : Various types of thick and thin marking pen are found to draw
picture. Drawing lines and rubbing on paper with these, beautiful color- pictures can be
drawn. In order to draw picture with pastel, the paper should be a little rough.
Oil Color: Oil color is usually found in tube or can in the form of soft paste. This color
is used mixing linseed oil or tarpin. Pictures are usually drawn. Using poster and
o, tempera, one color can be hidden with another color easily. Color can be used as many
S times as it is necessary. Picture can be drawn in this method mixing powder color with

56 Arts and Crafts
Gajglue or Arabic gum. Color picture can be drawn mixing yolk with powder. Water
may be mixed with yolk in order to dilute the color. This method is named, ’Egg
tempera’. One can draw picture in cloth, wood, hardboard as well as in paper using this
method. In the ancient time, miniature pictures were drawn following this method. Many
artists of our country have drawn picture in this method. The famous picture ‘Struggle’
of Shilpacharya Zainul Abedin on canvas, hardboard or wood with this color. Canvas for
drawing picture is a suit of thickly oven cloth with thick thread. In the color shop, color
oxide is found in the form of powder. Linseed oil or turpin is mixed with this powder to
make oil color. Oil color paintings are long lasting. The picture or painting of this
medium can be made lasting for years. Few thousand year old paintings of this medias
are still surviving intact in the art gallery home and abroad.
Sample Questions

Multiple Choic Questions
1. In how many shapes can all the objects of the world be devided?

a.One b.Two c.Three_ d. Four
2. How many types of light and shade are there?

a.One b.Two c.Three_ d. Four
3. How can collage be made?

a. by tearing and cutting paper b. by cutting wood

c. by carving on wood d. by coloring paper
4, What is easel?

a. Board of drawing picture b. Plate of Coloring

c. Stand of drawing picture d. Fram of picture
5. Who is the artist of the picture songram?

a. Quamrul Hassan b. S.M. Sultan

c. Zainul Abedin d. Hashem Khan
Practical
1. Make a picture with pieces of torn clothes.
2. Make a picture by cutting colorful paper. Paper Size- 15 x 20 inches.
3. Make a sculpture with pieces of wood using glue.
4. Make a shape of the followings with iron-wire. Horse, Deer, Human Body.
5. Make a horse with hey and iron wire or bamboo stick. Time- 3 days
6. Make a sculpture with pebbles as you like. %
7. Make a sculpture with two or three toys together. 8

Chapter Five
Practical Art

Lesson : 1, 2, and 3 KR PEE AX
Typography and Calligraphy '] Ne ee est
We all are familiar with features of fow ft A
alphabets in Bengali and English. Long time A \\S rant,
ago, when lead typos were used, they were ” ee at
identified according to their facial features and KO UE KH
characteristics, For instance, in Bengali
alphabets: Vidyasagar, Roman, Surupa,
Progoti, Sushri, Adhunikaya, etc. In English, ey
there were Times, Roman, Universe, etc. In Cy IK x ae
Bengali alphabets, wooden typos were used Qe. Pte, ~
prior lead. Panchanan Karmakar was the SK Ra :
inventor of the wooden typos. ee
Due to blessings of science and increased ( Ala
development of technology, in modern times,
use of lead typos and letter press has been
declining; and rapidly places are being 2
occupied by offset printing, photo-type, and sofa Ge NG)
computer. Consequently, rapid changes are areRe wat
taking place in visual features of the typos. sree QT
Due to technology and computer, regardless to ae pai mG 8 GA OI,
what extent visual features and shapes take ITY HAD WS
place, yet the original design is still being Gi, Bey Sige
created by the artist. From the ancient time, the sa Grud oath
age of wooden typos to present computer age, IB TE FE
the visual feature of the alphabets are rendered «en gene

the artist. ACO PATE |
by the artis pel ag —
The stylistics of alphabets has to be acquired. Fa gaR Se az HR |
Few days of regular practice is required for POPS IT LD TOTP MTT
that. Few good and beautiful alphabets have to Shen eT
be imitated identically. Later, applying one’s Three types of handwrite with

brush and ink

Forms-8, Arts and Carsfts, Class-9-10

58 Arts and Crafts
ingenuity and creativity, how beautifully alphabets can be redesigned has to be
practiced. As I mentioned earlier, whatever the visual shape and artistic forms of typos,
artists have provided the shape. After collecting few specimens of alphabets, picture, and
the rule, should you practice regularly, you would be able to give artistic rendition in
beautifully written Bengali and English, For publicity to make poster, beautiful writing
is required in hoarding. For advertisement in television broadcasting, different designs in
cinema, writing is necessary. In cover page of monographs, newspapers, signboard,
name plate even for political propagation, to write on walls, various artistic forms are
applied to alphabet. Commercial commodities such as label of medicine, wrap or packet,
milk, cookies and other food products; packets of toiletries- soap, oil, lotion and various
types of such cases, typography is an essential art.
CUR SHI UU ATT
at ;
- FAI GT
CA IHD ea Precor RAAT
PAT ay GT TA a et U
COA WAT Ear NE_MCT A gare
PROF RAT OST CT Perera aN
COT GA Grewal” seq VS SIS U
~ Bae BoA
Three types of handwrite with brush and ink 9
~}
N

Practical Art 59

Calligraphy is also an art. Prior ee z

invention of printing, all types Ts

of writings were done in hand Ye

writing. Proclamation of royal ‘ 2 4

edicts, documents, manuscript, S Zi \ 2

writing book, religious Ve AOA IY °

scriptures, all were written by t AN | ae *

scribes. , D)

® awe

Manuscripts of old Bengali :

hand writing, palm leaf

manuscripts and specimens of a va

documents are preserved in our apy r) p? 9 f)

national museum. The Holly ( i ‘AAD ) f)

Quran is there in beautiful

Arabic script. All over the a (es NC

world, the Holly Quran in

beautiful calligraphy = are et

available. Various zests of Some patterns of Islamic Design

Islamic teachings, rendered in Arabic script, are considered as special fine art. That is

called Calligraphy and it is a characteristic of Islamic art. Experts in handwritings are

called calligrapher. A good number of artists in Arabic, Farsi, and Urdu languages have

applied calligraphy to contribute in Mughal and Persian painting.

In order to do calligraphy, numerous artists have portrayed various shapes of animals,

birds, and plants. The national museum has a collection of calligraphy engraved in stone.

In the walls of few old mosques in Bangladesh, specimen of calligraphy as form of

Islamic art is available.

Documents that have significance of hand writing and calligraphy are yet written in

hand. To pay homage, writing letters of honorary, is still in practice. In wedding,

birthday, and festivity, writing invitation letter in hand is a socially recognized aesthetic

culture.

The handwriting of Rabindranath Tagore is very beautiful. In writing poetry, he

entangled crisscrossing lines so as to give it shape of pictures. The handwriting of poet

Nazrul is also beautiful. Many attempt to make their writing beautiful following patterns

of their style. Few famous artists of our country have writing style that is worthy to

follow. Stylistics in hand writing of artists Quamrul Hassan and Qayyum Chowdhury are
so also familiar to many. The constitution of Bangladesh was written in hand then typed.
§ The calligrapher is Abdur Rauf. For calligraphy, design, and pictures, it’s a unique

60 Arts and Crafts
aesthetic piece. Few examples are provided here regarding rules to make handwriting
beautiful and calligraphy. Should you pay attention and practice regularly, you would be
good hand scribe and calligrapher.
Lesson : 4,5 and 6
Design
Necessity and use of design is all pervading. However, the meaning of design is wide
and spread in many field. Here, we would discuss about making simple designs with
flower, leaves, bird, fish and line that are used in everyday life.
Design is widespread in folk art. In Embroidery, fan, prayer-mat, handloom made sari,
especially, Jamdani, Tangail sari, Dhakai BT sari, Katan, Benarasi thousands of designs
are used in many color. Pay close attention to pattern of design and its application in
these. In Bangladesh, numerous types of engraved designs are also available in wooden
works: doors, in making bed, boxes and lockers, furniture, palanquin, boat, etc. These
are called relief work. Such relief works are also used in pottery of which we discussed
in the chapter on pottery. Observe these works closely- you would become familiar with
many designs.
Designs and graphics are abundantly spread on articles of practical use such as wooden
doll, elephant, horse, earthen doll, pottery, barrel, utensils made of brass, silomsi, vase,
rose water sprinkler, khol-pot, sindoor-pot, jewelry box, gold and sliver jewelry.
Drawing floral design on the streets in Ekushey has become a means of tribute to the
martyrs. In recent time, in any wedding, birthday festival, Eid, Puja, and in almost every
festivity, what floral designs are drawn are invariably are specimens of folk art that are
amalgamation of flower, leaf, bird, and lines.
Circle, triangle, octagon, and lines are ingredient of making design. Observe these four
elements as to see how many design you can make. Observe the designs of the pictures
and see how using same elements and frequent use of lines rhythm and tune of design
are created. Let me clarify further. Entangling dictions one with the other in poetry and
music as rhythm swings the mind, so is frequent use of design not only creates beauty
but also creates rhythm and tune.
cs
S

Practical Art fil
= =
AV Pt
/e\ /e\ ey EN:
Madd Lanse OOSSUZECY
aC RRS
’ wana i) toh,
AAOMOl ses
. or re
oN, Via WA |
aa BN rd
Ma KY ey
AAA AAAL AAA "ne
3 eT Saaeae en a Se

ea aa! ite
ttt :
Poe Se
pee
Coe NGS oop
Pateebitesd bs A
Desianwillt seomeliioal pation SLX Gr
E NOLL

pues

Practical Art 63

PISPISCISCIS
. Jira Ye . Jr i
oe 1<f ot air
=== > >»a=*= >
PIO CIB FIS CIS
OKI WOK AS
4 >
LINO SO
Ve) 7 AX ¥, ¥,
Wid LIZ
MENS 2XE VRE KIO Ka
Design with Birds, Flowers and leayes

Circle, triangle, octagon, and lines constitute four elements of Islamic art. In Islamic art,

figures of animal are not usually used. Geometrical patterns get priority, In various

mosques, and edifices, specimens of Islamic sculpture of Bangladesh, aforementioned

geometrical patterns are used variously, to create Tumerous designs

Here various usages of geometrical patterna are displayed. Try youtself-see how many

forms you can invent. Using images of flowers leads, fishes, and binds displayed above,

practice yourself, New and beautiful designs you can also create for your various own

work, for examples, designing in boutique, cover of monograph, poster, wall paper,

invitation letter, Eid card and in many crafts.

Lesson : 7, 8, and 9

Graphic Design

For print and publication what design is used we can call graphic design, The world of

publication is under the ganmt of graphic design. Ths aesthetic of print relies on

illustration of monographs, periodicals, cover page, calendar, design of various products;

posters of publicity for products are dependent on it. Therefore graphic design is very

important.

5

64 Arts and Crafts
by “a8,
er,
A ;
ay a = wey cat
Z - ey ha ee
a ‘
‘ + The book cover has made by artist
The poster has made by Artist Sanjib Das Apu Kt
Prior advent of computer or its mass use, a graphic designer used to prepare all elements
by hand. Picture, design and style of writing, everything was drawn using color, brass,
and different pen. Besides, air brass, scale, compass are also used for design. Use of
typography is important for graphic design. Typography is style of the printed alphabet
used in cover page, label of product, and other amenities. Writing of different style is
significant for graphic design. For graphic design, colors of poster, Chinese ink, brash’
pencil are important, Because of widespread use of computer, similar to other aspects,
interesting changes has taken place in graphic design. Computer graphics is now a wel
known word. Many organizations are there to learn computer graphics.
Graphic designer now use software to design for printing, resulting in great change in
print industry. The printing industry of the world, as a result, one can say, has reached
the apogee of the height. Consequently, future of the printing industry now depends on
an expert artist. As a result, a graphic designer can become self-reliant.
Lesson : 10, 11, and 12
Fashion Design
Vogue, tradition, or style is called fashion. It can be in costume, furniture, jewelry or
others. Even hair style is not excluded from it. However, the word fashion is widely used ii
for costume; and with fashion, we understand widespread use of garment with popular s

Practical Art 65
shape and method of production, Lexicographical meaning of fashion is tradition in use.
This tradition changes with time, so we can also call it updated tradition as well. Culture
changes with the progress of civilization through the ages, Change, expansion,
refinement, even inclusion and exclusion has been part of fashion through time. For
example, sometimes, people prefer looge garment then, everyone likea that type of dreas
and it becomes fashion of the day. Again sometime, tight fitted garment becomes
popular, For that fashion is not for long time.
One Z i

A T-Shirt and s kamiz
For various countries, this fashion, thus, indicates social and economic condition or
status. In the 19" and 20" century, world fashion houses and magazines have developed
highly muccesaful busineas around fashion trend. The reaaon lies in improved quality of
life, and long with that consciousness of fashion has grown among people.
Exporting fashionable garments to the West and America, Bangladesh hag made its
economic foundation solid. Our garment industry has given importance to garment and
fashion of the dresses. As a result, BGMEA, the apex body of Bangladeshi garment
mamufactures has built a fashion training institute. Besides, varioua private sector
universities offer degree on fashion design. It is redundant today to mention that garment
is an art, Regardless of class, profession, age, and social status fashion has become
important to all. That's why; it carmot not be termed as hobby any more. Rather, along
with costume, shoes, sandals, hat, toupee, jewelry, umbrella everything haa to be
matched.
Forms-9, Arts anil Carafis, Clnas-9-10

66 Arts and Crafts
However, fashion has to be adoptive to its society, culture, weather, and comfort. In
Bangladesh, there are many fashion houses, and newly designs are also noticeable in
bazaar. For that reason, fashion designer has great demand. A sense of art, correct fusion
of color, and stylistic dress can enrich this profession.
It has relation to our traditional culture of folk tradition, our taste, values, and identity,
etc. Each nation has its own tradition and its reflection is evident in their manner, diet
and costume.
In information technology based global village, we are upholding our culture on world
heritage. Preserving own tradition or sometime, incorporating Western tradition, we also
are matching with globalization. Its influence has created also impact in our garment
sector. Diversity has emerged in design. Products of many designers have received
recognition globally. In this respect, we can mention Bibi Russell, the world famous model.
Reviving handloom and using hand made clothes using the modern fashion, not only has
she revived the native handloom sector, but also has inspired the new generation to inject
their ingenuity and creativity, so as to generate a new trend.
The First of Baishakh is the tradition and pride of the Bengalis. Considering the interest
of the buyers, every year on the Pohela Baishakh, fashion houses produce new clothes
suitable for the weather. The Bengalis intend to become colorful in dress.
Again, on 26 March, using red and green, many tops of women, salwar-kamiz, fatua
and Punjabi for male are made. In February, paying homage to martyrs, using alphabets
new clothes is made. Again when the spring season advents, the fashion houses design
dandy and chick clothes for customers that also color out mind.
Our national days of remembrance, religious festivals, and tradition of Bengali days
have enriched designs of our fashion industry with a new trend. To enrich this industry,
an artist has great contribution. Because, with the application of what designs you have
learned, you can also become a successful fashion designer.
Lesson : 13, 14, and 15
Interior Decoration
In modern time, in residence and offices, to meet necessity and taste, what decoration is
made, is called interior decoration. Men, charmed by beauty of nature, have applied its
beauty in everyday life from earlier. As it indicates taste, so does it create comfort in
living style. Art can make significant contribution in this respect. Today, residential
houses, office, auditorium, large architectural edifices, educational institutions, malls, FS
N

Practical Art 67
ambience, which soothes our mind. Mind gets pleasure working in beautiful ambience,
te
i = — ¥ | if a
A modem Interior of a house
Interior decoration is made conforming necessity of office space, taste, culture, and
weather, Decoration is not limited to illustration of walls, rooms, floor, or ceiling,
electrical lights and furniture are also part of decoration. The success depends on what
furniture should given importance and what should not get the preference. Excess stuffs
dilutes importance of important materials. Therefore, one has to think ahead of time
about important material. Besides, color of wall, tiles of floor and carpet is also
Because of difference in shade of color smaller room appears larger. The height of the
ceiling sometimes appears higher or lower, For that reason, attention must made in
selecting color. Color of bed room should be light and as such that does not hurt the
cycs. For, casting cyes on the wall becomes soothing and cases sleep. Deep color
agitates mind, resulting in disturbance in sleep, On the other, for living room, a slight
touch of bright color is preferable. Besides, using various wall paper the wall can be
made attractive. The color of curtains of windows and doors is also important that must
be in harmony of the color of the wall, Regardless how beautiful the color of the rooms
are, unless proper use of light is applied, the entire effort would go in vain. Therefore, it
has to be bear in mind that despite selection of appropriate color, attractive curtain, and
e furniture, lacking application of light would make the decoration incomplete. Light can
s be applied to room in many ways. Bulb, spot light, lamp shade, stand lamp can be used,

68 Arts and Crafts
In that case, to focus on specific item, spot light can be used; for instance, show piece,
painting, etc. Again, the living room can have twilight than complete illumination.
Besides, the use of beautiful lampshade enhances beauty of the interior. Only they have
to be place properly. However, the extent of interior decoration depends on the taste of
the resident and demand. Through professional education and experience interior
decoration can be made aesthetic, charming, and attractive.
Sample Questions
Write down the Answer
1. What types of designs are there on Jamdani sharess, Nokshi Kanthas,
Jai Namaj and wooden doors?
2. What types of artworks and designs are there on Mosques, Temples
and Pagodas?
3. What is Graphic design? Explain its different aspects.
4. What is Fashion Design? Opine on impact of fashion in our everyday life.
5. Describe necessity of interior decoration.
6. Describe on what topics be stressed on in interior design.
co
S

Practical Art 69
Applied arts for class ix
Drawing, Typography, Design and Graphic Design
Drawing
1. Direct drawing and making sketching from real life and nature.
Number of Classes- 5.

Medium : Pencil and ink-pen. The teacher will sometimes go in the nature with the
students. He will give a class on drawing trees, houses, fields, sitting on the bank of river
or near the forest with paper, board, pencil or ink-pen. The students will do free drawing
and sketch on any subject from nature many as possible.
Besides, an artist-student has to draw and sketch very often outside of the classes. That
is why every student always should bring sketch or drawing book as well as pencil or
pen. Whenever he gets time, he shoul draw or make a sketch. On a tour, at market place,
in field, train, steamer everywhere a sketch-book (Khata) is a fulltime companion of an
artist. An artist becomes skilled, confident and well-informed about art by regular
drawing and making sketch.

An artist has to study and exercise drawing and making sketch on paper with pencil or

pen selecting the subject from nature.

Some examples have been given here-

1. Practicing free hand drawing and sketching.

2. Still painting, five classes on still life. The students have to select any one of pitcher,
pot, bottle, glass, earthen pot to practice drawing still painting following light and
shade or size and shape.

Duration of one class is 3 to 4 days. Medium- pencil and color pastel.

3. Free selection from nature- Composition.

Number of Classes- 8
Medium: Water color, poster color, pastel color or anything.
Duration of Class- 4 to 5 days.

hac]

S

N

70 Arts and Crafts
The students will select the subjects of their own. It might be any village house, bank of
river, boat, fishing, harvesting paddy, etc. In town it might be any slum, road, zoo,
children’s park etc. It also might be any festival and program in village and town. For
example-‘Jatra’ drama, ‘Kabiganer Lorai’ ‘Ekushe February’, ‘Bijo Dibosh’, Shadhinata
Dibosh etc. It might be the favorite animals and birds. It also might be different life and
profession. For example rickshaw puller, van puller, hawker, fisherman, blacksmith,
potter etc can be the subject of composition or painting following the rules of using
color, light and shade, reflection.
Typography Learning
Number of Classes — 3 (More if possible)
Duration of every class — 3 days
1. You have to practice and habituate the writing alphabets of Bangla and English in
beautiful shape.
2. You have to know write well by practice and exercise again and again
3. The teacher will collect a stanza of a poetry or saying of a great man for the students.
They will write and design the stanza of poetry. For example-
“Caen Aa CUICHA SPAT
Ot Af Set SAN”
TISSAT TIA SHS NS
FT AR”
Design
Number of Classes — 3 (More if possible)
Duration of Each Classes — 3 days
1. Students will make design with circle, rectangle, triangle and line arranging than
differently.
x
Ss
N

Practical Art 71

a) Measurement of Design 6 = 6 inch on black and white paper- 3 different
Designs.
b) Measurement of Design — 8 * 8 inch, two or three colors on paper — 3 different
Designs.

Graphic Design

Number of classes- 3 (Duration of each class 2 days)
a) Cover designing for school magazine. (any medium)
b) Poster designing on tree plantation and protecting environment. (any medium)

Sample Questions

1, Make a freehand drawing sketch selecting any subject from nature. Paper size -25 x
37 cm.
Medium — Pencil or link- pen

2. Draw a block of a banyan tree. Time- 5 hrs or a day.

3. Draw an arum plant with pencil; Time- 5 hrs a day.

4. Draw a boat with pencil. Time- 5 hrs a day.

5. Study with a branch of mango tree with leaves with ink pen. Time- 5 hrs a day.

6. Practice drawing with still earthen pot before you. Paper size- 25 x 37 cm.

7. Practice drawing stilllife kept before you with color pastel.
Paper size- 25 x 37 cm. Time - 2 days.

8. Draw a picture on any thing in water color and poster color. Paper size- 30 x 80 cm.
Time - 3 days.

Object : Bank of river, fisherman, shepherd, on bufellow, parrot in a case, scene of

harvesting paddy. Kobi Ganer Lorai, Typography and Design.

oS
S

72 Arts and Crafts
Applied arts for class- X
Drawing, Typography, Design, Fashion Design and
Interior Design

Drawing
1. Sketch and Drawing from real life and nature

Number of Classes - 5

Medium — Pencil, ink pen and crayon.
The students will try to draw animal and human body as they did in class ix in above
mentioned media. For that the teacher along with the students will visit zoo, busy area,
market, railway station, village where life stocks are available. Try to maintain the
common rules for drawing in above mentioned media and in water color if possible for
practice as much as possible keeping in mind the light and shade, perspective eg.
Different kinds of trees, animals birds and natural scenery. You must always continue
making sketch and drawing sketch book or khata. Sketch book will be full time
companion.
2. Sill life

5 classes (more if possible). Duration each class- 3 to 4 days.
The teacher will arrange the subject for still paint. You can make still picture by pot,
bottle, can etc as you did in class ix. New objects like fruits, banana, papaya and
vegetables also can be arranged. In arranging still picture remember to observe properly
the reflecting of light and shadow. Do one or two classes with pencil and rest of the
classes must be with water color.
3. Composition

Number of classes- 5, Duration of each class- 5 days.
The teacher makes the students understand how to make composition. It is discussed in
chapter — 4 of this book. ee

S
N

Practical Art 0)
The students first will make a rough drawing of the subject of their composition. The
teacher will select the best one from at least 3 or 4. The learners will draw it freely in
water-color, poster color or pastel. Select subject from nature and everyday life which
were mentioned in class ix.
Typography

Number of classes- 3

Duration of each class- 3 days
Try to practice learning how to write standard alphabet writing discussed in class ix.
Make hand writing more beautiful through practice. Attend some classes to practice the
following things.

a. Making letter of honor.

b. Making poster painting.

c. Making invitation card.

d. Writing thanks letter.

e. New year card, Eid card, Birth day card.
Design

Number of classes- 3 (Duration of class- 3 days)

a. Make Islamic design with circle, rectangular, triangular, line and flower. The

teacher will explain in detail by making a sketch.
b. The students will make some Design to use for particular purposes. Example-
bed sheet, curtain, children’s dress, Panjabi, sari, sofa, cousion, table clothes etc.

Fashion Design

Number of classes- 2 (Duration of class-2 days)
The students will make a design of dresses for themselves and for their families.
Interior Design

Number of classes- 2 (Duration of class- 2 days)
Make design of living room, bed room etc. Draw useable furnishers, curtain and the
color of wall.
Forma-10, Arts and Carafts, Class-9-10

74 Arts and Crafts
Sample Questions (Practical)
1. Make some free hand drawings and sketches of a cow standing before you.
Time- 1 day.
2. Make a drawing and sketch selecting any object from nature.
Time-1 day.
3. Draw a mango tree, bamboo bower with pencil and ink pen.
4. Draw a hut and the environment around it with pencil and ink-pen.
Paper size- 25 x 37 cm. Time- 1 day.
5. Draw picture of a still object of vegetables arranged for this with pastel or in water
color showing the reflection light and shade.
Paper size- 25 x 37 cm, Time- 3 days.
6. Draw still picture what is visible to you in water color.
Time- 3 days.
7. Draw on any one of the following subjects in water color and poster color.
Submit rough drawing with main painting. Paper size 30 x 40 cm. or 15 x 18 Time-
5 days.
Subjects- fisher man, weaver, carts, woman carrying pitcher, bird seller, ‘Bede’, boat
with sail, boat race, harvesting paddy, ‘Dhan Marai’ hawker, any fair, ‘Dhan vana’
‘Making pitha’, ‘Ekusher provat Ferry’ procession, fair and Eid.
The students will try to paint selecting their subject of there own. The teacher may ask
questions like this.
bc]
8

Chapter Six
Practice from Practical
Objects and Memory
5 2 = > os |
i ° : |
End of this chapter we will be able to-
« draw pictures of still life,
e draw pictures of human and various animals.
® draw pictures of nature and surrounding world.
e draw pictures of various events and subjects from memory.
=
5

76 Arts and Crafts

Lesson : 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6

Still life and Fine Arts (inanimate life)

We have practiced painting separately with various objects and materials of every day

life. Now we will know that some objects and materials arranged jointly can be a

different subject of drawing,

The things we have to keep in our mind to draw still picture are the selection of the

shape and size of the materials presented together, to arrangement of the subjects to

observe light with the help of teacher. You also can practice selecting the objects by

yourselves.

rt -

\ =! ee *

fi _ —* ” zi
; e . — i A
oo =
fi , r ; - —, .-
Still Life painted with poster color

Lesson : 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12

Drawing practice with human bodies and other animals:

We knew primary lesson of drawing with human and animal in class viii. Now we will

know basic techniques for drawing human body. There are some rules and measurement

in drawing a small child and an adult person.
hs]
S
NN

Practice from Practical Objects and Memory 77
The structure of human body changes with the growth. There is a difference between the
measurement of drawing a child and an adult person. For example a child’s entire body
can be divided into four parts, if we consider his head as standard. But it is not
applicable in case of an adult person. It will be 7 or 8 parts if we divide an adult person’s
body considering his head as a standard.

It is presented in the following graph.

EN
Adult zs
anes y \\ j
SULUOGOT0
i =, =H = .
=) S Adult 15 Years 10 Years 5 Years 3 Years 1 Year
ce eS, h
itt
J \
\ wel L | ) \ =
s y \ \ 1 Year
} \*.*
Tm is
Py hier)
| tt = , ; .
| | CN a
Changes of the body in different ages of a person
You will achieve further skill on this issue if you practice with the help of your teacher.
Besides, It you observe deeply the movement of person you can make your picture more
lively implementing the past experience body and adding any animal with the picture
S you are drawing.
gy

i] Arts and Crafts
Lesson : 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19
Practice of painting with nature
We have drawn pictures from the memory till how. Now we will know how to paint
picture with real objects. Wherever we live, there are natural objects around, On any free
day start drawing the picture of your favorite scenery around you with paper board,
pencil from a specific distance following the basic rules and with the help of your
teacher.
The important thing you have to give attention is the selection of the area of scene in
your mind before drawing on your paper or canvas.
Another thing you have to be careful is the light movement of the moment you are
doing. If it is 9.00 o’clock in the morning, the sun light will be from the east and the
shade will be to the west but after 2.00 o’clock, or at 2.00 or 3.00 o’clock the light will
be from the west and the shade will be to the east.
When you will draw pictures having the knowledge of the relationship of light and shade
with nature, you picture will indicate the time when you drew it. You have to keep this
in your mind at the time of drawing.

i" 7 : "¢ a ne 2

> ie Nt fd ,

ie ra y » 4 7 ,) Ay a A

Pes) (wae se AE

as J sity j Fy) ( es oe a a are
z Ee =" “Waa Je J 3 ; a oe i os
Natural Scenery painted with pencil s

Practice from Practical Objects and Memory 79

Lesson : 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 and 25:

Practice form Memory

What we see today will be the memory tomorrow. There are many incidents in our life

which remain forever in our memory. Some memories are sweet and some are painful.

To draw pictures from those memories we have to go back to that past. The exact

incidents become visible in our memory if we close our eyes for a moment, We can draw

pictures from the recollection of those incidents.

For example, you went on a study tour to distant attractive places with all your

classmates and teachers after annual examination of your school, All of together you

enjoyed the natural environment and beautiful palaces which is permanent in your mind,

If you want sincerely, you can draw a beautifully picture of that place and natural

environment. In the some way you can draw picture from the memorable incidents of

your life.

Lesson : 26, 27, 28, 29, & 30

Mosaic painting/Mural

Mural as art is very old. Generally the picture big in size made on the wall or building of

a public place or the place where

people make gathering is called Mural.

Mural was made usually in big hotel,

restaurant, office building school, :

college, and national establishment. ; ee ra ae

Mural can survive in sun, rain, storm, <a ..! ae Bien

dust and other aversive climate as itis | ™ F: | ee

made with glaze titles. For that reason | 7 Ky 2 as |

Mural is made in open place or on the ty. ee! Bast i 4

out side walls of a building. Mural is ik pe. Aone

also called Mosaic Painting. i TA eS

Glaze tiles of different colors can be " \ en oe y

bought from shops. Mosaic paintingor = we =

Mural can be made with those tiles Pr ty fi es

which we use on the house wall. It is on teh a TF m «a, ura

also possible to make mosaic painting eg ie fa ei

with small chips of stone and pieces of . . 1 TWEE ‘ 2 wg Laas

glasses or broken pieces of ceramic == ol EES
S pots. Mosaic painted with broken colorful tiles.

80 Arts and Crafts
Method of Manufacturing
At first, try to enlarge the small lay-out of the picture for mural. That means small
picture will have to be enlarged according to the place where mural will be set. Then
draw the design or picture with color on paper or rexin paper according to the size. Next,
lay the paper or rexin on the floor (Nowadays, a small picture can be enlarged by digital
printing machine). After that, set the pieces of colorful tiles on the picture according to
the color and size. The mural will be completed when the pieces of colorful tiles will be
set on the paper or rexin. After that, check the picture minutely to make necessary
change and clean the dust on it. Then scatter the flour dumpling on a hard paper to fix it
with tiles. When the flour will dry, make marks on the picture to divide it into some
small parts. Give serial number to all the parts to maintain the originality of the picture.
Cut the paper with picture on it following the marks. Bring the paper with glued tiles to
the place where the mural will be set. Then set the parts of the picture according to the
serial number on the wall using cement and wait until it dries. After that remove the
paper using water and you will get the original mural. Finally, wash the tiles of entire
mural carefully with water and washing powder. You can use color oxide with white
cement to give the finishing task.
Sample Questions
Practical
1. What are the essential things we have to keep in mind to draw still life?
2. What the essential things do you need to draw real picture? Explain it by drawing a
picture.
3. Show the variations of structures of body in different ages by drawing picture.
4. Describe the devices of making Mosaic Painting.
xs
Ss
N

Chapter Seven
Crafts
After ending of the chapter -
Bamboo and Cane work
e We can make various kinds of bamboo made art work, such as- doll, flower
vase, astray, pen stand etc. We can also make sieve, basket, fish- creel, thatch etc
using bamboo.
e Wecan make cane’s simple and embroidered mat.
e Can arrange house with small fish creel and basket.
Cloth Print
e will know the name of the colors.
e will prepare the cloth for coloring and printing.
e will explain the procedure of Coloring cloth.
e will make block and pressed cloth with block.
e will use tie-dye system for printing cloth.
e will use wax- ‘butic’ system for printing cloth.
e will make wooden artistry.
Artwork using spare materials
e will make different kinds of artwork using broken vessels.
e will make artwork using spare wire.
e will decorate own house using these materials.
e will make artwork using clay- slab.
Forma-I1, Arts and Carafis, Class-9-10

82 Arts and Crafts
Lesson : 1

Bamboo and Cane Work

We all have seen bamboo. Many kinds of bamboos are found in our country. Such as-
‘Barak, Makhal, Jai, Muli, chikon’ etc. We may have seen same variety of bamboo in
different name in different place. Example- Barak is Boruya in Sylhet and Boro in
Noyakhali. Again Makhal is Bakal and Muli is Beto in somewhere else.

Cane is familiar to us. Usually we see two types cane, thick and thin. Long- thick cane is
Golla and thin one is called jail cane. Using these bamboos we can make door- window,
Chair, table, alna, cradle, dala (rimmed basket) winnow, doll and so many beautiful
things we can make.

But one can not use all verities of bamboo for all works, same to cane also. Each variety
requires each work and has to use; same to cane as for making structure Golla Cane is
used and for binding design and texture the jail Cane. It is a common rule. So, where we
will go to make something we will collect sufficient and can. But, all the time we will
not get expected things. So, what is available and less laborious we will use these things
to make beautiful things. If we get a piece of bamboo we will think what we can make
using it. Can we make flower- vase, tray, dala, winnow, basket, boat, doll, flute or
anything else?

Ingredients/ Elements

If we want to make something we need some apparatus along with bamboo and cane,
such as- sharp chopper, Knife, saw, hammer, chisel, auger, sand, paper, debris, barbed
and super glne attaching bamboo, cane and wood. We who are living in city can collect
high quality gum like Peli- gum, aica, aerelic etc. But it is not possible for the
countryside students. So we will learn here how to make gum easily.

We will make a ball of flour mixing with water. Wrapping with light cloth we wash the
ball in a bowl squeezing with fist until the white water of flour comes out. We can
change bowl water now and them. After cleansing we will notice some cheeses like
substance are accumulate, on cloth and collect it carefully in a yet. If could be effective
gum if we mix betel lime with it. But we have to use it quickly after mixing Lima
otherwise it will turn hard. If can be kept more two days, if we do not mix Lima. Now
we know what how and things can be made using bamboo and cane.

Lesson : 2 and 3

Flower Vase

We can make flower vase easily using bamboo. It requires hollow- thick Bork bamboo,
has to be dried and seasoned and will not be cracked and cut on its surface, its joint has 5

Crafts 83
to be scraped using chopper as it will not hurt hand; one or one half inches below the
joint will be cut down carefully as the joint can be intake. Height of the flower- vase will
be adjusted according to the bamboo’s thickness. Measuring the width and keeping the
double of its size would be adjusted: it could be long if wishes; then cut it down
carefully with saw as it could not be fractured; accordingly a vase is prepared. Rubbing
with sand paper, upper and lower part of the vase can be smooth.
How much it could be beautified can make design of it. If the smooth surface of the
bamboo is scraped beautiful lengthwise tissue stage will between the stages. This
difference can be used as a design on the surface of the flower vase. Scraped part would
be smothered by sand paper. After designing in this way, glittering planter of Kopal
Varnish will be given inside and outside of the vase; other systems can be designed
using color or animal. After dried up, plaster of Kopal Varnished will be given inside
and outside of the vase. Varnish makes it glittering and protects from insects as well.
Same system mentioned above will be applied in making pen and pencil stone, ashtray,
glass etc. Length of ashtray will be deducted while the mouth of glass will be scraped
from inside and the lower part will be thin to look well for glass pencil and pen stand
relatively thin bamboo will be used lower part of Muli or Beto bamboo is eligible for it;
ashtray requires thick and scarce bamboo. Some samples of flower vase, pencil and pen
stand, glass, ashtray etc are given in the pictures below. In this way we can make
different types of things using bamboo.
om (©
if
Different kinds of flower vase, pen stand, ashtray
To make the things disused above bamboo is not splited rather to cut it down. Now the
things what we will discus, bamboo is needed to split. So we can know something
advance about it. After splitting, bamboo can be divided into four parts according its
utility, such as chata, (thin slip of bamboo), Shala( pin), Bei( strip of bamboo) and Pati
s (row).

84 Arts and Crafts
Lesson : 4, 5 and 6
Chata (thin slip of bamboo)
Chata is made by cutting the bamboo lengthwise; after the split scraping the split is
smothered. Usually bamboo pin looks like round and long; it can be sharper and
lengthwise but not more than two- three hands; it requires Makhal or Bakal species
bamboo. Bamboo pin is used to make basket, equipment of catching fish cradle etc.
Beti (strip of bamboo)
Beti is made of Muli or Beto bamboo. First have to prepare chata; scrape its inner part;
make thin and smoother. Generally Beti is four coned, wideth and thin; sometimes it
could be wider than thickness. Beti is used to make tukri, creel and equipment of
catching fish.
Pati
Muli or Beto bamboo is used to make Pati. The middle part between outer and inner
surface of bamboo will be stripped off lager after lager to make Pati. It is easy to strip off
from unseasoned bamboo, but it requires preparing properly before weaving; it is very
difficult to make Pati from dried bamboo. Before stripping off 2/3 days, dried bamboo
will be soaked in water. Size of Pati is flattening and thin which would be one yarn to
one inch width and semi size long. Sharp thin pati cannot be more than one to one and
half hand long. Winnowing, dale (rimmed basket), sieve, hand for etc. are made of it.
Paper Cutter
We can make necessary as well as beautiful things with bamboo slip, such as. Paper
cutter, dining table, knife, spoon, fork etc. We can make boat with it also. Making
procedure of paper cutter and dining table knife is same; difference is in their size. Take
one inch width omd 8/9 inches long seasoned bamboo slip; remove inner cornel part and
scrape to make it thin; scrape outer slightly as tissue of bamboo is seen; knife- butt
would be thick relatively and cut carefully and slowly following the picture. Make sharp
both the sides of paper cutter and one side of dining table knife, Now scrape with debris
of glass and make smooth rubbing with, Jand paper. Finally, Kopal Varnish will be
smmeared on.
Doll
Beautiful dolls are also made of bamboo. One to two and half inches diameter thick
bamboo is needed to make doll. The inside hole would be small in size; thick side of this ei
bamboo can be used. Doll’s height would be in erased if the diameters of dolls are s

Crafts 85
shown in the picture below; see picture and make dolls accordingly Pati is stripped off
thin and smooth for making hair; Rapping with pencils head or sharp material Pati will
be stripped off and then heated with fire to keep it bend. Hands of doll are made of
bamboo- Pin; hair and hands of doll will be appixed with gum. The doll will be
smoothened rubbing with sand paper before appixing hair then varnish will be smeand
on; after dried up, draw eye, face, nose, dresses etc using animal color; we can make
design and color the hair in black.

a fa) B
(\ A\
| q fio
Y
ri
Dolls made with bamboo
We use huge things of bamboo and cane in our everyday life besides amusing things
made of bamboo and cave. Our agree based society cannot run without winnowing, dala,
sieve, tukri, creel and fish catching equipments. At first we need to know texture making
the things mentioned above. Many kinds of texture are which could be used to make
beautiful design, Generally single type, double- type and triple- type texture are in vogue
more. We can weave either flat or coiled from down to up or up to down. In coiled
sowing single, double and triple types are also in vogue. Colored pati is used to make
design in hand for and desired things; single double and triple types of textures are
assembled for design. In the picture we see chronologically the model of single, double
and triple type of coiled and designed texture. Now we will know the procedure of some
everyday necessities.
oo
ES

86 Arts and Crafts
ttt nae Ty
SH TLE
Se SS
Seseieaaniions Teo |
A Sk
sararaneesines Ot | 7 Ly . n
HE ATTA | |
rT be) Et) =
1. ie MS ELSIE SAA
H et Pla | he
— ae 8 i i . 4
Ae (0 | ann i
oe us f. e s ~ o =
Different things made with strip of bamboo
Lesson ; 7, 8 and 9
Dala (rimmed basket) and Sieve
The procedure of making dala and sieve is same.
We will take half- inches width thin bamboo Pati for dala and one or one and half
stitches for sieve; Patties will be 20/21 inches long; generally both the things will be
weaved in double- type system. Dala will be weaved by ‘hash’ texture as there will be no
whole in it and sieve will be with the sides of Pati lengthwise and crosswise will be in
same spare space. After weaving rim or frame will kept. For 1 to 1% inches width 3%
hand long thin bamboo- slip will be taken and scraped its inner side; a pair of bamboo-
slip will be needed for each dala or sieve. 6/7 inches of both sides, bamboo slip will be
scraped to make thins; each bamboo slip’s one hand will be scraped from outer side and
other from inner side. After scraped one bamboo slip will be encircled keeping its outer
side out; keeping one- hand diameter, thin splits will be tied with cane to make circle; we
will make another circle keeping second bamboo slip’s inner side out. The diameter of
second bamboo slip will quarter inch less than first one. Keeping long the weaving part
of dala or sieve will be cut roundish and set it on the big circle; thin insert it little bit
inside the circle. Now we will set small circle in the middle of big one and prened part of
textures. When we will set the small circle we will notice that its joint will be on the
opposite o big circle. Sy
a

Crafts 87
Segre Pg
BEEZ, ZESSEZP EL
OOTP TD Loa ge aiya
pore oom ree eee KEEP FE
SEE aan Ta gt Og at,
PFE IT ELIE od
eerie > =
ELSES”
—)
SSS SSS SIR a ey,
SSS Sr ae re
out a ia
en Oe ae
Method of making Rimmed basket and Sieve

After setting up of the small circle into the big one the spare part of the texture has to cut

down to make level; then the outer face of both the circles has to be equal in positions.

Then cut the tie of inner circles it could be adjust with the outer circle; the vacuum space

between the circles has to be fulfilled by setting a thin bamboo- slip over them and then

use jail cane to tie them up. Now we can make dala, sieve or same kind of thing. People

in the villages can make beautiful dala and sieve. We can observe their work as we can

understand practically. We can use them as toy.

Basket

Both pati and bamboo strip are under for making basket. We know pati is flatter and thin

but bamboo strip is long and thicker than pati. We will take at least 4 inch width and 3

hand long some paties and set them in circle according to the picture below. The middle

place of the paties will be set on the center. Now we weave circle in center with long

bamboo strip. We have to remember that we have to start weaving using two bamboo-

strips at time. We can notice in the picture. The first bamboo strip is coming up from on

pati and the second bamboo- stripes from the next pati. When we will weave we will
eo drug up the scattering patis from the center as they can go up gradually rather than
Sy because flat.

88 Arts and Crafts
Sa 7S
js
3 Ey,
1g by — ILL a ay
== =H See
a. —— —
i es Sa
Sa Sw SH SD SE ee
=a
2, !)
; | : LZ geass
Method of making Basket with bamboo strip.
If the weaving part becomes and 8/9 inches, we will enter new paties for the replacement
of the old ones and weave it with bamboo strips. After weaving some lines we keep the
thing up ride down and drug the pities up and weave the bamboo strip in circle. We will
notice that weaving will go up stuffy not in felt and will finish weaving keeping two .,
inches of patios the excessive part of pati will be folded parallel with the circle of the s

Crafts 89
basket and tie them tightly . Now we will take two slips of bamboo. One inch width and
necessary long to make circle. Keeping them inside and outside of the basket we will tie
lightly. In this way we can make toy baskets as well, it requires sharp and them bamboo
strep, pati and bamboo strip as it can adjust with the size of the basket.
Creel
Half inch width and two hand long pati and long thin strip of bamboo are needed to
make creel. Keeping quarter inch space and 7/8 inches width we set the paties
lengthwise according to the picture below. We will use same paties crosswise to weave
middle of the lengthwise paties. When the weaved past will be equal in length with
width we will finish weaving, then we will take a pair of long bamboo strip. We start
weaving from left side to right side of weaved part using bamboo strip. After reaching
second corner of weaving the whole thing will be turned to left drugging the left part
high, we will weave the front part using turned bamboo strip. Now in the left corner,
below the two parties of front and left, we will weave lengthwise, keep the paties of
every comer in close, after weaving two o three lines we will stop, again from outside
start weaving and push them to be spending.
. | \! [[)t aire
= WN |
ES SSS
ity SSS
Method of making Creel with bamboo strip.
We will notice at the time of weaving as the spare space of shift paties is equal. After
weaving till the middle of shift pati we will gradually make narrow the mouth of creel,
we finish weaving keeping two inches spare pati, remaining past of the paties will be
kept parallel to the mouth of creel and tie them inside, the creel is made now we will
Forma-12, Arts and Carafts, Class-9-10

90 Arts and Crafts
make a circle, % inch width equal to the creels mouth set it on the mouth and tie it
carefully, another part of creel is handle, take two pieces of jail cane , long and middle
width in size, scrape their sides and cut half each of their head and tie them with creel. In
this way creel is made. As we can use it everyday life so we can decorate our house with
it.
Lesson 10, 11 and 12
Murta and cave work
Murta and Cave are available in our country. Among them Sylhet, Comilla, Noakhali,
Chittagong etc districts are abundant in Murta and Cave. So, simple design mats maid of
Murta and Cave are found in these places. Mat of Sylhet is famous locally and
internationally.
Generally usuable part of Murta is 5/6 long. It is joint free. The surface is hard and smooth
and in raw becomes deep green, inner part is white and tender, the hard upper part
of Murta is used and the inner tender part is dropped. Making mat sleep or other things
we will take Murta or cave to prepare party. At first Murta or Cave will be spitted
lengthwise into 4 to 8 parts; drooped the inner tender part carefully.
In this condition party is must thing and still a portion of inner white tender part is with
the hard part, now, keeping with a bamboo pool we will prepare the inner tender part of
the parties according to necessity.
In this way cracking the inner part and leveling the outer part we will scrape the inner
part well. Look, parties are their moderately; we will split again if it requires; these
parties are used for making course mat but keen parties are needed to make mat. To
make sharp party one has two practice more; after making parties two or three days they
will be kept under water ; then dry up little and work .Colored party is used to make
designed mat . Generally smooth surface of Murta can’t be colored; so we will scrap the
smooth surface of party before coloring it; after mixing color with water, alone the
parties into it.
We can make ‘Maroon color’ mixing red and green and use them for mat. We know how
to make and color parties of Murta and Cave. Now we will make things. At first we can
start making bamboo slip.
Slip
Slip of Murta can be used to lie, sit and to keep under bed. Villagers use it more than the
city dwellers. If we try we can make it easily.
Co)
S
N

Crafts 91
It can be big or small in size. We will take % inches width and required length of party.
We can enlarge the party keeping another one on it if it requires; if the party of Murta
are wide generally they become close lengthwise, it looks fine and makes soft as well.
Double step system is used to weave slip. 1% /2 inches extra parties are kept around;
now the extra part of parties will be folded and tied them with spitted cave. It is called
the wrapping of slip. We see the system of wrapping in the picture. We will notice how
the tied came too used.
Mat
After learning the process of slip we will learn how to make mat. Generally mat is used
for lying and setting, designed mats are very popular for ‘jaynamaz’. Now day’s citizens
are fond of decorating houses using designed mat. 1% inches width things party is
needed for mat; colored party is needed to make design. Setting the simple party is
lengthwise and colored in crosswise we will follow single, double or triple type process
to weave; after weaving we will wrap them using then spitted cave. Now we can make
mat for us.
Soft Mat
Among the things made of Murta soft mat is more adorable. It is comfortable to lie on
soft mat during hot summer; it is also called cold-mat. To make beautiful and well
designed soft mat highly technical skilled knowledge and experience is needed. Now it
is difficult task for us. However, we will take some ideas of weaving simple soft mat.
For learning, we can try to weave mat using the parties of simple mat. Slip or different
types of parties are not used to weave soft mat. In case of soft mat, wearing is started
from one corner and same pati is folded from crosswise to lengthwise, sometimes it can
go from lengthwise to crosswise as extra parties are not kept, wrapping is stopped
automatically, like slip or mat wrapping is unnecessary. At first, take a pati and fold
them according to the picture shown below, then take another pati or set it crosswise,
after folding both the sides we take it lengthwise side. At the time of folding we will
notice as the outer part of pate will be up always, in this case we can fold twice. Now
same way we will used third pate. We will follow double type weaving system common
mat, in this way we will set parties one after another. One thing we will notice that
during the weaving, at first, we set parties crosswise and after folding then make
lengthwise. The mat increases during the weaving both wide and long sides
simultaneously. Generally mat becomes longer than wider. According to the requirement
we will weave from crosswise to lengthwise and vice-versa.

2

8

92 Arts and Crafis
hy YY,
fife ty
Primary step to make slip
ieibaabe ss stmthebihneie ca ee) Ve = =e i
i — SC
* i a |
+ s *. F| Y a
te eo *? We , ws so
(ttcsenatnestbanancinipegsciecconnenacterien
Bd het alent dis HP EN eda
Designed soft mat =
N

Crafts 93
Lesson : 13, 14 and 15
Tie and Dye
Element : cloth, thread, pin, safety pin , shamble, cork, button, soda[cloth soda], salt, tea
spoon, big spoon, color, boll, balance for measuring powder, kerosene stove, manger for
washing cloth, bucket, boutique, first color , dyeline , color , iron , plate, (calendar) etc.
The charming fine arts made of tie and dye system have become famous for long time
in different parts of the world. A doping heralding process and pasting color making
design on the cloth we can create hard rewarding art work in this system. Now people
are gradually tending to creative house hold activities avoiding complexities of modern
life, for this reason noxious and dying system of art work becomes extra apple in human
mind as it is a beautiful art. Art works made in this process become attractive
immaculate to use.
Quadrangular
A thin piece of cloth has to be four- folded; then we will give it triangular shape; binding
color them.
Marble Color
Talking small sample, Cloths have be clustered; tie the stitch knot; in this everywhere it
will be tied. Spread the cloths on the table. Both the sides of cloth will be worked out; a
particular part of it has be roundish as the hem becomes folded; a light tie will be given
during the work. When the total cloth becomes cluster a hard cluster for both the
procedures has to be made more knots. At first, wash them with color and then
accumulate. Again tie the cloth properly and color also.
Ektal (One rhydm) cloth Binding
Small things like shamble, cork, button, paddy etc. can be tied with cloth. Their position
will be identified giving ‘dot’ (.) with the help of pencil. At first ‘dot’ keep one of the
things inside the cloth and stitch it with thread. In this way stitch the next dot; tie a light
knot on it. During the work every things will be tied in this way.
Changing
Covering with a piece of polithin binding place will be tied double, one on another.
Covering the thing tie upper side like a bun; then color it.

eo

5

94 Arts and Crafts
Circle will be drown in a certain part of cloth. For a small circle, a certain part and for a
big one another part of the cloth have to be tied with thread. Necessary knot will be
given for certain design. After it color will be given; before giving other color knot can
be changed or added new one.
Egg-shaped and Hetero Angle
Floded the cloth middle of its shape, draw half egg shape and hetero angle opposite of
the fold. Through the pencil’s line stitch with ‘seafeteffin’. Tie underneath the pin with
thread and later remove it. Tie the sample winged like knot; repeat the same process for
each shape ; later color it. we can change the knot before coloring even we can add
another knot.
Lesson : 16 and 17
Boutique
Elements / Ingredients : Tracing paper, water-colored brash (No. 2 and 3), Poster
paper, oil colored brash (No.4 and 8), red and white wax, salt, soda (cloth washing),
elginet (one kind of gum), cloth fitcary, sodium nitret, sulfuric acid, monopol soap,
coastic soda, nepthol color (boutique color), First color (boutique color), Prussian color,
indigo color etc.
N.B before using the new cloth it has to wash with soap and calendar as well.
Boutique is one of the mediums of creative work. It is difficult to know about its history
or source. However, what we know is that its use is much more seen in oriental countries
especially. Java Bali of Indonesia and its adjacent countries. Now it becomes very
popular tradition in these countries. It spreads other parts of the world as well; it is
developing font in those countries. In our country we also notice boutique work is
spreading. Some are working it in developed research projects; some others are using it
commercially.
Now in our country boutique work is done in two ways as (1) Nepthol color (2) Prussian
color (reactive dyes).
At first draw boutique useable design then press it on cloth with tracing paper.
80
Ss
N

Crafts 95
Nepthol color process
There are five sequels steps in this system. We will know them.
/ a,
‘ R77 . WHR i 2 ee aE
NRE: ,
rss SZ ed yk *
Boutique wax
First step
At first according to the design, "Paste hot wax both the sides of the cloth except the part
where color will be used (naturally color will not touch the wax covered place). Cloth
will be kept in water for 10/15 minutes before coloring it.
Second Step
First designed cloth will be doused in colored water for 2/3 minutes; same way douse the
cloth in another color water pot for 2/3 minutes; we will douse it frequently as color will
be clear in the cloth.
Third step
According to the design to keep this color and add new we have to paste wax on old
color and douse the cloth in color mixed water. We can change the pot also according
our need. In this way we can use many more color in the cloth.
Fourth step
so The cloth will be dried up in shadow for twelve hours,
S
N

96 Arts and Crafts
Fifth step
Douse the cloth into boiled water mixing with slight alkali soap for 4/5 minutes; they dry
in shadow place. In this way boutique print is douse in Neothol color process.
Making wax
Mixing equal portion of paraffin wax (whit wax) and view wax (red wax collected from
honey comb).
Theory of Nepthol color process
(According to Weight ratio of cloth)

First pot Second pot

(Impregnating bath) (Developing bath)

In twenty times multiple water Tn twenty times multiple water
Method of pasting wax in design

Method-1 Method-2 Method-3

White wax/paraffin wax- | White/paraffin wax- 6 | View/ red wax-2 percent

2 percent percent

Resin (N-Gasade) 1 | Red wax- 1 percent Resin (N-Gasade) 1

percent percent
System of melting wax
In a steel at first we will melt view wax; after becoming cold we will mix paraffin wax
with it. When it will be melted we will mix granules of resin. Keeping the paraffin wax
on heart we will stir it with big spoon. Stirring in this way keep away the waste partials;
this melting wax will be paste on design; when the clear mixture is gainel we will paste
it on cloth with brush. However, we will notice whether grey colored vapor is, coming
out or not from the mixture. If we notice this colored vapor we will put down the pot
from the hearth; we will not use this wax because it can burs the cloth again color can be
dropped from the cloth as well.

co)
S

Crafts 97
a. Nepthol- As or Branthol As-3%
b. Fast Red Salt- GL or Branthol Salt-6%
c. Monopol soap or TR Oil- 3%
d. Bolon- 12%
e. Costic Soda- 1.5%
Second pot will be changed only during the work of Base color. Example-
In twenty times multisle water
a. Fitcary- 65
b. Sodium Nitrate- 3%
c. Sulfuric Acid (H2S04)
Or Hydrochloric Acid(HCL)
d. Fast Red KB- 3%
Fast color boutique has different types of name, for example- fast color = Red KB, only
applicable for Napthol- As. Which color will be got adding salt or Base with which
Napthol or Branthol are given in the chart below.
Red=Napthol As+Fast Red Salt GL
Red=Napthol As+Scarlet Salt GG
Red=Napthol As-Fast Scarlet R
Red=Napthol As+BS+Fast Red Salt R
Red=Napthol As-TR+Fast Red Salt TR
Red=Napthol As-BO+Fast Red Scarlet Salt R
Red=Napthol As-RL+Fast Red Scarlet Salt R
Red=Branthol AstFast Red KB Base
Red=Branthol As+Fast Red Scarlet R Base
Red=Branthol MN+Fast Red Scarlet G Base
Red=Branthol BN+Fast Red Scarlet G Base
Red=Branthol BN+Fast Red Scarlet R Base
Red=Branthol BN+Fast Red KB Base
Red=Branthol CT+Fast Red Scarlet G Base
Red=Branthol CT+Fast Red Red KB Base
Forma-13, Arts and Carafts, Class-9-10

98 Arts and Crafts
Reddish Yellow=Napthol AS+Fast Orange Salt GC Base
Reddish Yellow=Napthol AS+Fast Orange Salt GR Base
Reddish Yellow=Branthol AS+Branthol fast Yellow GC
Red=Branthol AS+Branthol fast Orange GC Base
Red=Branthol As+Fast Orange GR Base
Red=Branthol MN+Fast Orange GC Base
Red=Branthol CT+Fast Orange GC Base A

Dare Brown =Napthol AS-BO+Napthol Red Salt B

Dare Brown =Napthol AS+Napthol Garnet GBC Salt

Dare Brown =Napthol AS+Bardo Salt Gp Salt

Dare Brown=Branthol AS+Branthol Bardo CP Base

Dare Brown=Branthol AS+Branthol Fast garnet GBC Base
Dare Brown=Branthol MN+Branthol Fast Garnnet GBC Base
Dare Brown=Branthol AN+Branthol Fast Garnnet GBC Base
Dare Brown=Branthol AN+Branthol Fast Bardo GP Base
Dare Brown=Branthol BN+Branthol Fast Bardo GP Base
Dare Brown=Branthol BN+Branthol Fast Bardo GBC Base
Blue= Branthol AS+Branthol Fast Blue Salt B

Blue= Branthol AN+ Brathol Fast Blue Salt B

Blue= Branthol BN+Branthol Fast Blue Salt B

Blue= Napthol AS+Fast Blue Salt BB

Blue= Napthol AS+Fast Blue Salt BR

Blue= Napthol AS-TR+Fast Blue Salt BR

Blue= Napthol AS-OL+Fast Blue Salt BB

Reddish Yellow= Napthol AS-G+ Fast Yellow Salt GC
Reddish Yellow= Napthol AS-G+Scarlet Salt GC

Reddish Yellow= Branthol AT+Branthol Yellow GC Base
Equal chart of Branthol and Napthol

Branthol AS= Napthol AS

Branthol MN= Napthol AS-BS S

Crafts 99
Branthol AN= Napthol AS-BO
Branthol PA= Napthol AS-RL
Branthol NG= Napthol AS-GR
Branthol BT= Napthol AS-BL
Branthol RB= Napthol AS-SR
Branthol FR= Napthol AS-OL
Branthol GT= Napthol AS-TR
Branthol DA= Napthol AS-BS
Branthol FD= Napthol AS-RG
Branthol AT= Napthol AS-G
Branthol BN= Napthol AS-SW
Procedure of Prussian color
This process is like Napthol color process but wax making process is different such as-
paraffin wax 4%+ Resin 2%+ view wax 1% will be mixed to use.
Dyeing system of Prussian color process
Mix need based color (prussian) and salt 30% with shallow water in first pot; in second
pot mixing the first pot’s prepared color with twenty times multiple water; then wet cloth
will be stirred. Again mixing 8% soda the cloth has to be stirred; then wash in cold water
and dry 24 hours in shadow. Again the dried cloth has to douse in boiled water and stir
4/5 minutes to separate the wax.
Have to dye needbased cloth-
1 To 2 total for light color
2to3 total for midieem color
3 to 4 total for deep color
N.B. for 100 total cloth.
List of Prussian color
Blue M2R, Blue M3R, Red M8B, Red M5B, Yellow M6G, Orange M2R etc.
Besides, Napthol or prosssian color process, green, blue or violate color can be used
according to design in boutique print cloth. But pigment process will be applied using
particular color in particular plce before doing cold Dying.
Le)
S
N

100 Arts and Crafis
Pigment Process
Different types of Indigo colors are found in market. For example, ‘quarter total Indigo
color is needed to dye Pigment process of one gouge cloth. Two anas (1/8 total) Sodium
Nitret has to mix in % chotak boiled water; then % total color will be mixed in it; if we
Alginate gum in slight worm water it will turns into liquid gum; then it will have to mix
in color water.
Color brush can be used. don designed cloth. In this ay different types of Indigo colors
color are used; natural Indigo color will be flourished if we stir the color cloth in water
mixed with Sulfuric Acid (2/1 tea spoon).This system is called "Pigment Process’.
De Pen | Fa) y Aine Sr. isan =
Sim's 3 Cag ¢) % =e pg
ee 28a S Fate
a? 80 Fein. = et os ~ aw” Gg
d > oe ee re
hone ese ~~ f Se . awe oo” 3d
Pal & - q ; tf wail
4 Thi, be pe 4 yi. “Sy , rT fh
=n Pr a Bo aie
Boutique print
Cloth Printing
We use printed cloth more or less. We make Panjabi, shirt, bed sheet, Shari, frock, orna
etc. one made of different types of printed colored cloth. If we know the process of
printing we can use own choice printed cloth.
Cloth has to prepare properly before printing for dying well, color can not use properly
on pasted cloth. For this reason, take 10 times more multiple weight water of cloth, boil
2 tola, soap 2 total cloth washed soda and 3 tola costic soda in together in water for 2/3
hours; then wash in cold water. It it is washed cloth boil it in soda water for 15/200 .,
minutes; then was it properly for printing. Now we will know printing system. s

Crafts 101
Tie and Dye
Tie and dye is done for attractive print;
it is the easiest process as well. We will peel sh SOD
use this familiar/ name; in this system : ‘i
and will be kept to tie the cloth. We He Aaa
will tie the particular part of cloth and Ae i (sun
douse in color. The binding place will \ We 2
create one kind of design; though it is «
not particular design but it is attractive. Be me 3). Oc,
- oro as A APay 4
a se
a 2 }; a ag pce
Fe i, +0 oy
wes pink Ae
i @ oe : S
Method of Tie and Dye . sie
For particular design we will take help from sti thread and needle. We will draw
rectangle, squire, circle, ‘borfi’ flower leaf or other design on Sari, Lungi or on other
cloth. Now stitch the sides with needle and draw both the sides of thread to enter in cloth
and tie it with thread. Keep space during the binding. In this way all the designs have to
tie; then douse and stir it; douse once for one color and do same way for other colors;
every time we have to dry in shadow; for dying light color will be started first,
Besides this process adopting other processes we can print various types of attractive and
decent cloth. We can see some sample picture of binding.
i 2.02 enrol i. = =~
a 2.2%? = >
s Afier Tie and Dye Printing

102 Arts and Crafts
Wax Boutique
Ingredients : In this system the process of designing cloth is more or less like tie and
dye; it means dying the whole cloth without the design; wax will be used in this purpose
to cover the designed place. In this way sari bodies, bed sheet, certain, shirt, ‘oma’ can
be designed.
In the process we can draw attractive picture as well which is called the picture of
boutique, For one color boutique we can use directly pencil drawing and cover it with
wax. But for many colors we will draw color design in paper and paste wax
chronologically; drawing the designs with the help of carbon paper we will covers both
the sides of white cloth with wax. First douse I yellow colored, then wash with cold
water and dry; again cover the yellow design part with wax. We will follow same
process for the next color. At last we will dye with deep or black color.
We will use cold color for boutique. For tie and dye boutique same theory will be
applied. So we will learn color making process in next chapter.
Now we will learn the process of making wax for boutique. Two types of waxes and
resin are used for the work of boutique.

_ ae Fi — r a E ——- .-9
+ .. Cae ee 4 cee a

y &, ae | —- ae? a"
hey ™ *) sigue § ee* > “5
aoe’ g 2 ‘wi ait ay ie a a
ee os. oe ee er.
Wax Boutique
Cloth will be doused long time water for boutique with Prussian color; otherwise wax
will be broken down. So more resin will be mixed.
bao}

Now we know the ratio of making wax. s

Crafts 103
1. Paraffin or white wax in ratio - 50%
2. View wax -25%
3. Resin -25%
Keeping in bronze or Aluminum Pot wax will be melted in light heat. After mixing resin
and wax properly part it on the design cloth. Now we can follow the picture. After
pasting wax, we will dye it dousing in Prussian or vat color; for more colored cloth we
will wash paste and dye.
After dying in this way, the cloth will be boiled in soap water to remove the wax- past;
then wash in clear water and colander properly. It is called wax- boutique.
Making Color of Cloth
To know the rules of coloring cloth; more three systems of dying are used in boutique.
1. Vet color
2. Prussian color
3. Napthol Color
Napthol color is difficult to use; so we will know the process of vet and Prussian color.
Vet Color
To dye a shari or same portion of cloth we need the following amount of color and
chemical elements.
Vet color = 1 tola
Hydrosulfite NF = 4 tola
Costic soda =4 tola
Before dying cloth will doused in water at lest 30 minutes; then drop water; again boil
water and stir properly color and chemical particles. After mixing these particles
properly we will boil the cloth for 15/20 minutes.
=
S
N

104 Arts and Crafts
Prussian Dye
The amount of dye, salt and soda for a share or same length of cloth.

1, Prussian Dye-1 ‘tola’(160 grains)

2. Salt- 5 ‘tola’

3. Washing Soda- 1 ‘tola’
The cloth has to be drawn in cold water for half an hour and 1 ‘tala’ of salt will have to
be mixed. We have to mix 3\4 drops of stick acid with Prussian dye in the modest warm
water in animal pot. When the mixer of color is made we have to pour salt in it and put a
cloth and stir it properly to make the soaked with dye. After 30 minutes, soda has to be
diluted in a little water and mixed with the dye. Then take the cloths from the water and
wash in cold water. Then the cloth has to be hanged in shadow for 24 hours. We will
follow the process of making burlesque.
Lesson: 18
Block
Block is made by drawing design on the wood and then by cutting the wood with
sharp chisel.

of
KISS
= VEG
hey
axed
POS C7 qin Pia
®, 4 ep si
BIKES CIES Tt Soll ok
e y a =
SS
Design by Block print x
AQ

Crafts 105
SS eS
. “a “ee ve wae eee
g 744 |
«é
2
Wit =
isa Se . a= Mi)
“ca GasSN=
. Nps 222727
+P fen. 2» sr: t) Sa
oN Nay 7-7)
vas Dx SSAENY Ba ..
i ky
ia 1 Oe (LES
5 VAS ANS Na y) ‘
Wooden Block
Lesson : 19 and 20
Wood Engraving
It is made by drawing design on the soft plank of wood or plywood with the help of
sharp chisel.
Ingredients : Hammer, Chisel, Round Chisel, plus, a saw blade, sand paper, small
chisel.
Forma, 14 Arts And Crafts, Class- 9-10

106 Arts and Crafts
Spa ae oe TEs ihe MEO FA ay
ee S| a
leapt Sak Pa a te \ > uae a ge ie La” Sg 6 :
ioe Cig. ee meri . aa
Print by wood cut Artist : Rubaia Zaman ruba
NS a el > Le cee
yal PD bk ya he ae a, _ ee
i 3 om al why WY AL i ri i: oe Fe
AY \WRARE dag tie a 4 eae , dag. ae =
: Eth . Tee : ns J ah. caso) sty
e ori + on, = ‘we |
. Vitale BAD | anita 2 Soil
Print by wood cut Artist : Sanjib kumar Paul R

Crafts 107
Lesson : 21 and 22
Terracotta
Terracotta is an ancient and traditional folk-art of Bangladesh and is very famous.
Terracotta boards mere used on the walls of different buildings, achitictnrs especially
temple mosque etc in the middle age. Terracotta is a relef work that the picture and
design on the day made board. First raw mud is used for giving the shap of the board and
then they are burnt. That is why these are called boards of burnt earth. The oldest board
paint (Falok chittra) has been found in Mahastangoura in Bogra or ancient pundra Nagar
from archeological dig. The subject of the board paint found in Mahstan Goura and in
‘Kantaji ‘temple in Dinajpur is males females and gods and goddesses. On the other
hand contemporary socity and picture of nature are eyposed on the parthen board in
paharpur and Mynamoti in comilla. Subjects of board art are flower leaves, geometrical
design on the boards of ‘Bagha” Mosque or of “Modina’ Mosque in Tangail. But now
terracotta is being made in different shapes and subjects Terracotta now is used a lot for
interior decoration as well as external beauty. First slab is made with soil and engrave on
it with tools of different sizes. After making it has to be dried properly in Shane light.
After that it is burned. Those who have potter’s house near can burn the pot in their
furnace.
We can easily understand and make observing picture below.
(> \
D col, 6
o. , wT
Ovo, o' * 1, 5 te *
ran So , sR e
7” Se 4° °
‘ “ Ww
4 § ‘
\ Tee a ji
lye yop |
S Slab made with clay
N

108 Arts and Crafts
wer
ai s " i
Node Ay 4 [2a ¥ : " ra
Terracotta =
N

Crafts 109
Lesson : 23 and 24
Arts with rejected materials
Making picture with the broken earthen pots :
Ingredients : Febic glue, various kinds of pieces of broken pots.
Let’s take a piece of play word. Let’s draw a picture of our own with pencil on the
plywood. Then fabic glue is used on the plywood. Febic glue is also essential in the gaps
of pieces. After that we arrange these pieces on the board. Another pieces also have to be
fixed with febic glue ont side the design. In this way we can make a mosaic with rejected
materials. (Do exercise flowing the picture.
: wy a
ae | ne
— a |
> rex La, Ne bt = a *S
MOT ea
ead Fae
i The portrait of shilpachary a Zainul Abedin
eS made with broken pieces of earthen pots
N

110 Arts and Crafts
Sample Questions
Creative Questions
Read the passage and answer the following questions (works with bamboo and cane)
A private TV channel was organizing a fair to celebrate ‘Boishakh Festival’. There the
day was being celebrated indifferent ways. They were welcoming the month of
‘Boishakh’ Swapnil and shreya went to the fair along with their mother. They saw many
stalls of different commodities. Among these they were mostly attracted by the stalls
made with bamboo and cane. They saw bamboo made flower vase, estrey, chalon;
‘Khaloi’ to decorate home, dolls etc. They also saw ‘sheetal Pati’ made like cane,
embroidered mat etc. They liked those things very much and insisted their mother to buy
then that they could decorate home. Mother bought then two dolls made with bamboo,
flower Vase; and small creel. They came home happily with joys things.
But it is a matter of sorrow that the use of those commodities decreases day by day in
Bangladesh.
1. Whom did swapnil and shreya go to fair with?
2. What materials did they see made with bamboo and cane?
3. How can swapnil and shreya decorate their home with the things made with
bamboo and cane? Give your argument.
4. ‘The use of these commodities is decreasing day by day in Bangladesh’- How
can the use of these be increased? Give your opinion.
Practical Activity
1. Make a flower vase with bamboo-
Multiple Choice Questions
1. To print the cloth by tie and dye first we have to -
a. Paint with color b. Mix with water
c. Pasting bee wax d. Tie the cloth
80
Ss
N

Crafts 1
2. What color do we have to use print clothes in yellow, red and blue by tie and dye
system?
a. Red b. Black
c. Yellow d. Green
3. To print by wax boutique system -
a. Dye has to be worm b. Dye has to be cold
c. Little worm d. Boiling hot
Creative Questions
Dia and Dipro like to travel. They went to visit Proiti and Nazmul’s home. There they
saw interesting scenery. A woman was teaching a group to going girls how to make
buttic will tic and dye and wax. There were many clothes and saris hanging on a rope in
the yard of the home. Those were the works with tie-dye and wax. Dipro and dia became
interested to this work. They also started learning this.
1. What do Dia and Dipro like to do?
2. When did they go to visit?
3. What things did Dia and Dipro test to learn?
4. What work did Dia and Dipro start to learn?
=
S
N

112 Arts and Crafts
Match the following columns
Short questions
1. How do you prepare the cloth before dying?
2. What is the process of using tie-dye?
3. How can you make wax boutique?
Practical Activities
1. Make a terracotta board
2. Make a Shirt with tie-dye. 20
R

Color picture
won 2 en:
. Wee 8 Bs
Ly a ee
Ree
ht aa
Os , ’ iia is
¥ a” ; . § i L 93 !
° Ay ey ilk: ‘
et ERE a Se 4
4 Bot. ey
in mn ey - Si Boe s < ‘
Picture of flowers with water color. Artist : Hashem Khan
Forma-15, Arta and Crafts,Clase- 9-10

114 Arts and Crafts
rd ]
. .
4 : '
_ +
7
—<* i
S at a *
My
” e r a
| ee :
o3 ,
i -
.
5
6 s
Human study with water color, Artist : Sushanta Adhikary 8

Color picture 115
lpm |
Tk es. 2A v * Hes - it haem =
® < ae = a ~ = a. 2
=| ope Setoe Ye
g Pie ft : “ ea A a Lie

116 Arts and Crafts
ya /7, a vis Mees
<i ring ¥ c ij) i | ¥y egal a :

oy a y "y f
mn i GAS a?

eee Po i at 7 ‘ 7

cep ee _ e~ ‘ | de

ae Le Fe, 4 Ai 4

ee Mee oe CWS

“Movement” Drawn with poster and water color by Trishna Das Gupta, Age-14 5

Color picture 117
=
: “é
, ”
wy
Ae ’
op eS a .
| s¢ 28
aa Pas \
* » - , te é Pa
gr j 7. J ad
=
& “Dadar Mukh’ Drawn with water color, Artist : Alaptagin Tushar

118 Arts and Crafts
2 fe ||US ii - , ) “re
g i ; ¥ s) = : a, A= *

| } See — ae
. i a | , > Se i

Color picture 119
, a
lange a ee TA
i in oS "are - 1 . » € e a sy
‘ : > oe en! Se
i he eR,
- “@ hS
eed
Stil life with water color, Drawn by Progga Portia Patoary, Age-14
a
= a
a) tel
ill) Pag mye! ry rm
xs
& The picture is painted by Arpita Saha (Arpa) with pastel color on umbrella. Age-14

120 Arts and Crafts
Fore Ss ’ vf | fh amar tal , mi- £
‘Je we Sains P mh = « it
be ae ~ Pye
X\ rf
‘ Se : en Naya
» = Ea
i AE)
4 ;
, i
ob > Pies
, \ %.. >
E oS
bial
Kite, Chicks with hen, King fisher, Shalik and Dove, drawn
with water and poster color by Artist Hashem Khan.
80
3
End "

Academic Year
9-10 Arts and Crafts
Weal 6 fre Fetters Soa Sora afeers ¢ afecatces GAT AMT CRAY CTBT
dos AKA (Cole BF, 28 WOT HSA) CHT PT
GAS wy
tc)
rence”

