' = pee ee Re oo de get a |
angladesh And Global Studies’ ="... >
fixe ee ae eee Maes s ae
Classes Nine-Ten

a Es * acai aoe -

ye —s re a ae Bf eS , y:

or on bo ee Se. = “> Seas
alee

if 2 & - ~ i ae
“ee ss! " i at ae
Big sy

= kA Ses
‘=e ' oe cA — Sts Ri

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a textbook for classes nine-ten from the academic year-2013
e
Bangladesh and Global Studies
Classes Nine-Ten
Reviewed and Modified
for making the contents easy and accessible by
Professor Dr. Md. Akhtaruzzaman
Written by
Professor Dr. Mamtazuddin Patwari
Professor Dr. Shawkat Ara Husain
Professor Dr. S. M. Anowara Begum
Professor Roohi Zakia Dewan
Dr. Uttam Kumar Das
Edited by
Professor Dr. Harun-or-Rashid
Translated by
Shafiqul Islam Chowdhury
Sharif Atiquzzaman
Re-translated by
Professor Dr. Mohammad Ibrahim
Md. Tanvir Ahsan
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel commercial Area, Dhaka.
[All rights reserved by the Publisher]
First Publication : September, 2012
Revised Edition : November, 2014
Revised Edition : November, 2017
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh
For free distribution by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Printed by :

Preface
The aim of secondary education is to make the learners fit for entry into higher
education by flourishing their latent talents and prospects with a view to building the
nation with the spirit of the Language Movement and the Liberation War. To make the
learners skilled and competent citizens of the country based on the economic, social,
cultural and environmental settings is also an important issue of secondary education.
The textbooks of secondary level have been written and compiled according to the
revised curriculum 2012 in accordance with the aims and objectives of National
Education Policy-2010.Contents and presentations of the textbooks have been
bselected according to the moral and humanistic values of Bengali tradition and
culture and the spirit of Liberation War 1971 ensuring equal dignity for all
irrespective of caste and creed of different religions and sex.
The present government is committed to ensure the successful implementation of
Vision 2021. Honorable Prime Minister, Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina expressed her firm determination to make the country free
from illiteracy and instructed the concerned authority to give free textbooks to every
student of the country. National Curriculum and Textbook Board started to distribute
textbooks free of cost since 2010 according to her instruction.
The following subjects namely, sociology, history, civics, economics, geography and
populations has been presented in a combined way rather than in an individual manner
to prepare the book entitled Bangladesh and Global Studies. As a result, the students
will gain complete knowledge of the society and environment, history-heritage,
culture, socio-economic-political condition and global issues of Bangladesh. It is
expected that the students will be turned in to citizens with complete civic values by
practicing these issues following the cherished tradition of Bangladesh. They will get
an opportunity to develop themselves as conscious citizens. They will be able to
enrich their world of knowledge comparing to global issues. They will be expected to
possess the life-skills with a view to dealing with different issues of the society.
Considering the challenges and commitments of 21St century and following the revised
curriculum the textbook has been written. The textbook has been revised and re-edited
by a prominent educationist to make it learner friendly in 2017.
T thank sincerely all for their intellectual labor who were involved in the process of
revision, writing, editing, art and design of the textbook.
Prof. Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

Table of Contents
[+ [emnasencsnin |
+ [stents ft
Pe [assem in
i Tateenamnntnn [iio
eC
Fo [metinettmmniee rr

Chapter-1
The Political Movement in East Bengal and the Rise
of Nationalism (1947-1970)
At the midnight of 14 August 1947, the colonial rules of the Raj ended in India,
and gave birth to two independent nations called India and Pakistan. Pakistan was
divided into two parts. The eastern part of Bengal was included in Pakistan as a
province and it was named East Pakistan. The other part was called West Pakistan.
Since the beginning, the administrative power of pakistan had been vested in the
rich section of the West Pakistan, which employed their power to control the
Language, Literature, culture, economy, politics as well as the social system of
East Pakistan and created discrimination. The people of East Pakistan organised
protest against the injustice and discrimination, and started agitation and mass
movement. The language movement took place to defend the mother tongue,
Bangla. The Bangalees of the then East Pakistan were united on the issue. The
spirit of the ‘Language movement’ encouraged the people of East Bengal to launch
agitation, demonstration and mass movement against the communal rule of
Pakistan. Based on the historic six point demands, the people of East Bengal voted
in favour of the Bengalee nationalism in 1970, and gave their verdict for a secular
nation named Bangladesh. A national unity was urged on the identity based on
language, history, tradition, culture and Bengali nationalism. This national
unification is called the Bangalee Nationalism that encouraged people to form a
secular, non-communal Bangladesh. As its consequence, Bangladesh emerged as
an independent country in 1971. In this chapter we will know about the political
movements in East Bengal and the rise of nationalism.
After reading this chapter, we will be able to-
¢ explain the background and significance of ¢ realize the spirit of the Bengali Nationalism;
the language movement; ¢ explain the reasons and consequences of
¢ analyse the significance of the language the anti martial-law movement in 1958;
movement in the formation of nationalism; * analyse the nature of discrimination
¢ explain the significance of declaring 21 between West Pakistan and East Pakistan;
February as the International Mother Language ¢ explain the significance of the
Day by the United Nation; historic six point demands;
¢ be respectful to our own as well as the © explain the historic Agartala Case (State
languages of others; Vs. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and Others);
¢ explain the reasons of forming the Awami © describe the background of the Mass
Muslim League and the Jukto (United) Front; Uprising in 1969;
* explain the impact of the election in 1954 of the ¢ evaluate the role of the mass movement
Jukto (United) Front; as an influence to the Liberation War;
* understand the reason of transformation from describe the election of 1970 and
the Awami Muslim League to the Awami explain its aftermath;
League in 1955, and explain the political * be conscious to defend the interest
situation from 1958 onwards; of the country.
Forma- 1: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

2 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Section 1.1: The Role of the Language Movement for Flourishing the
Bengalee Nationalism
Background of the Language Movement
Even before the creation of Pakistan, the debate arose on the issue of its official
language. As Mohammad Ali Jinnah proposed Urdu as the official language of the
Muslim League in 1937, Sher-e-Bangla A K Fazlul Haque, a veteran leader of
Bengal protested against it. When the establishment of Pakistan became absolute-
ly certain in 1947, the debate again arose. On 17 May 1947, Chowdhury Kaliquz-
zaman and in July, Dr. Ziauddin Ahmed, the Vice Chancellor of the University of
Aligarh proposed Urdu as the state language of. Pakistan. Dr. Muhammad Shahid-
ullah, an eminent linguist of East Bengal, Professor Dr. Muhammad Enamul
Haque of the University of Dhaka and some other intellectuals protested against
the proposal through their articles.
A cultural organization called Tamaddun Majlis @ SOY) aie aa ee
was formed at the University of Dhaka headed (@geeuis Mila Vay i7ey same
by Professor Abul Qasem in September 2,1947. ‘72Be ee, Har ah ae
In a meeting of the young workers of this 4 oe she AS Tc aes
organization on 6-7 September, it was | ayy. ARAM” ee ‘
unanimously decided to propose Bangla as a i, Wie yi 4 er ie
medium of education and court proceedings. A ie Sc ie eet rat
fierce protest broke out in East Bengal when a BN i. ae ‘
decision was taken in an education conference in i P dae ‘ 4
Karachi in December 1947 that Urdu should be mo “ ‘
the state language of Pakistan. People from all —_ — The Procession of the
walks of life raised their voice to declare Bangla
as the state language of Pakistan instead. Articles were published focusing on the
demand, and in December, Rasrtabhasha Sangram Porishad was formed,
Processions were brought out and meetings were ,held at different institutions
including Dhaka University and the secretariat. The Pakistan government
imposed Section 144 and banned meetings and rallies. Dhirendranath Dutta, a
member of the Pakistan Assembly (The Gano Porishad) demanded Bangla along
with Urdu and English as the medium of proceedings in the Assembly on 23
February, 1948. As his demand was rejected, there was a call for strike in Dhaka
on 26 and 29 February. Rastrabhasha Sangram Porishad was reformed on 2 March
at the University of Dhaka. March 11 was declared 'A Call for Bangla Language
Day’, and people observed hartal on that day. Founded on 4 January, 1948, the
East Pakistan Muslim Chatra League played a significant role in observing the .
protest. At least 69 protesters including Sheikh Mujib, Shamsul Huq, OliAhad $

The Political Movement in East Bengal and the Rise of Nationalism 3
were arrested while they were demonstrating with slogans we want bangla as state
language. In the present east pakistan the-than student leader Shaikh Mujibur
Rahman at the top was among other political prisoners for the demand of Bangla
as state language. A strike was observed in Dhaka during 12-15 March against the
arrests and repressions. Having no other way out, Khawja Nazimuddin, the Chief
Minister of Pakistan signed an eight-point-agreement with the Rastrabhasha
songram Porishad. The points are stated below:

1. All detainees in connection with the language movement would

unconditionally be released;

2. The Prime Minister himself will make a statement after a thorough investiga-
tion of the police atrocities;

3. A proposal of declaring Bangla as one of the state languages would be tabled
in the Bangal Legislative Assembly;

4. Bangla would replace English as the official language of East Pakistan, the
medium of instruction also will be Bangla ;

5. All restrictions would be withdrawn from the newspapers;

6. No legal action would he taken against the participants of the language
movement;

7. Section 144 imposed since 29 February would be withdrawn;

8. Confessing the guilt about the issue the ..Chief Minister would unequivocally
sta:e ‘hat the language movement was not provoked by the enemies of the
state.

Mohammad Ali Jinnah, the Governor General of Pakistan, came to Dhaka on 19

March, 1948. He unequivocally declared in a public meeting arranged at-the

Racecourse ground (now Suhrawardy Uddayn) on 21 March, that 'Urdu and only

Urdu shall be the state language of Pakistan’. When he repeated the declaration on

March 24, at the Convocation of the University Dhaka, the students had burst into

protest and opposed his declaration saying 'No,

No'.They also spontaneously protested against | successive of the events of the

the declaration made by Jinnah in the Racecourse| language movement.

ground. At a certain stage the Pakistan Government proposed to write Bangla by

using the Arabic alphabet. The Bengalees protested and agitated vehemently.

Within a few months immediately after the emergence of Pakistan, the movement

that erupted on the language issue was the manifestation of support for Bengali

s Nationalism. By defending the honour of the mother tongue, the people of East
& Bengal realised the importance of their development as a nation. The minority

4 Bangladesh and Global Studies
ethnic groups of this land also supported Bangla, not Urdu, as the state language
of Pakistan. Khawja Najimuddin, the new prime minister of Pakistan followed the
footsteps of his predecessor Jinnah and announced on 26 January 1952 Urdu as
the state language of Pakistan. In protest against it students observed strike on 30
January. Rastrabhasha Sangram Porishad was newly reorganised with Abdul
Matin as its new convener. Movement continued and the political parties also
joined it. Students observed an agitation. On 4 February in Dhaka, A resolution
was adopted for a general strike on 21 February which was to also be observed as
the ‘State Language Day’. They declared their firm determination to continue the
movement unti] the demand was realized. Imprisoned Sheikh Mujib, while under
the treatment at the Dhaka Medical College Hospital, gave the students and the
workers of the Awami Muslim League necessary instructions for observing the
21st February Programme. After that, Sheikh Mujib and another co-detainee
Mohiuddin Ahmed were transferred from Dhaka Central Jail to Faridpur district
prison on the charge of providing leadership in the language movement. As both
of them went on a hunger strike till death demanding unconditional release of the
arrested political leaders and immediate declaration of Bangla as the state lan-
guage, the movement received a great became more serious. Public opinion was
being formed throughout the province. The government imposed Section 144
since 21 February onwards, and banned all meetings, rallies and procession for a
month. The leaders moblising the movement decided to violate the section 144. A
meeting was held at Amtala (under the mango tree in front of the present Dhaka
Medical College) of the University of Dhaka at 11 am of 21 February. It was
Pe at > » A Oe

a ™ = ve

Abdus Salam Abul Barkat Abdul Jabber  Shafiur Rahman Rafiquddin Ahmed
Picture: 1.2: Language Martyrs

decided that they would bring out small processions in turm comprising 10
persons in each, These processions approached from the Dhaka Medical College
side by defying Section 144, At first, the police made some arrests, and later
hurled the tear gas and charged batons at the demonstratons, At one stage, as the ©
police opened fire on the protesters, Abul Barkat, Jabbar, Rafique, Salam and Rg

The Political Movement in East Bengal and the Rise of Nationalism 5
others became martyrs, and many others received bullet injuries. The news of
killing the students spread at Dhaka soon throughout the country. A huge
mourning processions were brought out at Dhaka on 22nd February. Shafiur
Rahman became a martyr due to the police assault. The mass people and the
students together erected a Shahid Minar (memorial) in front of the Medical
College on 21 February to make the martyrs' memory immortal. The Shahid
Minar erected first was inaugurated by the father of martyr Shafiur on 23
February, but the police demolished the Shahid Minar on 24 February. Poet
Mahbub-ul-Alam of Chittagong composed the first poem on the killing of 21
February, titled "Kadte Aashini Fashir Dabi Niye Aeshechi" (We've not Come to
Cry, but with the Demand for Death Sentence by Hanging). Another poem was
composed by young poet Aalauddin Al Azad titled "Smirit Minar"(Monument of
Memory) on the instant reaction of the incident. Students, youth, mass people
from different cities including Chittagong, Rajshahi, Rangpur, Khulna, Barisal,
Comilla extended their supports to the language movement. A strong feeling of
hatred to the West Pakistanis stirred the people of East Pakistan. The killing had a
far reaching impact on the mind of the people. Journalist Abdul Gaffar
Chowdhury composed the immortal song Amar bhaier rokte rangano ekushe
February, ami ki vulite pan, singer Abdul Latif composed and tuned songs like ora
amar mukher bhash kaira nite chaye and Tora Tora Dhaka shohor rokte vhashaili.
Dr. Munir Chowdhury from inside the prison wrote a drama titled "Kobor", Jahir
Raihan wrote a novel "Arek Falgun". Basing on the language movement, a fierce
protest against the Pakistan government spread through out East Bengal in the
fields of art, culture and literature. The narrow stream of the Bengali nationalism
was going to be a deluge. Started in 1947, the language movement took a turn into
a violent struggle from 1948 to 1952. As a result, the Pakistan government was
compelled to recognised Bangla as one of the state languages, and Bangla was
included in the constitution of Pakistan in 1956. The Bengali and the other ethnic
groups of East Bengal became the first Shahid self-reliant and brave relying on
their history, tradition, culture Minar of Bangladesh and language. After the
language movement in 1952, the whole decade of the 50s was the most eventful
period for the preparation of establishing rights and independence by the Benga-
lis. The language movement was the source of inspiration to all the political
movements afterwards. The movements made the people aware of their rights this
movement made them aware of unity and independence. It was the first
movement for the emancipation from Pakistani rule.

« Development of Nationalism

3 The language movement which was the primary step to develop the Bengali

6 Bangladesh and Global Studies
nationalism united the Bengalis first. The fascination 5 ~~
for Pakistan faded away soon. The importance and ————
interrelation between the language and culture s porsc ee
became clear and unmistakable to them to build up 2} Sa ba 3
their own national identity. They started realising the =<) 48 .
significance of politics, economy, education and ‘tocme ieee his
culture of their own to be recognised as anation. The | — ea sim
language oriented unity made a solid foundation for , = P|
nationalism which subsequently played the key role a
in emerging Bangladesh as an independent county. Miami: (i
The Martyr Day and the International Mother Picture 1.3: The first Shahid
Minar of Bangladesh
Language Day
The 21 February has been observing as the Martyr Day since 1953 throughout the
country. Every yea.r we pay tribute to the martyrs by laying floral wreath at the
Shahid Minar (Martyr Memorial) early in the morning after walking barefoot, It's
a day to the Bengalis to be revived in the spirit of grief. The United Nations
educational, scientific and cultural organisation (UNESCO) recognised 21
February, themartyr day of Bangladesh as the International Mother Language
Day on 17 November 1999 as a result of initiatives taken by some Bengali
emigrants in Canada and the diplomatic role played by the Awami League
government. There are more than 6000 languages in the world. Since then the
people of these languages realized the importance of Martyr Day of Bangladesh
and thus have learnt the importance of their mother tongue. Besides Bangla, in our
country there are different ethnic communities who have different languages. We
will try to protect and develop their language and culture.
Section 1.2: The Role of the Political Movement in developing the Bengali
Nationalism
The people of East Bengal understood the political peculiarities of the state called
Pakistan, and realised the illusions of two-nation theory immediately after the
establishment of Pakistan. Although the Bengalis were 56% of the total
population, the West Pakistanis dominated everywhere in running the state, either
occupying high administrative posts or availing of the economic and political
privileges. The people of East Pakistan, i.e. the Bengalees were deprived of their
rights. There were three streams in the political parties and leadership in that time:
1, Political parties loyal to Pakistan like Jamat-a-Islami, Nizme Islam, the Muslim
League 2. Political parties defended the interest of East Bengal like the Awami
League, the National Awami Party (NAP); 3.The political parties of the Left 3
Stream.

The Political Movement in East Bengal and the Rise of Nationalism 7
The Formation of the Awami Muslim League
After a few months of the creation of Pakistan the Awami Muslim League broke
away from the two-nation theory of the Muslim league, and emerged as a
non-communal progressive party imbibed with the ideal of the Bengali
Nationalism. and established The East Pakistan Awami Muslim League’ on 23
June 1949 in a conference at Rose Garden. Maulana Abdul Hamid Khan Bhashani
and Shamsul Haque of Tangail were nominated as the president and the General
Secretary respectively of the newly formed party, while Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
became the Joint Secretary. At the very beginning, the party made an extended
plan of activities in the interest of the Bengalis. They decided to place some
demands before the government like provincial autonomy, sovereignty of the
people, recognition of Bangla as one of the state languages, nationalisation of the
jute and tea industries, abolition of feudal system without giving any
compensation, distribution of land among the farmers, cooperative farming etc:
The party became very popular within a very short time for voicing the demands
to the government. Particularly Sheikh Mujibur Rahman became a victim of rage
of the Pakistani rulers. Sheikh Mujib was arrested in 1949. But even while in Jail
he provided leadership in the movements including the demand for state language.
Consequently he was kept in jail until 27 February 1952. The Awami League was
the key initiator to form Jukto (United) Front in 1954. In order to reflect its
non-communal political ideology changed its name to from the 'East Pakistan
Awami Muslim League' to East Pakistan Awami League’ in 1955. So the Bengalis
and the minority ethnic groups had the opportunity to be merged into the stream
of nationalism. In this time, on the one hand, the party initiated movements
outside, on the other hand, the members in the national assembly and the
provincial government remained vocal inside the government to perform
important role as a pro-people party.
The Formation of Jukto (United) Front, Election and Government
After the establishment of Pakistan, ruling party Muslim League did not take any
initiative to form the central and provincial government for a long time. Besides,
the dillydallying of the central government on the issue of forming the provincial
government became clear to the people of East Bengal. The Awami League
decided to establish Jukto (United) Front on 14 November 1953 to defeat the
Muslim League in the forthcoming Pradeshik Porishad (Provincial Assembly)
election of East Bengal. The Jukto (United) Front was comprised of four
parties- the Awami League, the Krishok Sramik Party, the Nezame Islam and the
a, Ganotantri Dal, The Provincial election was held in March of 1954. The people
$ considered the 21 point demands of the Front the charter of their emancipation.

8 Bangladesh and Global Studies
The Jukto (United) Front got 223 seats out of 237 Muslim constituencies in the
Provincial Assembly of East Pakistan, while the Muslim League bagged only 9
seats. The other parties got the rest of the seats. The people of East Bengal gave
their verdict in favour of the Jukto (United) Front as they wanted to get rid of the
authority and dominance of the West Pakistanis in the state power. It was evident
that they wanted the Bengalis to see in the power, and the Jukto (United) Front had
the mandate from the people to form the provincial government. The election
again proved that people are the 'sources of all power'. They by rejecting the poli-
tics of the Muslim League brought about an end of their regime in East Pakistan.
The 21 Point Demands of the Jukto (United) Front in 1954
1. Bangla will be one of the state languages of Pakistan;
2. Feudal system will be abolished without giving any compensation; all
brokery and certificate system will be null and void;
3. Giving fair price, the jute trade should be nationalised, and the culprits
involved in Jute scam should rightly be punished;
4. Cooperative agricultural system should be introduced, and handicrafts
and small cottage
industries will be developed;

5. Salt industries will be expanded and the culprits involved in salt scam will

be duly punished;
6. Homeless workers of the factory and technical trades will be

rehabilitated;
7. Digging canals for Irrigation, and improvement of Agriculture; measures

should be taken to initiateflood control system and to prevent famine;
8. East Bengal will be properly Industrialised, and the rights of the

labourers will be duly protected;
9. Free and compulsory primary education will be imparted, and a decent
scale of salaryand allowance for the teachers will be ensured;
10. Thorugh reforms of education system and Introduction of Bangla as the
mediums of instruction,
11. University of Dhaka and Rajshahi will be given full autonomy, and all the
black I will be repealed and higher education should be easily accessible;
12. Expenditure in running the administration should be reduced, and the
discrimination between high and low waged staffs will be minimized;
13. All kinds of corruptions will be wiped out; wo

S
AQ

The Political Movement in East Bengal and the Rise of Nationalism 9
14. Political detainees will be unconditionally released, and freedom of speech, of
meeting and assemblage, and of press will be ensured;

15. Judiciary will be separated from the administration;

16. Bordhaman House will be a hostel for the time being, and later be
devi-. research centre for Bangla language and literature;

17. A Shahid Minar (memorial) will be erected in memoriam of the langui

18, 21 February will be declared The Martyr Day’ and it will be a governr

19, East Pakistan will have full autonomy as per the historic Lahor proposal:

20. Free and fair election will be held regularly;

21. If the Jukto (United) Front is defeated in three consecutive by-elections, the
cabinet will resign;

The Government of the Jukto (United) Front

AK Fa/lul Haque, the leader of the Krishok Sromik Party, one of the allies of the
Jukto (United) Front took'oath as the Chief Minister on 3 April 1954. The Jukto
Front remained in power just for 56 days. The Pakistan government could not
accept the Jukto (United) Front government in East Bengal. They started conspir
ing to topple the government. Golam Group Warks The umrchy Geated
Mohammad, the governor general of by the ruling class was responsible
Pakistan dismissed the Jukto Front | for the failure of the Jukto (United)
government on 30 May 1954 on a flimsy | Front government-show reasons in
pretext of the riot between the Bengalis and |_fvour of this statement.

the Non-Bengalis at the Adamjee Jute Mill and Kornofuli, it was found later that
the riot was provoked by the Pakistan government. Sher-e-Bangla A.K. Fajlul
Huq was placed under house arrest, Sheikh Mujib and other 3 thousand political
leaders and supporters were arrested too. The enmity and the hatred ofthe — Pa-
kistani rulers were again expressed through this conspiratorial act. The despotic
regime began in East Pakistan. The frequent changes of government in the centre
and provinces increased unrest everywhere. The country passed under military
rule.

Section 1. 3: The Martial Law and the subsequent political events

Under the military and civilian rulers of West Pakistan. As a result, the Parliament
as well as the government could not play any effective role. The conniving groups
were waiting for the chance to grab the power. In the Provincial Assembly, Deputy
Speaker Shahed Ali was seriously injured and subsequently died in a hospital
because of a brawl among the MLAs on a disputable issue. President Iskandar
Mirza declared Martial Law on 7 October 1958 on the pretext of this incident.
Forma- 2: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

10 Bangladesh and Global Studies
After assuming the power, the decisions he took were as follows: 1. Annulled the
Constitution of 1956; 2. Dissolved the central and the provincial Assemblies. 3.
Banned the political activities of the parties. Sheikh Mujib and some other leaders
were arrested and sent to prison; 5. All fundamental rights were suspended.
Occupying Power by Ayub Khan
President Iskandar Mirza was ousted from power in a military coup on 27 October
1958 and was forced to leave the country. General Ayub Khan after assuming
office as the President of Pakistan took the following steps: 1. Declared himself
the chief martial law administrator; 2. Postponed the general election of 1959
declared earlier; 3. Expressed his commitment to wipe out corruption and illegal
trafficking of goods; 4. Continue embargo on political parties;
Ayub Khan initiated a new system called fundamental democracy to linger the
autocratic rule. In this system, an electoral panel will be formed with 80 thousand
elected members of the union council from both West and East Pakistan. They will
preserve the right of electing the President and the members of both the central
and provincial assembly. It was an indirect election process. He was elected the
President of Pakistan getting 80 thousand votes of the union council members.
The administrative power was centralized on West Pakistan, and the
discrimination between the two parts became blatant.
Discriminating Attitudes to the People of East Pakistan
Before the establishment of Pakistan, East Bengal was in a better position in
economic, social, educational and other sectors in comparison with West Pakistan.
However, Pakistan started lagging behind due to the oppressive rule of West
Pakistan established in 1947. Discrimination between the two parts was looming
large since ihen. Discrimination in the economic sector: West Pakistan was in a
better position in comparison with East Pakistan due to the discriminatory policy
of the Pakistan government. For example, East Pakistan received taka 113 crore 3
lakh and 80 thousand at the budget allocation from 1955-56 to 1959-60, on the
other hand West Pakistan got taka 500 crore in the same period. Taka 6,480
million from 1960-61 to 1964-65, wallocated as ,
for the East Pakistan and West Pakistan received
taka 22,230 million in the same period. The |py west Pakistan.
foreign exchange earned through export of
Jute, tea, hide etc., used to be spent for the development of West Pakistan. As a
result. East Pakistan started lagging behind in the fields of trade and commerce,
industry and agriculture, and in economy. ~
S
AQ

The Political Movement in East Bengal and the Rise of Nationalism 11
Discrimination in the administrative sector: East Pakistan was prevented
from playing any effective roles in the administration of Pakistan. The
discrimination was very blatant. A comparative study of discriminatory
administration of Pakistan in 1966 is shown bellow:
[3. | Industry | 25.7% | 748%
|6. [Education 27.8% | 72TH
[8 [Law 8H | OH
[9 Agriculture MT 9%
Discrimination in the defense sector: The Bengalis would often experience
discrimination in the recruitment and promotion in the Army, Navy and Air Force.
Only 5% of officers, 4% of general soldiers, 19% of high official in the Navy, 9%
of lower officials, 11% of Pilots in the Air force, 1.7% of technicians belonged to
the Bengali community.
Discrimination in the education sector: East Bengal was far ahead of West
Pakistan in the primary and secondary education before the establishment of
Pakistan, but after its birth, the complexion in the education sector was totally
changed as West Pakistan started receiving more than double allocation of funds
in the annual budget every year. So, many new educational institutions had been
established in the primary, secondary and higher secondary levels in West
Pakistan.
Social Discrimination: The growth of the middle class in East Pakistan was
hindered for the discriminatory policies of West Pakistan. The Bangalees became
fragile financially. Disparity increased between the two regions. People started
showing demonstrations and organising movements.
The Anti-Martial Law Movement: Agitation started in East Pakistan against the
autocratic regime of Ayub Khan since 1961. It was further intensified when
Hossain Shahid Suhrawardi, a favourite leader of the Bengalis and former Prime
Minister was arrested in January 1962. Subsequently Sheikh Mujib was arrested
in February, and the people of this part launched movement demanding his
eo unconditional release including all other political detainees. The students became
& vocal against the form of government proposed by Ayub Khan. Then they

12 Bangladesh and Global Studies
declared 15 point demands. Various professional groups extended their supports
to the movement on the issue of education policy. Besides, Jatiyo Ganotantric
Front (The National Democratic Front) was formed to reinstate the constitutional
government. The front orchestrated agitation against the despotic regime of Ayub
Khan. The political parties got the opportunity to go to the mass people with their
political agenda against the military rules while they were campaigning for the
Presidential election in 1965.
Indo-Pak War
Indo-Pak war broke out on 6 September 1956, and continued for 17 days. Then
East Pakistan was totally unprotected. The government did not think of the safety
of the people of this part. Though Pakistan was defeated in the war, the ruling
quarter of West Pakistan-continued their anti-India campaign. Besides, this time
they describing the songs of Rabindranath as Hindu culture, and complaining
against the songs of Nazrul bearing influences of Hinduism tried to stop its
practice, and termed it as anti-Islam. So the people of East Pakistan reiterated
provincial autonomy to defend their own culture, history, tradition and political
rights. People started feeling more urge for the politics of Secular Bengali
nationalism.
The 6 Point demands: East Bengal’s charter of freedom
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman is the proponent of the historic 6-points
programme. The long movement against the Pakistan government's
discriminatory policy and indifferent attitude to the people of East Pakistan took
a deep and clear shape in the 6 point demands. Awami league president Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman participated in a conference of the opposition leaders on 5-6
February 1966 in Labor. He stated the 6 point charter demands in a press
conference to defend the rights of the people. The points are as follows:
1. In Pakistan there will be the Parliamentary form of government under federal
system. The polling will be held under the general electoral system, and adult
voters will enfranchise;
2. The central government will keep tevo ministries in their hand, the defence and
the foreign affairs. The states will have full autonomy of the other affairs;
3. Two different but convertible types of currency should be introduced in the
country, or a single currency might be used on some terms and conditions;
4. The state government will preserve the right to impose taxes, and a part of the
collected revenue will be deposited to the treasury of the central government;
29
S
AQ

The Political Movement in East Bengal and the Rise of Nationalism 13
5. The states will be the owners of the foreign currency that they will earn, and
similarly a portion will be deposited to the treasury of the central government;
6. The states will be given the power of forming militia force for their regional
security;
Importance: The 6 points included economic, . A
political, martial and other rights of the people of : rv,
East Pakistan. The Ayub regime termed it as a “t ‘
separatist movement. The demands reflected the euskal
national spirit of the Bengalis. Although the demand ai] — ae
of independence was not spelled out init, the charter = a See
inspired the Bengalis in the spirit of independence, & Gee
and in the end, it became the national charter for es
liberation. For his 6-points programme the Pakistani sie 94
regime blamed Sheikh Mujibur Rahman as a "ey
Secessionist and enemy of Pakistan. a
The Pakistan government did not accept the nh
demands, rather started oppression that made the picture 1.4: Bangabandhu Sheikh
peoples’ movement inevitable, Mujibur Rahman, the exponent
of the provincial autonomy on the
basis of the 6 point demands.
The Historic Agartala Case (State Vs. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and Others)
The ultimate goal of the politics of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the
father of the nation was to achieve independence of Bangladesh, and he believed
that the freedom would not be achieved without armed struggle. He gave consent
to the revolutionary wing formed secretly to achieve independence of
Bangladesh to go for armed struggle as per the plan. The revolutionary wing
planned to attack all the cantonments being devided into different groups on a
specific date at night in the commando style to snatch arms and ammunition from
the Pakistani forces and hold them captive. Later they would declare the
independence under the leadership of Sheikh Mujibur Rahaman. With this plan in
mind Sheikh Mujib had once visited Agartala, the capital of Tripura, India. As the
plan was disclosed before being materialized, the historic irtala (State Vs. Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman and others) case was lodged. The ruling clique termed it as a
conspiracy case. A charge was framed against a total of 35 persons including
political leaders, civil servants, in Service and retired army officers and other
« civilians,
3

14 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was named the number one defendant.
They were accused under .'.ion of 121-A and 131 of the Pakistan Penal Code for
conspiring to make East Pakistan a sovereign and independent state through arms
struggle. The hearing of the case started on 19 June 1968 in a special tribunal at
the Dhaka Cantonment. As the trial began, a fierce movement launched by the
people to withdraw the case, The farmers, labourers, students and general people
spontaneously joined the agitation on the 11 point demands of the students. The
political movement on the basis on the 6 and the 11 point demands took root
among the masses, and the subsequent ‘Historic Agartala Case' eventually
encouraged the people to move for the independence.

The Mass Uprising in 1969

The most important movement against the Pakistani rulers was launched in 1969
with full participation by the people from all walks of life. It was termed in the
history as Unoshotturer Gano Abhuthan (The Mass Uprising of Sixty Nine) that
took a revolutionary turn. All democratic parties,

professionals, mass people spontaneously took part in

the movement. Asaduzzaman Asad, a student of the \

University of Dhaka, and Dr. Shamsujjoha, a

professor of the University of Rajshahi became the

victims of brutal killings by the Pakistani Junta. “% — «_ J

People indiscriminate of professions took to the , =

streets everywhere in East Pakistan to protest against _ ie \G

the autocrat, and in the end, Ayub Khan was forced to ‘Picture 1.5: Martyr Asad
telease Sheikh Mujib unconditionally on 22 February 1969. Similarly the other
political detainees were released too. The Agartala case was withdrawn. Chalra
Sangram Porishad gave a warm reception to Sheikh Mujib at the Racecourse (now
Suhrawardi Uddayari) on 23 February, and he was awarded the title
‘Bangabandhu' in the reception meeting. The-them Ducsu V-P. Mr. Tofail Ahmed
moved the motion. ea

The Historical influence of the Mass Uprising: Be 4 pRB pec
Pakistani Junta Ayub Khan was forced to resign [gamed Miia k ze: why
as the consequence of the mass uprising in 1969, (Ry °” 98 (a Ry ak

and before his resignation, he withdrew the 2) a ‘4. a
Agartala Case. The new military government of [Ry i) Ul i
General Yahia was forced to declare the general j A =
election in 1970. The nationalist ideals started ™ : =
germinating in the minds of the people of East pple are dig 3
Bengal for the successful uprising in 1969. They _ mass uprising of 1969 »

The Political Movement in East Bengal and the Rise of Nationalism 15
realised a greater unity based on the Bengali nationalism. The mass uprising of
1969 had an influence in the polling of 1970 and the liberation war of 1971, and
the achievements were made possible for the spark of the Bengali nationalism in
the people's mind.
The Election of 1970 and aftermath
President Ayub Khan resigned his post on 25 March 1969. Yahia Khan succeeded
him as the next dictator. In a statement on 28 March, he promised to hold a general
election, but on this there was confusion because previously no general election
was so far. Nor was there any election rules yet. Finally on 7 December 1970, the
general election was held for the first time in Pakistan on the basis of ‘one person
one vote'. The Awarni League, the NAP (Wall), the Muslim League (Kayurn), the
Muslim League (Convention), the Pakistan People's Party, the Democratic Party,
the Jamat-e-Islami and some other political parties took part in the election. The
Awami league termed this election as a 'referendum' in favour of 6 point demands.
3 crore and 22 lakh out of 5 crore and 64 lakh voters belonged to East Pakistan. In
the central parliament election of 1970, the Awami League bagged 167 (with 7
female seats) out of 169 seats preserved for East Pakistan. In the election of
Provincial assembly held on 17 December, the Awami League got 298 out of 300
seats and won the absolute majority. The landslide victory of the Awami League
in the election was unprecedented. They got the verdict of the people in favour of
6 roint demands and for the formation of government.
Importance of the Election: The Awami League achieved the landslide victory
in the National and provincial assembly. So it was authenticated that the people
supported the 6 and 11 Point demands. The Bengali nationalism marked a political
victory. On the other hand, it was a big blow to the Pakistani rulers. So they started
hatching new plot against the Bengalis not to hand over the power to the elected
body. The people of East Pakistan stood firmly against the dictatorship of West
Pakistan. The significance of the election [qigiviqual work: Make a list of the
in emerging an independent Bangladesh in
1971 became clear. It also played a vital | of the Bengali nationalism.
role to transform the spirit of nationalism
to the spirit of freedom. As a result, a new country named Bangladesh emerged.
Short Questions: Exercise
1. How did East Bengal become a Province of Pakistan?

oo 2. What is the International Mother Language Day?

S 3. Identify the reasons of calling the historic 6 Point demands the charter of liberation.

16 Bangladesh and Global Studies

Descriptive Questions:

1. What were the circumstances of demand to establish a militia force in 6
Point demands?

2. ‘The people of East Pakistan fully participated in the movement of the 6
Point Demands because of the discriminating attitude of the rulers of
West Pakistan towards the East Pakistan about financial matters’—
substantiate your points in favour of your statement.

3. ‘The liberation war was the inevitable outcome of the general election of
1971°- explain.

4. Explain the reasons of terming the historic Agartala case as a conspiracy by
the then rulers.

Multiple Choice Qustions:

1. What ideal was spread out in East Bengal by the language movement?

a. The Bengali Nationalism
b. The secular ideology

c. The two-nation theory

d. The community feeling

Read the pragraph below and answer the question nos. 2 & 3 that follow:

Rifat watches cartoons on television on 21 February every year, but this year he

comes to school to participate in the morning procession, and took a vow to place

floral wreath at the Shahid Minar (The Martyr Memorial) every year, and he will
never write Bangla by using English letters.

2. The vow Rifat took to lay wreath at the Shahid Minar expresses his —

i. respect to the martyrs of the language movement
ii. inclination to get applause
iii. love for cherishing the memory of the martyrs
Which one of the following is correct
a. iGii
b. i &iii
c. ii & iii
d. i, ii & iti
3. The spirit reflected in the changed disposition of Rifat is his-
a. respect to the Bengalee nationalism
b. tendency to imitate people
c. love for his own language =<
d. disinclination to write English language s

The Political Movement in East Bengal and the Rise of Nationalism 17
Creative Questions:
1. Table-1
Table-2
a. What was the first movement launched by the Bengalis for the
national emancipation in the Pakistan regime?
b. Describe the historic significance of the mass uprising of 1969.
c. Explain the discrimination between East and West Pakistan reflected in the
table no. 1.
d. Evaluate the economic condition resulted from the discrimination between
East and West Pakistan shown in the table no. 2.
2. 100% = i
95% rr F 1%
16% 15%
me | 95% 4
15% 96% cast Figure-1
«wie of EEE =
Sena eat po eeny pilot air force
100%
80%
60% 96. 58
40%; a8 66 80 16 rea (Figure-2
a i ee a =“
foreign currency The US. other foreign industrial_industy loan __industrial
{in dev. work) Aid Aid dev. cor. and investment dey. bank.
a. In which year was the Jukto (United) Front formed?
b. What do you mean by Bengali Nationalism?
c. Which of the 6 point demands was raised in the light of the statistics
shown in the figure-1
d. ‘The 6 point demands were raised for the discrimination shown in figure-2, are
you agreed to the statement? Show reasons in favour of your answer.
Forma- 3: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

Chapter-2
The Independent Bangladesh

Bangladesh achieved the independence through armed struggle in 1971. The Ban-
galees experienced widespread sufferings, and sacrificed a lot to achieve the inde-
pendence. The Awami League won by the absolute majority in the general elec-
tion of Pakistan in 1970 under the leadership of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman. The people of East Pakistan spontaneously voted for the Awami League
to be free from the oppression of the Pakistani rulers. But the rulers of the West
Pakistan started hatching plots not to hand over the power to the Awami League.
The then Pakistan President and the Military Chief Agha Mohammad Yahia Khan
suspended the session of the national assembly on 1 March 1971 sine die. Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman called for Ashhojog Andolon (the non-cooperation movement)
on 2 March protesting the decision. In a historic speech delivered at the Race-
course on 7 March 1971, Bangabandhu called for a decisive struggle to achieve
the liberation and independence. The Pakistan army swooped on the civilians on
25 March. Bangabandhu declared the independence on the early hours of 26
March. The formal campaign of the liberation war began after the formation of the
Mujibnagar government and the approval of the constitutional declaration on 10
April, and we achieved independence on 16 December 1971 after a bloody war of
long nine months. A total of 93 thousand Pakistani invading soldiers surrendered
in that day, and Bangladesh emerged as an independent and sovereign country in
the world map. The Bangabandhu government faced enormous challenges to cope
with the situation of a war torn country, but Bangabandhu was brutally killed and
his government was ousted from power in a military coup on 15 August 1975.
That was the beginning of the autocratic rules in Bangladesh. Democracy was
reestablished by deposing the junta through a long struggle and continuous move-
ments by the people. The country returned to the track of the socio-economic
development again. In this chapter, we will know about the background of the
independence of. Bangladesh, her emergence, reconstruction, military regime,
reestablisment of democracy and the development of socio-economic condition.
After reading the chapter, we will be able to —
e analyse the importance of the oration of 7 March analyse the historic significance of

in achieving the liberation of Bangladesh; the great liberation war;
e evaluate the role of the Mujibnagar government explain the introduction of constitution

in commanding the liberation war; of 1971 formulation;
e evaluate the roles of various political parties, explain the process of reconstruction

students, professional groups, women, mass of a war affected country;

media, cultural workers and mass people in the describe the brutal killing of the father

liberation war; of the nation and four other national
¢ evaluate the roles and contributions of the — jeaders in 1975, and the subsequent

important political leaders to the events in political changes;

Beaieitip ite irae | ; e describe the rise of military rules after 1975;
° evaluate ie roles: of various countries and describe the killing of General Ziaur BS

creating global opinion in the emergence of | Rahman and the subsequent elections; 8

independent Bangladesh;

The Independent Bangladesh 19

e be inspired to the ideals of the architect of ° explain the despotic rule of H M Ershad
independence and the father of nation Sheikh since 1982 and its impacts;

Mujibur Rahman show respect for the love of * describe mass movement in 1990
country, democracy and independence; and reestablishing of democracy;

e describe the significant socio-economic

and cultural development of Bangladesh.

Section 2.1: Preparation for the Liberation War, Armed Struggle and the

Emergence of Sovereign Bangladesh

The Awami League achieved absolute majority in the national and provincial
election held in 1970. The Junta of Pakistan started hatching plot not to hand over
the power to the Awami League. Yahia Khan called for the session of the national
assembly on 3 March 1971. Pakistan people’s party chief Zulfikar Ali Bhutto
tefused to join the session in Dhaka and threatened other members to refrain them
from joining. It was the part of a Bhutto-Yahia conspiracy. Yahia Khan postponed
the session of 3 March sine die through a statement on 1 March using the refusal
of Bhutto as a pretext. The people of East Bengal exploded into agitation against
the decision of suspending the session without discussing with Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the leader of the party got absolute majority in the elec-
tion. Strikes were observed on the call of All Parry Action Committee and Bang-
abandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman on 2 March in Dhaka and 3 March throughout
the country in protest against postponing the session. As a result, all the activities
of the government came to a standstill. During hartal, police and army opened fire
leaving hundred killed and injured. Bangabandhu called for a non-cooperation
movement, and under this circumstances, he delivered his historic speech on 7
March in a huge gathering at the Racecourse (now suhrawardi uddan). Addressing
the people, he urged all Bangalees to participate in armed struggle for liberation.
After a bloody war of nine months. Bangladesh emerged on the world map as an
independent country.

The Historic Speech of 7 March and the Formal Journey towards the Independence
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman delivered a historic oration on 7 March at
the Racecourse (present Suhrawardi Uddyan). In his speech, he, pointing to the
glorious background of the political history of the Bengalees, gave a detail
account of the oppression, misrule and the awful deprivation of the Bengalees by
the West Pakistan government, Particularly the oration is a historic document
particularly for the Bengalees nay for the world. Of the speeches notable in the
history of the world, the speech of 7 March is remarkable, and it will be immortal
to the people' aspiring freedom and independence. The Bengalees got the

« inspiration for being united and the indication for joining the liberation war from
S the speech of 7 March. Only one target was fixed before them from then onwards,

20 Bangladesh and Global Studies
and it was nothing but the freedom. The Bangalees started getting preparation for
the lebaration war after the formal call for the independence by Bangabandhu in
his speech of 7 March, Giving suggestions and further he urged the people, "build
forts in every house, and face the foes with whatever you have.' 'As we've
sacrificed our lives, we will sacrifice again, we will liberate the people of this
rons saeetnpaieat = J. Cue oe pt aes

Se ite at cmiascetcate

PS eo a ie 3
Picture 2.1: The historic speech of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman given
at the Racecourse on 7 March 1971
country, Inshallah. This struggle is for freedom, this | Group Work: Mention the
struggle is for independence,’ he added. In this | Vi#l aspects in the historic

as oration of 7 March inspired
speech, he also highlighted the strategy of war, | 4. freedom fighters.
ways to face enemies, resisting technique, etc.
Bangabandhu clearly declared the independence of Bangladeh in his historic 7
March speech. The Bangalees joined the liberation war responding to the call for
independence by Bangabandhu. The Pakistan army swooped on the innocent
Bangalees in the night of 25 March and started genocide. The Bengalees were
raising stiff resistance against the invading Pakistani forces.
The Formal Journey to Independence Miz.) ks
People from all walks of life were united ig 2 fo ‘| (PS
responding to the call for independence and the 2 we eS
activities declared by Bangabandhu on 7 March a ee ee
1971. All the offices, educational institutions, er 7 fe
judiciary department, factories and industries = Se mb & See We
remained closed sine dic. As the situation of (Wy -afe? a
East Pakistan was rapidly deteriorating, Yahia eh we ho nn ad
Khan came to Dhaka to talk to Bangabandhu it a ee
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. Bhutto also came to pete a ; oon Benocite or OS

The Independent Bangladesh 21
Dhaka then. They were pretending as well as wasting time in the name of holding
talks and meeting, but they secrectly assembled soldiers, arms and ammunition
to East Bengal from West Pakistan as a part of the preparation of war. Tikka Khan
and Rao Forman Ali designed a blue print named the ‘Operation Search Light’ on
17 March to make the Bangalees victims of mass_ killings. The brutal mass killing
in the history of world civilisation began in the night of 25 March. Yahia and
Bhutto secretly left Dhaka. The Pakistani Army launched attack on the innocent
people by the order of Yahia Khan, and indiscriminately killed people. They
attacked the Police line of Razarbagh, the EPR camp of Pilkhana, the University
of Dhaka and the other important establishments of Dhaka city and committed
genocide civilian. It is called Kalratri (blackout) in the history of Bangladesh. This
night is recognized as National Genocide Day. Bangabandhu declared the
independence in the hours of blackout on 25 March, i.e. at the early hour of 26
March, and transmitted the message through wireless to different places.
Hearing the declaration of the independence by angabandhu, the people instant-
ly initiated resistance in Chittagong and other districts of the country. So an
uneven war broke out between the Pakistan armed forces and the unarmed Ansar,
police, and common people. It is known as the great Liberation war of
Bangladesh. Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was arrested at the midnight,
nearly at 1.30 am of 26 March, and was secretly taken away to West Pakistan.
The Declaration of Independence
Bangabandhu declared the independence of Bangladesh at the midnight of 25
March i.e. in the early hour of 26 March just before his arrest by the Pakistani
Army. The declaration was in English so that the people around the world can
understand it. The declaration was as follows: ‘This may be my last message, from
today Bangladesh is independent. I call | Group work: What is the declaration
upon the people of Bangladesh wherever | of independence? Prepare the subject
you might be and with whatever you have,
to resist the army of occupation to the last. | Group aearic ie ecerhe why the
Your fight must go on until the last solider | Bengalis started the liberation war.
of the Pakistan occupation army is expelled
from the soil of Bangladesh arid final victory is achieved.' (Bangladesh Gezette,
Fifteenth Amendment of the Constitution, 3 July 2011). The declaration of
independence was broadcast all over the Bangladesh through the radio transmitter
of EPR, telegram and tele-printer. M.A Hannan, a leader of the Chittagong Awami
League broadcast the declaration of independence by Bangabandhu at noon
« through Chittagong Radio Station and subsequently through Kalurghat radio
S station in the evening on 26 March. Major Ziaur Rahman again proclaimed the

22 Bangladesh and Global Studies

decalration on behalf of Bangabandhu in the evening of 21 March through the

same radio station. The freedom aspiring people became very much enthusiastic

hearing the declaration of independence by Bangabandhu and the immediate

support and participation of Bangalee officers in the army, para military and other

forces.

The Commencement of the War of Liberation and the Activities of the

Mujibnagar Government

Before the Operation Search Light Began on 25th March, 1971 Bangabandhu

discussed with his close associates the situation that than prevailed. He gave them

directives to resist if the Pakistani army would attack. He imparted important

instructions to the elected representatives about the formation of Government and

other matters during the liberation war.

The formation of the Mujibnagar Government was very important in the history

of liberation.The mango grove of Baidaynathtala of Meherpur was named

Mujibnagar after the name of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. The

Mujibnagar government was formed on 10 April 1971 with the elected members

of the national and provincial assembly to run the war by giving necessary

directives as well as to drum up the support of the foreign countries. This was the

first Bangladesh Government. The order of the declaration of independence of

Bangladesh' i. e. the declaration of independence was formally proclaimed on that

day. The Mujibnagar government took oath on 17 April 1971, and the government

of independent Bangladesh came into being with taking this oath.

The structure of the Mujibnagar Independent Government was as follows:

1. President and Commander in Chief of the Liberation War: Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman

2. Vice President: Syed Nazrul Islam (Acting President in absence of
Bangabandhu)

3. Prime Minister: Tajuddin Ahmed

4. Finance Minister: M. Mansur Ali

5. Home, Relief and Rehabilitation Minister: A.H.M. Qamaruzzaman

6. Foreign and Law Minister: Khondoker Mostaq Ahmed

An advisory committee of 6 members was formed to provide necessary

suggestions and guidance to the government of Independent Bangladesh.

Maolana Abdul Hamid Khan Bhashani of the National Awami Party ,,

(NAP-Bhashani), Professor Mozaffer Ahmed of the Natioanl Awami Party $

The Independent Bangladesh 23
(NAP-Mozaffer), Comrade Moni Singh of the Communist Party, Sri Monoronjon
Dhar of the National Congress, Tajuddin Ahmed (The Prime Minister of
Bangladesh government) and Khondoker Mostaq Ahmed (Foreign and Law
Minister of Bangladesh government) were on the committee. Colonel (Retired)
M.A.G. Osmani was made the Chief commandant of the liberation war.
The Activities of the Mujibnagar Government
The Mujibnagar government was formed with the elected members of the national
and provincial assembly in the general election of 1970. The government ran the
administration by the Bangalee officials. There were 12 ministries or divisions in
it. Those were the Ministry of Foreign affairs; the Ministry of Finance, Industry
and Commerce; the Cabinet Secretariat; the General Administration; the Health
and Welfare Division; the Relief and Rehabilitation Division; the Engineering
Division; the Planning Commission; the Controlling Board for Youth and
Reception Camp etc. The Mujibnagar government established Bangladesh
mission in various important cities (Calcutta, Delhi, London, Washington, New
York, Stockholm) of the world. These missions campaigned for having support in
favour of Bangladesh from the world community. The government appointed
Justice Abu Sayed Chowdhury as a special envoy. He tried his best to get support
of world leaders and the public as well in favour of the Liberation War. After the
formation of the Mujibnagar government on 10 April, a force of the freedom
fighters with the Bangalee soldiers and civilians was | Group work: Describe the
Mujibnagar government.
The government divided the country into 11 sectors. Besides, some sub-sectors
and 3 Brigade forces were formed. The Bangalee officers served the Pakistan
army, the police, EPR, members of the Navy and Air Force joined these sectors.
There were soldiers, guerrillas and general fighters in every sector. They were
usually called MuktiJoddha or Muktifouz ( the freedom fighters). Sudents, youth,
women, farmers, political activists and supporters, labourers and various
professionals joined these forces. After receiving training in different training
camps, the warriors entered the country and attacked the Pakistan army camps,
barracks and other military establishments. Several troops were spontaneously
organised inside the country to take part in the Liberation war except the troops
formed under the Mujibnagar government. These troops played a significant role
in the war against the Pakistan army and the Razakars in local areas. The name of
Kaderia Bahini (Cadre of Kader Siddiqui) of Tangail is still remembered by the
people. Under the leadership of Mujibnagar government, the freedom fighters
o fought in the battle fields to liberate the country from the occupation ofthe — Pa-
S kistani forces. Many of them sacrificed their lives for the cause of the mother land
and many of them suffered causalities.

24 Bangladesh and Global Studies
The Role of the General People and Professionals in the Liberation War
The students, general people, Police, EPR (East Pakistan Rifles) bravely resisted
when the Pakistan army swooped on the unarmed people on 25 March 1971.
The Bangalees did not give up resisting the Group work: Explain why the nation
enemy, and many freedom fighters sacrificed | i ponour the freedom fighters as the
their lives in the battlefield and many others | valiant sons of the soil.
became permanently disabled with bullet] Group work: Explain why the
wounds. The country is deeply indebted to | liberation war is recognised as the war
these freedom fighters for their sacrifices. of the mass people.
The nation will always remember them as the valiant sons of the soil. The freedom
fighters risked their own lives and joined the war to liberate the country. They
were brave warriors and patriots inspired by the spirit of self-sacrifice. The Ban-
galees from all walks of life participated in the war. That is why, this war was
termed as Ganojudha or Janojudha (a battle of the masspeople). The people were
the major controlling force of this war of independence. When the war broke out,
different political parties, students, professionals, women, cultural workers and
people of all spheres of life joined the war, and contributed whatever they could
from their respective positions. They established the sovereign and independent
Bangladesh by sacrificing their lives.
The Political Parties
The main political party that led the war was the Awami League. The political
leadership determined the strategy of the war. At first the Awami League
organised the people of East Pakistan and initiated movements for self rule. After
winning the general election in 1970 with absolute majority, they inspired the
people to achieve the independence, and the people, responding to the call of
Bangabandhu for independence, started taking preparation for the liberation war.
At the beginning, the political leaders formed the Bangladesh government, and
formally recognised on 10 April 1971 by
Bangabandhu, the declaration of independence on |Greup work: Describe the
26th March and the background of the | importance of political parties in
liberation war, its significance, and future plan be Eactee len “

we : roup work: Why will the
were sketched out. The political leaders being bangal is hate the anti-leberalion
organised formed the government, liberation force, | forces?
and campaigned for having support of the world
community, collected arms and ammunition for war, and worked hard to boost up
the confidence of the people. The political leadership succeeded in showing their x
strength, merit and political acumen to achieve victory in the war. The S
government and the political leadership arranged training for the freedom fighters

The Independent Bangladesh 25
and guerrillas, shelter and relief for a total of 1 crore refugees in India, opened
Shawdhin Bangla Betar Kendra (A war time radio station) and played a vital role
to get support in favour of the liberation war, and urged the world leadership to
reach a consensus on the issue.

The progressive political parties Like the National Awami Party (NAP-Bhashani),
the National Awami Party (NAP-Mozaffar), the Communist Party, the National
Congress etc. along with the Awami League played an important role in the
liberation war. Many leaders and workers of these parties directly participated in
the liberation war.

The Muslim League, the Jamat-e-Islami, the PDB and some other political parties
inside Bangladesh opposed the liberation war. These parties established militant
cadres called Shanti Committee, Rajakar, AlBodor and Al Shams. These forces
were engaged in anti-human activities like killing, looting, arson, and raping
women. Besides, these anti liberation forces killed the intellectuals of the country
on 14 December 1971 as a part of implementing the blueprint of making the
nation intellectually barren.

The Student Community

The student community played a glorious role in all the major movements
regarding the interest of the Bangalees during 24 years of the Pakistan rules.
They played the most significant roles in ; ;
the language movement in 1948S and 1952, Srvup work ilenaty the wee

; = contribution and sacrifice for the
in the movements against the Education Liberation War.

Commission Report in 1962 and 1964, in

the movements for the 6 point demands in 1966 and for the 11 point demands in
1968, in the mass uprising of 1969, in the general election of 1970, in the non
cooperation movement called by Bangabandhu in the March of 1.971. A large
number of school, college and university students directly participated in the war
of liberation after it had been started on 26 March 1971. Most of them entered the
country after having the training from neighbouring country India, and fought
against the occupation army of Pakistan. Students were the highest in number in
the liberation force as the single group of participants. In the irregular wings of
liberation force, were students mostly from colleges and universities. At one stage
of the war, MujibBahini was formed mainly with the students. Activists of the
Chatra League and the Chatra Union got organized in different zones and
participated in the war. It was difficult to win the war without the sacrifice of the
students.

Forma- 4: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

26 Bangladesh and Global Studies
The Professionals

Those who are involved in various professions are usually called professionals
among whom are teachers, doctors, engineers, artists, writers, technologists,
journalists, bureaucrats, scientists, government officers and other officials. They
played a unique and glorious role in the war of liberation. A large section of the
professionals either actively or passively participated in the liberation war. The
professionals played an important role in the war by forming a planning cell under
the Mujibnagar government, and representing the authentic picture of the
liberation war to the international community sought their cooperation,
campaigned for support in different international forum, and encouraged the
refugees. Some of the professionals died in the liberation war.

Women in the Liberation War

The role of women in the liberation war was glorious. The participation of women
specially the female students was spontancous in the Sangram Parishad (The
Action Committee) constituted in the beginning of March 1971 in every part of
the country. They took part directly in the war after having training in handling
the firearms and in guerrilla warfare in the training .,, _ APRESS
camps along with the male fighters. Besides, a large Wij IF prot ae re
number of female freedom fighters as fellow soldiers, ET an say Se ai
providing the freedom fighters with shelters, collecting G&geywa. iy cin i
information of the enemies and nursing the wounded | y ve «
fighters played a vital role in the war.Nearly 3 lakh f 7.
women were molested by the Pakistani army. They |
were the fellow fighters too, and as a recognition of

their sacrifice, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman :

gave them the title of honour Birangona (the heroic Y

woman). The Awami League Government declared fa trataing The female fighters
them as freedom fighters in 2016.

The Mass Media

The role of the media in the liberation war of
Bangladesh was enormous. The newspapers and the | Cn !bution of women
Shawdhin Bangla Betar Kendra played leading risle; | He Hiberation Wer,

in this regard. The artists and cultural activists of Chittagong Radio Station the
Shawdhin Bangla Betar Kendra on 26 March 1971. Later it ran under the
supervision of the Mujibnagar government. The Shawdhin Bangla Betar Kendra
broadcast news, patriotic songs, heroic deeds of freedom fighters, events of
warfield and thus inspired the general people to join the liberation war. It &
encouraged the freedom fighters, and contributed a lot to win the war. Besides, the “

The Independent Bangladesh 27
newspaper Joy Bangla circulated by the publication cell under the supervision of
the Mujibnagar government also played important roles in the liberation war.
The Mass People
The victory in the war of liberation was made possible only in nine months for the
all out cooperation and assistance of the mass people and their strong will for
liberation. Most of the people somehow participated in the liberation war except
the collaborators of the Pakistan occupation army. People gave the freedom
fighters shelter, food and medicine, information of the enemy's position and
movement, and provided assistance. The small ethnic groups participated in the
liberation war too, and some of them attained martyrdom. The mass' people were
large in number of 30 lakh martyrs of our liberation war. The national flag of red
circle on green mass and a map of an independent land are the achievements of
their sacrifice.
The Immigrant Bengalees
The immigrant Bangalees contributed to the liberation war in many ways. They
collected donation from many countries. They went to their parliament members
to get support for Bangladesh, sent representatives to the international forums.
The immigrant Bengalees pleaded to the governments of some countries to stop
supplying arms and ammunition to Pakistan. The role of the immigrant Bangalees
in Britain was remarkable in this regard. They relenttasly campaigned for having
public support in favour of the Liberation war of Bangladesh.
The Role of the Artists, Writers and Intellectuals
The key regulating factor of the liberation war was the people. However, the role
of the artists, writers, intellectuals and cultural workers was very praiseworthy.
Articles in the newspapers, news cast in the Shawdhin Bangla Betar Kendra,
patriotic songs based on the libation war, recitations of poetry, drama, talks,
Charampatra and Jollader Dorbar, the most popular programmes, etc. contributed
a lot to move the war ahead. All these helped to boost up the spirit of the freedom
fighters, encouraged them, and made the general people indomitable against the
enemy.
The Roles of the Political Leaders in Achieving Independence
The contribution of the political leaders for achieving the independence was
immeasurable. The leaders of various political parties made great sacrifice for
achieving the independence of Bangladesh. They faced repression and
oppression, and risked their own lives to continue the political activities from
& beginning to end of the liberation war.
N

28 Bangladesh and Global Studies
The Leadership of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
The main leadership in the liberation war of Bangladesh came from Bangabandhu
Shiekh Mujibur Rahman the architect of independence and father of the nation.
He devoted all the activities, struggles and movements of his life to achieve
freedom of the Bangalee nation. He put in a lot of effort to establish the Chatra
League in 1948, and the Awami League in 1949. He played a vital role in the
language movement in 1948 and 1952. He was the most prominent among the first
detainees of the language movement. Irrespective of the assembly or of the
street, he was always vocal in favour of Bangalee language and culture.
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the father of the nation played the most
important role single handedly in the Jukto (United) Front election in 1954, in the
movement to get the constitutional recognition of Bangla as the state language in
1956, in organizing agitation against the martial law of General Ayub Khan in
1958, in the movement to realise the 6 Point Demands in 1966, in mass uprising
of 1969, in the landslide victory of the Awami League in the election of 1970,
from the non-cooperation movement to the declaration of Independence and in
winning the liberation war in 1971. Bangabandhu had to spend in prison as a
political detainee for long 12 years out of 24 years of the Pakistan regime. He gave
the clarion call for freedom in his historic 7 March, 1971 speech in sequence of
struggle. When the Pakistan army swooped on the innocent people of the country
with utter cruelty on 25 March, he formally declared the independence of
Bangladesh in the early hour of 26 March 1971. He called for the war of
independence in his great oration of 7 March 1971 following the ways of armed
struggle. Our liberation war was directed after his name. He was the
Commander-in-Chief of the liberation war and the Le.
President of the Mujibnagar government. We a
achieved the independence for his strong and CN
uncompromising leadership. Bangabandhu Sheikh ost
Mujibur Rahman is the father of the nation, the great sare
leader of our independence and the great architect of ~anaf
a sovereign Bangladesh. Picture 2.4: Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
Syed Nazrul Islam -
Syed Nazrul Islam was one of the top leaders of the Awami )
League. He was the Vice President of the Mujibnager > f
government too. He discharged the duty of the acting President
in absence of Bangabandhu. He called on all to join the ;
liberation force. Syed Nazrul Islam was one of the organisers ” x
and leaders of the liberation war. eit ari yea 8

The Independent Bangladesh 29

Tajuddin Ahmed

Tajuddin Ahmed was the General Secretary of the Awami

League during the lebaration war. He was the most loyal and |9@aRAI]

close ally of Bangabandhu Shiekh Mujibur Rahman. This great : a

leader discharged his duty of the Prime Minister of the i\ ce]

Mujibnagar government formed on 10 April 1971 to direct the ‘\

war of liberation. He announced the formation of the Nes

Mujibnagar government through a radio on 11 April 1971. He fox

succeeded in directing the liberation war in absence of Bang- Picture 2.6:

abandhu. He was the Convener of the Advisory Committee Tajnddin Ahmed

formed to run the liberation war. His name is deeply linked to

the history of our liberation war.

Captain M. Mansur Ali Se

Captain M. Mansur Ali was one of the senior leaders of the / f

Awami League and a very close associate of Bangabandhu. 2 SS

He was the Finance Minister of the Mujibnagar government ay

during the liberation war. Therefore, providing finance for a

food, clothes and armed training of the freedom fighters was °

very important job for him. He had discharged these duties Picture 2.7: Captain

very successfully. M. Mansur Ali

A.H.M. Qamaruzzaman

AH M Qamaruzzaman was another top leader of Awami

League, During the liberation war he was the Minister for ‘

Home, Relief and Rehabilitation of the Mujibnagar © ly

Government. Then he discharged his duty successfully by

collecting relief for millions of refugees sheltered in India,

distributing relief in the camps and later rehabilitating the 7M

refugees etc. He had immense contribution for achieving Picture 2.8: A-H.M.

independent Bangladesh. ies

Other leaders

The role of Maolana Abdul Hamid Khan Bhashani in the liberation war was very

noteworthy. He played a very vital role in the movement begun with the demand

of the release of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman from the historic Agartala

case (1968-69) and in the mass uprising of 1969. Staying in India during the war,

he called upon the world community to support our liberation war and extend their
«, band to help us. Besides, Professor Mujaffar Ahmed (NAP-Mujaffar) and
= Communist Party leader Comrade Moni Singh played a significant role in the war

30 Bangladesh and Global Studies
of liberation. These three leaders were the members of the ‘Advisory Committee’
formed to conduct the war of liberation rightly. The Bengali nation will
respectfully remember them.

The Opinion of the World Community and the Role of the Foreign
Countries during the Liberation War

The brutalities of the Pakistani occupation army to the people of Bangladesh
during the liberation war in 1971 gave a jolt to the conscience of the world
community. They woke up and protested against the booty, arson, molestation of
women and mass killing by the Pakistani soldiers and their collaborators of this
land, Many countries condemned and protested against the brutalities and
expressed support to the liberation war. The world community raised their voice
against the genocide in the night of blackout on 25 March nay the national
Genocide Day and afterwards. The people around the world directly or indirectly
supported the liberation war of Bangladesh.

The Role of India: Our neighbouring country India directly supported
Bangladesh, and successfully highlighted the crimes of mass killing, atrocity,
violence on women, booty committed by the Pakistani invading army since 25
March to the next nine months. So the consciences of world community received
a jolt.

India provided shelter, food, clothes, “ =
medicine to the millions of refugees, and a wi ‘ 4° ag
arms and ammunition with necessary train- EX* | ANE) Se
ing to the freedom fighters. In the last stage \%, © een / >
of the war, Pakistan initiated airstrikes to Sie ; Se :
India. India recongnised Bangladesh on 6 me. BP. fz
December 1971. The Muktibahini PT Wate UJ)
(freedom fighters) and the Indian force 4 \ 7 Yaa
jointly initiated the Joutha (Joint) Com- A ES BR ‘ 4
mand. A total of 93 thousand Pakistani ee nth 2 ae wa
army surrendered to the Joutha Command 4: The waconditional
after an all out attack launched by them on _—_gurrender of the Pakistani force

the Pakistani army.A large number of

Indian soldiers died in the liberation war .

The Soviet Union and the Role of the Socialist Countries: most to the
liberation war of Bangladesh, next to that, the then Soviet Union (present Russia).
The Soviet President called upon President General Yahia Khan of Pakistan to .
stop mass killing, booty, arson, and the violence on women. He also urged Yahia &

The Independent Bangladesh 31
to hand over the power to the elected body. The Soviet newspapers, mass media
highlighted the atrocities of the Pakistani army and the armed resistance of the
freedom fighters in the war to drum up the support for the cause. When the USA
tried to table a proposal at the United Nations to declare a ceasefire in Pakistan's
favour, the Soviet Union used its veto to block the proposal. The then socialist
countries like Cuba, Yogoslavia, Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia,
East Germany etc. supported the liberation war of Bangladesh.
The Role of Great Britain: The British media, specially the BBC and
newspapers published from London highlighted the genocide and the brutality of
Pak-army, the resistance of the Bengalees, the plight of the refugees sheltered in
India, and the development of liberation war to have support of the world
community. The British government was also very sympathetic about our
liberation war. It is worth-mentioning that London was the main campaigning
centre for drumming up support for our war of liberation. Besides, the British born
singer George Harrison along with Ravi Shanker and Ali Akber Khan organized a
concert in New York to have support of the world community and raise funds to
help the distressed people of Bangladesh. About 40,000 people attended the
concert where Harrison sang songs describing the anti-inhuman activities of the
Pak-army in our liberation war. The media of Australia. West German, France,
Italy, Japan and Canada along with Britain helped winning the support of the
world community against the atrocities of the Pakistani inavding army. Iraq also
supported Bangladesh. The people, media, and some congressmen of the United
States supported our libration war, but it is a sad truth that some of the countries
opposed the war of independence.
The Role of United Nations
The main objective of the United Nations is to establish world peace and maintain
security throughout the world. When Pak-Junta Yahia Khan was jealously
engaged in slaughtering the Bengalis instead of handing over the power to the
elected body of East Pakistan, then the UN remained silent. It did not take any
effective measure against the genocide and the violation of fundamental rights. In
fact, the UN did not have any power to act on its own initiative except the five
influential countries that could exercise the veto.
The Historic Significance of the Liberation War
The liberation war of Bangladesh is a significant event in the world history.
Bangladesh was the first among the third world countries that achieved
« independence through armed struggle. The people of East Pakistan were the
S victims of oppression, repression and exploitation since 1947 by the Pakistani

32 Bangladesh and Global Studies
tulers, but the rebellious people of this land revolted against all the evils that came
to an end with the victory in the liberation war on 16 December 1971.
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahaman, the greatest leader of the liberation war
called for the independence on 7 March 1971 and formally declared it on 26
March, and after an armed struggle of nine months, we achieved it on 16
December 1971. The mass people of this country provided all cooperation to the
freedom fighters. As a result, the liberation war became the expression of the
Bengali nationalism. The liberation war created a new patriotic zeal among the
Bengalis and different ethnic communities living in this land, and they being
inspired by this zeal, engaged themselves in the reconstruction of a war torn
country, we have got an independent country through the war of liberation, and
she has secured her position in the world map. The dream that the Bengalis
nourished for thousand years came ture through the victory in the war. The
liberation war of Bangladesh inspired the oppressed people of the world desirous
of freedom.
Section 2.2: The Rules of Bangabandhu in the Reconstruction of
Bangladesh and aftermath
The ultimate victory in the liberation war was achieved through the unconditional
surrender of the Pakistani invading army on 16 December 1971. The independent
Bangladesh government (Mujibnagar Government) and assumed office on 22
December. The country started running by the declaration of independence
delivered on 10 April 1971. 10, January 1972 Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman. The architect of Independence the father of the nation came back to
independent Bangladesh and took the responsibility as the head of the
government. The holistic Reconstruction of the war torn country, administrative
reformation, rehabilitation of one crore refugees staying in India, drafting of the
constitution, holding of fresh election, sending the Mitrabahini (friendly troops)
back to India, earning recognitions of various countries, etc. were the remarkable
achievements of his rules. Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman the great
architect of independence and Father of the nation and his family were brutally
killed on 15 August 1975 by some aberrant army officers as a part of
implementing the conspiracy of the anti-liberation force. Only his two daughters
Sheikh Hasina and Sheikh Rehana escaped as they were staying abroad.
The Reconstruction Process of a war torn country
When Bangladesh achieved the Independence, it was fallen into ruins. Laments
for losing kin, outpouring of grief, and tears made the air heavy. A huge number
of roads, bridges, culverts, industries, inland ports, and sea ports were demolished. S

The Independent Bangladesh 33
The government treasury was found empty. The independent Bangladesh had no
military or civil aircraft. The main challenges in the newly independent nation
were the rehabilitation of one crore refugees, reconstruction of thousands of
damaged houses in the villages and urban areas, providing food, cloth, medicine
and shelter to seven crore people, and restor law and order. The rules of
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman started with the reconstruction of the war
torn Bangladesh, besides, the key achievements of his administration were as
follows:

7d Min” Lee aA

Mask ey ¥ “eh aei.\ \} MN JES? 2 Waal

ek) By gh c'9* os | Se ee

. 5 4 J — RY Maly , U

Ay Wi
Picture 2.10: Bangabandhu in the reconstruction works of the country

Drafting of a New Constitution and its Enforcement: Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahmand as the President of the country proclaimed a temporary
constitution order on 11 January 1972. A Draft-Constitution Formulating
Committee of 34 members was formed in the first session of the national
assembly (Ganoporishod) on 10 April 1972. The committee drafted a constitution
and submitted in the national assembly on 12 October. It was adopted and enacted
in the assembly on 4 November, and enforced since 16 December 1972. The
fundamental priciples of the Constitution were democracy, socialism, secularism
and nationalism, Voting rights for all, the fundamental rights, justice and political
tights, economic and social rights were also recognized in the constitution.
The Ganoporishad: Bangabandhu brought into force an order called the
Bangladesh Ganoporishad, on 23 March 1972. All elected members of the
national and provincial assembly were considered the members of the
Forma- 5: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

34 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Ganoporishad under the order. All the necessary laws for the country were enacted
and passed in the first session of Ganoporishad started on 10 April 1972. It was a
significant event in the development of democracy in Bangladesh.
Nationalization of abandon industries: As after independence the non-Bangali
Pakistani industrialists including Adamjee left the country, the Bangabandhu
government natonalised all the abandoned industries, and brought under state
ownership. As a result the workers came under respectable state control.
Natioanlization of the Primary Education: There were 38 thousand primary
schools in the land of Bangladesh during the Pakistani rules. During Pakistan days
the teachers who had been serving in the primary schools would receive very
small salary and allowances from the government. Bangabandhu Nationalised
about 38000 primary schools. With this step, the state took responsibiites of the
Primary education.
A Committee for New education policy: The Bangabandhu government formed
a committee for new education policy headed by eminent scientist Dr. Kudrat-e-
Khuda in 1972. The Committee submitted a science based education policy in
1974. Thus Bangabandhu government took the initiative to evolve a pragmatic
education system.
The Relief and Rationing system: The Bangabandhu government distributed to
the affected families blankets, foods and financial aid that came as donations from
foreign countries in 1972. He also introduced the rationing system in the village
and city areas to provide foods and other household commodities to the people in
reasonable price. This was a Unique humanitarian measure to help the destitute
people of the war-torn country.
The General Election of 1973: : The first general election was held on 7 March
1973. The Awami League won the election with absolute majority. The
government was formed under the leadership of Bangabandu for the second time.
The importance of this election is immense in the history of Bangladesh
democracy.
New Financial Policy for five years: The Bangabandhu government constituted
a planning Commission for the economic progress of the country and a 5 Year
Plan was framed and took initiatives to reform the commerce, industry,
agriculture and other sectors to rebuild a war-affected country as recommended by
the Commission. The government waived all land-taxes with arears upto 1972.
The Second Revolution Programme for an Oppression-free Society: When
Bangladesh was busy with repairing the immeasurable loses caused by the war, 3

The Independent Bangladesh 35
there was hike in oil and food price in the international market. Food production
fell due to flood in 1973-74. All this led to food crisis in the country, Moreover,
groups of hoarders, corrupt people and conspirators were active in the country.
The government of Bangabandhu formed Bangladesh Krishok Shromic Awami
League (BAKSAL) with the leaders and activists of the Awami League, NAP, the
Communist Party and other parties. For the uplift of living standard Bangabandhu
initiated a new policy in the economic and political spheres. The father of the
nation termed it as the Second Revolution.
The Foreign Policy: Bangabandhu after returning from Pakistan to Dhaka on 10
January 1972 said in a statement that Bangladesh believed in peace and did not
support enmity towards anyone. He declared, friendship to all, malice to none. He
had called upon the world community to recognise Bangladesh and assist in the
effort of reconstruction of the country. So at least 140 countries recognized Ban-
gladesh as a sovereign and independent country within a very short time. The
Soviet Union helped Bangladesh in sweeping landmines from the Chittagong
Port. Other friendly nations also extended their hands in providing food and relief
to the distressed people.
The Withdrawal of the Indian Mitrabahini (Friendly Troops): The Indian
army participated in the liberation war of Bangkadesh as the Mitrabahini (Allied
Army). Their role in defeating the Pakistani army, is unforgettable. Bangabandhu
but Bangabandhu requested Indira Gandhi, the prime minister of India to take
back the troops, and did not give the various local and international circles any
chance to make false propaganda. They left Bangladesh in March 1972 for India.
This example of any foreign army leaving for home is rare in world history. This
event heightened the image of Bangladesh in the international sphere.
Bangladesh in the International community: Bangladesh became a member of
the Commonwealth in 1972. It got the membership of the United Nations in 17
September 1974. Bangabandhu delivered his speech in Bangla in the U.N.
General Assembly for the first time in the history of the UN. Bangladesh got the
membership for Non Aligned Movement (NAM). Bishwa Shanti Porishad
(The World Peace Council) awarded him the Julio Kuri Peace Prize. In
Bangabandhus time Bangladesh achieved the place of honour at the international
level. Bangabandhu and the Awami League had to face the conspiracies inside and
outside the country and the natural calamities as well to run a newly independent
nation ravaged by war. The government achieved a significant success in different
fields during their short tenure.

©

S

N

36 Bangladesh and Global Studies
The Background of Formulating the Constitution of 1972

The Constitution is the top most document of a country. It reflects the purpose,
mission and vision of a state. As the head of the government, Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman proclaimed a temporary constitution order on 11 January
1972. The parliamentary form of government was established under this order
instead of the Presidential form of government. The key features of this
temporary constitution order were as follows: | Group work: Describe the various
This order was the temporary constitution | aspects and objectives of the
order of Bangladesh. It would be enforced
immediately. It would be applicable to the whole country. A Ganoporishad would
be formed to draft a constitution for Bangladesh. There would be a cabinet to run
the administration. The prime minister would be its chief. The President would be
the titular head. The President proclaimed ‘Bangladesh Ganoporishad Order’ on
23 March 1972 to prepare a constitution in which the aspiration and dream of the
nation would be reflected. As per the order, the members elected in the national
and provincial assembly in the general election of 1970 would be the members of
the Ganoporishad. The main objective of the Ganoporishad would be to prepare
the constitution. At the first session of the Ganoporishad on 10 April 1972, a 34
member committee called A Draft-Constitution Formulating Committee headed
by Dr. Kamal Hossain was formed. A female member was also included in the
committee. Suranjit Sengupta, (Subsequently Awami League Leader) a the-then
leader of the NAP (Mozaffar) was the member of the committee. The Committee
sought suggestions about the constitution from the organisations and the
interested persons.

The draft-constitution was placed as a bill at the second session of the Gano
Porishad on 12 October 1972, and it was adopted on 4 November 1972 and
enforced since 16 December (the Victory Day). While addressing on the
Constitution, Bangabandhu said. 'this Constitution is written with the blood of the
martyrs, and it will remain alive as a symbol of aspirations and dreams of the
people.’ It is worth mentioning that Pakistan took 9 years (1947-1956), and India
took 3 years (1947-1949) to promulgate their constitutions after the partition, but
the Bangabandhu government presented a constitution to the nation only in ten
months. This is a unique contribution of the father of the nation in establishing a
democratic society.

The Characteristics of the Constitution of 1972

The original Constitution of 1972 was significant for the distinctive
characteristics of independence and sovereign Bangladesh. The original &
Constitution of 1972 was prepared with the characteristics given below: 8

The Independent Bangladesh 37
The Constitution of 1972 was a written one. It was a non-changeable. The four
fundamental principles of state policy. Nationalism, democracy, socialism were
written in it. and secularism. These ware declared as the basic pillars. The state
would secure the basic necessities of life including food, clothing, shelter,
education, medical care and recreation. Defending the fundamental rights of the
people is the main characteristic of this constitution. Protection of rights to life
and personal liberty, freedom of movement, freedom of assembly, freedom of
association, freedom of thought and conscience, and of speech, freedom of
religion, rights to property were ensured in this constitution. Bangladesh was
described in the constitution as a unitary state to be known as the People's
Republic of Bangladesh. The National Parliament would be the sovereign body to
enact laws. 'All powers in the Republic belong to the people,'— this declaration
established the people's sovereignty. The Constitution was stated as the supreme
law of the Republic. The Supreme Court can nullify any law inconsistent with the
constitution describing it as unconstitutional and uphold the honour and the
supremacy of the constitution. The parliamentary democracy was introduced
with. According to the article no. 77, the parliament, by law, may provide for the
establishment of the office of Ombudsman. In the Constitution of Bangladesh,
irrespective to caste and creed, any person who is not less than 18 years of age,
under the 'one person one vote policy’ can administer his/her voting right in the
general election.In this constitution, the principles of the state, cooperative, and
private ownership were stated. The Parliament will be of the single assembly. In
different times, various governments had amended the constitution for 15 times.
Of these amendments, the Supreme Court nullified the fifth amendment by the
late President Ziaur Rahman, the seventh and the thirteenth amendments of
General Ershad.
The Brutal Killing of 15 August 1975
On August 15, 1975 a brutal and heinous murder took place in the National life of
the Bengalies. A section of aberrant and ambitious officers of the Bangladesh
army by the support of the anti-liberation
force assassinated the great architect of | Group work: Describe the brutality of
independence and father of the Nation | the killing of 15 August.
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahaman, Group work: Describe the reasons of
at his own residence on the road no | Killing of the Father of the nation.
32 of Dhanmondi. No family member of Bangabandh present in the house
remained alive. Even Rasel, an innocent child of 10 years old was not spared of
co the bullets of the cruel killers. When Bangabandhu was proceeding with the
®& ambition of making a modern, oppression and corruption free state with his

38 Bangladesh and Global Studies
‘Second Revolution’ programmes by uniting the nation, some conspirators hiding
in the country organized the assassination of 15 August with the help of the local
and the international reactionary groups. They understood that Bangabandhu
would be successful in materialising the 'Second Revolution’ as was successful in
the liberation war. They hatchd a plot to reverse the political direction of the
country. The Pakistani communal ideal was reestablished through the killing. It
was the most heinous crime opposed to humanity. It took place as a result of a
secret conspiracy. Bangladesh fell into a deep political crisis after the killing of 15
August. The day is our national mourning day.
The Black Stain in the History of Bangladesh and the Gruesome Murder in
the Jail (15 August-3 November)
Khondokar Mostak Ahmed, the then minister for commerce assumed power as the
President after the killing of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the Father of
the nation and the President of Bangladesh. By declaring martial law he had
arrested the four national leaders of the liberation war on 22 August. General
Ziaur Rahman was appointed as the chief of army staff replacing General K M
Shafmllah on 24 August. Ban on politics and the political parties was imposed by
an order on 31 August. Khondokar Mostak Ahmed declared an ordinance
inconsistent with the constitution and justice on 26 September 1975. It was called
'The Indemnity Ordinance’ to save the killers of 15 August from the trial. The
junior army officers who were involved in the killing on 15 August started
interfering in the state affairs staying at the President building instead of returning
to the barrack. A chaotic situation prevailed in the country. Brigadier Khaled
Mosarraf took initiative to restore discipline (chain of command) in the army. An
army revolution took place on 3 November of 1975 under his leadership.
Khondoker Moshtak resigned his post on 5 November. ASM Sayem, the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court took oath as the new President on 6 November.
The Heinous Killing in Jail (3 November. 1975)
The killers involved in the assassination of 15 August illegally entered the Dhaka
Central Jail with the permission of Khondokar Mostak Ahmed and brutally killed
the four national leaders — Syed Nazrul Islam, Tajuddin Ahmed, Captain M
Mansur Ali and AH M Qamaruzzaman who led the nation in the war of liberation.
It was another black stain in the political
history of Bangladesh. This heinous killing
created an adverse reaction among the people | teasons of killings in the jail on
and the army of the country. This incident 3 November 1975. ~
S
AQ

The Independent Bangladesh 39
accelerated the fall of Mostak regime. The killers were forced to leave the country.
The killing was the implementation of a blue print of the anti-liberation force of
1971 and the local and international groups conspiring against the independent
Bangladesh. The one and the same quarter initiated both the killing missions of 15
August and 3 November. The aim of those killings was to destroy the success and
glory of the armed struggle of 1971, and make a vacuum of leadership in the
country and restore the ideals of Pakistan.
Section 2.3: The Martial Law Administration (1975-1990)
The martial law prevailed in the country from 15 August 1975 to 6 December of
1990. Dissolving the Constitution of the country Khondokar Mostak, Justice
Sayem, General Ziaur Rahman, Justice Ahsan Uddin, and General Ershad
assumed power in different times. Keeping the martial law in force, GeneralZiaur
Rahman (1975-1981) and General H M Ershad (1982-1990) succeeded in holding
the election and established the civilian rules. Their anti-democratic exercise of
power, snatching the right to enfranchise, anti-liberation war activities made the
people violent. They protested against the military rules, and after a long struggle,
democracy was established in the end.
The Rules of General Ziaur Rahman (1975-1981)
General Ziaur Rahman was a Major of the army during the liberation war in 1971.
He read out the declaration of independence on behalf of Bangabandhu on 27
March 1971 from Kalurghat radio station. He was the Commander of Sector no. 2
in the liberation war under the Mujibnagar Government. After the incident of 15
August 1975, Khondokar Mostak assumed office as the new President of the
country. Later, he appointed General Ziaur Rahman as the Chief of Army staff on
24 August. After the fall of Mostak by a | Group work: Identify the
military coup, General Ziaur Rahman was
placed under under _ housearrest. to consolidate power.
On 7 November, General Ziaur Rahman was freed by a counter military coup, and
came to the limelight of power. President and Justice A S M Sayem was appointed
as the Chief martial law administrator, but General Ziaur Rahman replaced him as
the Chief martial law administrator on 3 o November 1976, and assumed office as
the President of the country on 21 April 1977. During the rules of Ziaur Rahman,
a good number of thwarted coups intensified the unrest in the country. After that
incidents, in a farcical trial, many innocent military officers and soldiers were
either sentenced to death or sacked from the job. A drastic change was made in the
co foreign policy and politics of Bangladesh during the regime of General Ziaur
S Rahman. Most of the fundamental principles of the constitution and the spirits of
the war of liberation were void in that time. He rehabilitated the anti-liberation

40 Bangladesh and Global Studies
forces and pro-Pakistani persons in the society and politics. Colonel (Retired) Abu
Taher, a valiant freedom fighter and a sector commander, who played the key role
to rescue General Ziaur Rahman from captivity on 7 November was sentenced to
death by hanging in a farcical trial at the military court ordered by General Zia.
The then President General Ziaur Rahman was the initiator of the black Indemnity
Ordinance to save the killers of Bangabandhu.
The Election and the Formation of Political Party
The political parties were allowed to do 'infromal polities' on some terms and con-
ditions in 1976. General Ziaur Rahman arranged a referendum on 30 May 1977 to
legalize his rules. Later, as per his plan, he formed a political party called the
Jatiotabadi Ganotantrik Dol (Nationalist Democartic Party) with the leaders and
activists of different political parties. The Presidential election was held on 3 June
1978 under immense pressure and the splitting up of the political parties. Two
alliances were formed on the issue of the election. One was the Jatiotabadi
(Nationalist) Front led by the Jatiotabadi Ganotantrik Dol founded by General
Zia. Another was the Ganotantric Oiykko Jote (Democratic Alliance) led by the
Bangladesh Awami League. General Zia was the candidate of the Jatiotabadi
Front and MAG Osmani, the Chief Commandant of the liberation war was the
candidate of the Ganotantric Oiykko Jote. General Ziaur Rahman won the elec-
tion easily. The intention of the ruler was reflected in the election arranged under
any military rules. General Ziaur Rahman established the Bangladesh Nationalist
Party (BNP) on 1 September 1978 by abolishing the previously founded the
Jatiotabadi Ganotantrik Dol. General Ziaur Rahman formally took the leadership
of BNP. The National Parliament Election was held on 18 February 1979 for the
second time in the country. In this election, the BNP bagged 207 seats. In this
parliament, all military rules, amendment of the constitution, and various
ordinances passed from 15 August 1975 to 6 April 1979 were enacted as the fifth
amendment of the constitution. However, the Supreme Court has declared the
fifth amendment as illegal through a judgment in 2008. The martial law was
withdrawn in a session of the parliament on 6 April 1979. General Ziaur Rahman
rehabilitated the anti-liberation forces in the politics. He changed the fundamental
principles of the constitution. He opened the path of using religion in politics
anew. He gave his own interpretation of nationalism and socialism. President
General Ziaur Rahman initiated the 19 points. ,
Action plans of his party and propounded the SOT NUE
: ‘ of steps taken by General
concept of BangladeshI Nationalism. He also Ziaur Ral to lesalise
introduced the Khal Kata (canal excavation) isrmilitieernlcet 2
S
N

The Independent Bangladesh 41
programme. Some countries opposed the independence of Bangladesh such as
China, the Middle East including Saudi Arabia recognized Bangladesh during his
period. Pakistan also made a very close ties with Bangladesh then. The relations
with India and Eastern European Countries including the Soviet Union became
very cold, but the relation with the USA improved. The policy for building up
close ties with the Muslim countries of the Middle East was followed with a view
to use religion in the politics. Ziaur Rahman took the initiatives to establish South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC).

President Ziaur Rahman was brutally killed on 30 May 1981 at the circuit house
of Chittagong by a group of military officers. As a result, the five and a half year
long military rules of President General Ziaur Rahman came to an end.

The Rules of General Hussain Mohammad Ershad (1982-1990)

After the assassination of General Ziaur Rahman on 30 May 1981, the Vice
President Justice Abdus Sattar assumed power as the acting President as per the
Constitution. General Hussain Mohammad Ershad was the chief of army staff
then. Inthe same year, Justice Abdus Sattar won the Presidential election, but
General Hussain Mohammad Ershad occupied the power on 24 March 1982
through a military proclamation showing the excuse of weak leadership of Justice
Sattar, political unrest, corruption, anarchy and economic crisis. After taking over
the power, he suspended the Constitution and dissolved the Parliament. Retired
Justice of the Supreme Court Ahsan Uddin was made the President. General
Hussain Mohammad Ershad, the Chief of army staff declared himself as the Chief
Martial Law Administrator. Ousting President Ahsan Uddin from the power on 11
December 1983, General Hussain Mohammad

Ershad assumed office as the President of | Group work: Describe how
Bangladesh. Ban on the political activities ay Hussain Mohammad
continued since the proclamation of the martial EEG: GUILE Oe

law on 24 March 1982. The press was deprived

December 1983, General Hussain Mohammad Ershad assumed office as the
President of Bangladesh. Ban on the political activities continued since the
proclamation of the martial law on 24 March 1982. The press was deprived of
their rights. Sheikh Hasina, Dr. Kamal Hossain, Mohammad Farhad and some
other leaders were either detained or placed under housearrest. In February 1983,
the Chatra League, Chatra Union, Jasad Chattra League for the first time protested
against the military rules. Movements under the banner of Chatra Shangram
Parishad (The Student Action Committee) started anti Ershad movement. In this
movement, Selim, Delwar, Shahjahan Shiraj, Jainal, Dipali Saha, Raufun
Bashunia and some other students were killed in police raid and terrorist activities
Forma- 6: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

42 Bangladesh and Global Studies
of the government supporters. A 15party alliance under the leadership of the
Awami League and a 7-party alliance under the leadership of the BNP were
formed. This anti-Ershad movement in 1990 is called Mass Movement. And
finally on 6 December 1990, General Ershad resigned.

The Ershad government followed the most of the policies of the Ziaur Rahman
regime.

The Formation of Party and Election

General Hussain Mohammad Ershad faced violent political opposition from the
beginning of his assuming power. On the demand of the political parties, Ershad
allowed to start political activities. He gave permission for informal politics from
1 April 1983 and gave permission for open politics from 14 November. Ershad
himself tried to form a political party named Jonodol on 17 March 1983 and
declared the 18 point Action plans. The Union Parishad election was held in 1983
and the Pourashava (Municipal) election was held in 1984. Ershad organized a
referendum on 21 March 1985.

The third National Parliament Election was held on 7 May 1986. A total of 28
parties including the Jatiyo party of Hussain Mohammad Ershad, 8 party alliance
under the leadership of the Awami League and the Jamat-e-Islam participated in
the election. The 7 party alliance led by the BNP boycotted the election. In the
election, the Jatiyo Party won by securing 153 seats out of 300. The Awami
League got 76 seats single handedly and appeared as the second largest party, they
complained against General Ershad for the media coup to snatch the victory. The
observers also support the complaint. The presidential election was held on 15
October 1986. All the major opposition political parties did not take part in the
election, and General Hussain Mohammad Ershad was declared the President of
the country after the farcical election.

All political parties, general people and civil societies exploded into a rage against
General Hussain Mohammad Ershad after holding the Parliament and Presidential
election in 1986. People started agitation demanding the resignation of Ershad and
holding a meaningful election. The National Parliament was dissolved as all the
elected members of the opposition resigned in December of 1987. The fourth
National Parliament election was held on 3 March 1988. All the major opposition
parties including the Awami League and the BNP boycotted the election. In this
Votarless and party less election the Jatiyo Party was shown as having won in 251
seats, and the government sponsored Shommilito Birodhi Jote (cop) headed by A
S M Abdur Rob was offered 19 seats. Of the remaining seats the distribution was 2%
: JSD (Siraj) 3 seats, the Freedom Party 2, and the other individual candidates S

The Independent Bangladesh 43
bagged 25 seats. The roads and communication system of the country was
significantly improved during the nine year long rules of General Hussain
Mohammad Ershad.
Section 2.4: The Restoration of the Journey towards Democracy
After the martyrdom of the father of the nation and the founder President of
Bangladesh Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the journey of democracy of
Bangladesh was hindered. The Junta was in the power upto 1990 in the guise of a
civilian ruler.
With the resignation of General Hussain Mohamman Ershad on 6 December
1990, military rule ended; the fresh course of democracy began through an
election on 27 February 1991 the democratic process of changing Government
started with the participation of all the parties. The people of Bangladesh, after
being free from the military misrule, started proceeding further towards the spirit
and values of the liberation war by developing the democratic norms. In this
development, people from all walks of life made a heroic contribution. To
establish a real people's participation oriented administration, the people of the
country faced oppression, suppression and imprisonment. They sacrificed their
lives for the cause of democracy. way of running the government by the elected
representatives were inaugurated. The Parliamentary form of democracy was
reestablished removing the Presidential form of Government, and it was
incorporated in the Constitution.
The Mass movement of 1990 and the Restoration of Journey to Democracy
The students started agitation for the first time against the martial law in 1982 by
demanding the cancellation of the education policy of General Hussain
Mohammad Ershad. Demanding the restoartion of the original constitution of
1972 and for establishing the parliamentary democracy, the Awami league led 15
party alliance and the BNP led 7 party alliance were formed in 1983. The 15 party
and 7 party alliances raised 5 point demands to the anti-autocratic movement. The
key demands of the 5 points were the withdrawal of the martial law, returning of
the army to barrack and holding the parliament election before any other election.
The people of this country did not like deposing a civilian government through a
millitary coup. As a result, General Hussain Mohammad Ershad faced violent
mass movements in his nine year long rules. Apart from the politica parties,
students, teachers, doctors, engineers, Grou Wark: ile ie uaporeaee
lawyers, —_ journalists, agronomists, | of politics of the alliances in the mass-

<< farmers, labourers and people from all revolution in 1990.

no

AQ

44 Bangladesh and Global Studies
quarters of life participated in it. Thus, this mass movement tured into a mass
revolution. Due to the immense pressure from the 15 party, 7 party, including the
sramik-karmachari Oikka Parishad and General Hussain Mohammad was forced
to allow open politics. From the experience of the Parliament election in 1986 and
1988 and the Presidential election in 1986, the political parties understood that
any election under the rules of Hussain Mohammad Ershad would not be free and
fair. Therefore, the 8 party alliance, 7 party alliance and 5 party alliance launched
a one point movement for ousting Ershad from power. The anti-Ershad movement
got a tremendous pace because of the call for an all out strike action and the
Dhaka Oborodh (besieging Dhaka) ,
prorgamme by the three alliances. On 10 Group Work: Mention the names
November 1987, while demostrating near one re in ea
the Dhaka GPO (General Post office) at ZeTO | Friccain Mohammad Ershad.
point writing Ganotontro Mukti Pak,
Shoyrachar Nipat Jak (Democracy be free, despot befallen down) on his chest
and back, Nur Hossain was shot dead by the Police. The agitating people became
more violent. Sheikh Hasina and Khaleda Zia were arrested on 12 November
1987, and Ershad declared Emergency on 27 November. The Junta sponsored
hoodlums indiscriminately fired on a gathering of Sheikh Hasina in Chittagong on
2A January 1988, Sheikh Hasina was narrowly escaped. The whole nation flared
up. The programme of besieging the secretariat on 10 October 1990 by opposition
alliances and other parties made the political situation volatile. The firing on the
processin took the lives of 5 people and other 3 hundred got injured. Shorbodolio
Chatra Oikkyo (All Party Student Unity), an alliance of 22 student wings declared
to continue the agitation until Ershad resigned. General Ershad had to retreat
because of the continuous agitation by the opposition political parties. Though
President Ershad decleared different cal.* ON Bald
measures to suppress the agitation, in Magy Fa 1 yf
the end, he had to withdraw. The FU<t ai \ cf \h Hath, hee,
three alliances announced a joint aw eve Fa a
declaration suggesting the formula of LAr Qaramn | \ 4
the resignation of Ershad which was Py | ay ry » ae
known as the Tin Joter Ruporekha Ib@ie 4 bal ;
(The Precepts of the Three Allianc- [QS * i je a:
es).When the Bangladesh Medical J) phi Way ‘ rly
Association (BMA) leader Dr. Sham- pCa) re if ones // |
sul Alam Milon was shot dead on 27 J) it >i. As yu
November, the movement =~ : — S
Picture 2.12: Nur Hossain in the mass movement ‘“

The Independent Bangladesh 45
reached its pinnacle. The teachers of the University of Dhaka unanimously
submitted their resignation on 29November. Besides, teachers of other
universities announced to put their resignation too. The 8 party alliance headed by
the Awami League, 7 party alliance headed by the BNP, and 5 party alliance of the
left wing got united with the same political programmes. Finally General Ershad
declared his resignation on 6 December 1990, and formally handed over the
power to an interim government headed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court, Justice Shahabuddin Ahmed on the frame work of the three alliances. The
new interim President Justice Shahabuddin Ahmed assumed the responsibility to
lead the nation towards a democratic system.

With the mass revolution, the autocratic rules ended in 1990 and the country

entered a new phase of democracy. The fifth Parliament election was held on 27
February 1991 with the participation of all parties. The democratic process of
handing over the power was established. The parliamentary form of governmment
was incorporated into the Constitution. It gave the opportunity to free flow of
information, right to speech and withdrawal of embargo on the press. Bangladesh
got recognition as a democratic country all over the world.

In the general election of 1991, the BNP got 140 seats. They needed 151 seats to
form the government. In this circumstances, the BNP formed the government
taking support from the Jamat-e-Islam. Begum Khaleda Zia was elected the Prime
Minister. There were complaints of vote rigging in several by-elections held under
the BNP government. The opposition political parties came to a conclusion that
the free and fair election under a partisan government would not possible. So, all
the parties unitedly moved to initiate a care taker government system for holding
a fair election, but the BNP solely held an election on 15 February 1996 disregard-
ing the demand of other political parties. This election was not accepted in the
national and the international level. So, the BNP led government passed a bill on
the caretaker government on 26 March and resigned on 30 March 1996.

Justice Habibur Rahman became the Chief Adviser of the Care taker Government.

The Seventh National Parliament election was held on 12 June 1996 under this
government. In this election, the Awami League got the majority bagging 146
seats. The Jatiyo Party supported the Awami League to form the government, and
Sheikh Hasina, the daughter of Bangabandhu was elected the Prime Minister. The
Awami League handed over power to the second caretaker government in 2001
after completing the tenure. The 8th National Parliament election was held on 1st
October, 2001 under this Care-taker Government. The four party alliance led by

so BNP formed the government getting 219 seats in the Eighth National Parliament
& Election held on 1 October 2001. There wasa crisis in selecting the head of

46 Bangladesh and Global Studies
caretaker government in 2006 after the completion of the tenure. President
lazuddin Ahmed violating provision of forming the caretaker government
assumed office as the Chief Advisor. As a result, the crisis loomed large. The
opposition parties initiated an all out movement to form a caretaker government
as per the provisions for holding a free and fair election. President lazuddin
Ahmed resigned from the caretaker government and declared emergency on 11
January 2007. Dr. Fakruddin Ahmed backed by the army became the Chief
Advisor of the caretaker government on 12 January 2007. In fact, the military was
running the state behind the curtain. The two leaders of the major 2 parties were
arrested. This government initiated depoliticisation in the name of reform and
advanced with a blueprint to linger the military rules, but the plot was not
successful because of the previous bitter experience that the military rulers
encountered. Finally the election commission prepared a new voter list with
photograps and the code of conduct for the political parties, and held the Ninth
Parliament Election on 29 December 2008. In this election, the Mahajote (greater
alliance) under the leadership of the Awami League achieved the landslide victory
bagging 262 seats and formed the government.

Sheikh Hasina became the Prime minister for | Group work: Describe how
the second time. The Mahajote Government is | Bangladesh restored its journey
running the state keeping the flow of the | towards democracy.
socio-economic and cultural development

unhindered.

Significant Socio-Economic and Cultural Development of Bangladesh
Bangladesh is a poverty-stricken country. The poor was 70% in 1972. The poverty
level was reduce to 30% during the last 40 years due to the government policies
and collective effort of labourers and farmers. The objectives of the last 5
Five-Yearly Plan and 1 bi-yearly plan helped to reduce the poverty. The policies
of the government also helped the people living below the poverty line to win the
poverty. The human development indicator for Bangladesh is now developing. It
is now better than that of the South Asian countries like Pakistan, Nepal and
Afghanistan. ‘The National Poverty Alleviation Strategy' and 'The National
Poverty Alleviation Strategy-2' prepared by the advice of the development
partners played a significant role in this regards. The present government is
working hard to transform this country to a middle-income nation by the year
2021. In the last 3 decades, food production rose to 3 times than the previous
periods. Bangladesh is in the third position among the garments manufacturing
countries of the world in exporting trades. Apart from poverty alleviation,
Bangladesh has made a significant progress in various social sectors. Dr. Amartya S

The Independent Bangladesh 47
Sen, the Nobel laureate in economics opined that Bangladesh has made a
praiseworthy role in flourishing education, reducing child mortality rate,
empowering women etc. among the countries in the world. The child mortality
rate has been reduced to 48 in 1000 comparing to 185 in 1000 during the last 4
decades. Child education is now increased to 65% comparing to 17% during the
Pakistan era. The Education Policy-2010 has brought about a radical change in the
education sector for the first time in Bangladesh. Introducing an assesment system
of creative method, using information and communication technology in
education, developing curriculum and publishing new text books, distributing free
text books among the students of primary and
secondary levels, imparting training to the teachers, Individual work: Prepare a
the government has brought a significant change in| liSt of the social security
the education system. As a result, admission of PIQeamene
students in schools, the success rate in the public examinations has increased by a
good marign, the rate of drop out has been reduced, attendence of female students
in the class has gone up. Besides, due to the introduction of unified education
‘education for all’ programme has been successful. As a result, the government is
advancing towards the Vision-2021.
The significant steps taken for women empowerment and for ensuring their health
are providing financial assistance during motherhood, immunization programme,
helping project for poor women, providing stipend for increasing the rate of
female education etc. These steps help to ensure overall development of women.
In 2011-12 fiscal year,! lakh 12 thousand progenitresses are provided with taka
350 each as government grant. Under the project of Social Safety circle in 2010
-11 fiscal Year, the working mothers of urban areas are getting financial grant
from the Lactating Mother Assistance Fund. A new law titled, Family Violence
prevention and Protection Act was enacted in 2010 to protect women from the
violnce in family. This law has played a significant role in women empowerment
and establishment of their right. he Food Policy-2006 was proclaimed to achieve
food security, i.e. T ensuring availability of food and nutrition among the poor
people. The government has initiated various
projects such as Food for work (Kajer | jink between the socio-economic
binimoy khaddyo), VGF, VGD, TR etc. to | and cultural activities and the
ensure food safety to the marginal people of | achievement of target for the
the villages. Under this programme, the Misiouetel:
government has alloted 20 lakh tons of rice to the poor, handicapped and
labourers. The government has received appreciation from the international
= community for the successful management of the environmental problems and of
“various natural disasters.

48 Bangladesh and Global Studies
The government has enacted The National Child Policy-2011 for the protection of
children and the development of their life in 2011. Everyone under the age of 18
is Child as per this Policy. Compelling child in risky and heavy job is totally
prohibited under this law. Separate steps are taken to foster the street-children and
those who have gone astray. Bangladesh is not lagging behind in the cultural field.
Our Mother tongue Bangla achieved the status of the International Mother
Language Day. We hoped that in near future Bangla will be the official language
of the United Nations. On 21 February 1952, the students and people sacrified
their lives for Bangla, as a state, language today, it has been recognized as 'The
International Mother Language Day’. This is a big achievement of our country
and the people. The Mongal Shovajatra (new years procession) of Bangladesh has
been listed in the world cultural Heritage by the UNESCO as intangible Heritage.
Exercise
Short Questions:
1. Present the structure of Independent Mujibnagar government of Bangladesh
in a table.
2. Identify the role of mass communication in achieving independence.
3. Write the role of the Soviet Union in the liberation war of Bangladesh.
4. What are the reasons of mass uprising in 1990 ?
5. "Independence is the biggest achievement of our country and people"- what
are your logics in favour of this statement?
Descriptive Questions :
1. Describe the contribution of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in achiving the inde-
pendence.
2. Explain the reconstruction process of the war torn country.
3. Explain the fundamental policy of the Constitution of 1972
4. Evaluate the administration of General Ziaur Rahman.
5. Evaluate the election process of General Ershad.
Multiple choice Qustions :
1. Who was the Relief and Rehabilitation Minister of the Mujibnagar Government?
a. Captain M. Mansur Ali
b. Tajuddin Ahmed
c. Khondokar Mostak Ahmed.
e
d. A. H. M. Qamaruzzaman S

The Independent Bangladesh 49

2. To drum up the support of world community in favour of the Liberation
War, the government and political leaders —

i. Ran Shwadhin Bangla Betar Kendra;

ii. Trained guerrilla fighters.

iii. Gave speech in various international forums.
Which one of the follwing is correct?

a. i&ii

b. ii and iii

c. iand iii

d. i, ii and iii.

Read the paragraph below and answer the question no. 3 & 4.

After the liberation war, Bangladesh started reconstruction work of a war ravaged

country. As a rehabilitation process, Bangabandhu government waived taxes of

land up to 1972 with all interest. After that he introduced "The Second

Revolution" programme.

3. According to the paragraph, which initiative did include the primary
step of Bangabandhu?

a. Formulation of new Constitution

b. Distributing Relief and Rationing

c. Initiating “The Second Revolution” programme
d. New five years plan for economy

4. According to the paragraph, what is the purpose of Bangabandhu’s

taking the later step?

a. Agricultural development

b. Infrastructural development

c. Development of Engineering

d. Socio-economic and political development

Creative Questions :

1. Imran's father was an artist of the Shwadhin Bangla Betar Kendra. The
general people joined the Liberation War being inspired by his songs. On the
other hand, his mother supplied food to the freedom fighters in the Liberation
War Camp. Some times, she took care of the injured freedom fighters.

Forma- 7: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

50 Bangladesh and Global Studies
a. How the Liberation War was termed?
b. Why was the Mujibnagar government formed in achieving independence?
c. What was the role in the Liberation war of the media where Imran’s
father worked for?
d. To accelerate the achievement of Independence, the role of women like
Imran’s mother was significant. Show logics in the light of the text you read.
2. Dulu Mia, son of a freedom fighter was a jail guard at the Dhaka Central Jail
on 3 November 1975. At the mid-night, he saw a group of armed men went
to the special cells of the jail and killed some persons there. Dulu Mia
informed this to his father. In a instant reaction, his father said the main motif
of this killing was to destroy the achievements of armed struggle in 1971.
a. What is the lactating mother assistance fund?
b. What is the role of “Bangladesh Ganoporishad’ in progressing
democracy of Bangladesh.
c. Explain which incident as per your reading was related to the killings
witnessed by Dulu Mia.
d. Do you agree with the opinion with the Father of Dulu Mia? Present in
the light of your reading of the text.
=
g

Chapter-3
The Solar System and the Earth
The earth is surrounded by the space. This space includes the stars, galaxy, nebula,
comet, planet, minor plant or satellite, aeroliths and other luminaries. The
universe has been created with such innumerable luminaries of the stellar sky. The
sun is one of the stars of the universe. The solar system or the solar family consists
of the sun and its planets, minor planets, asteroids, countless comets and
innumerable aeroliths altogether. The sun is the regulator of all planets and minor
planets of the solar system. The planets and the minor planets being attracted by
the sun as well as their mutual gravitation traverse round the sun through their
respective orbits in a particular duration. The solar system is very small in
comparison with the vastness of the universe, and the earth is smaller too. The
universe is bigger in size by billion fold in comparison with the earth. In this
chapter, we will learn about the concept of the solar system, the planets, the
formation of subterranean and time schedule of the universe, the rotation of the
earth and its effects, the change of seasons, the surmise of ebb and flow and their
influences.
After reading this chapter, we will be able to—
® explain the concept of the universe; e explain the concept of diurnal rotation
e describe the planets of the solar system; and annual motion, and their effects
© explain the causes for habitation of the on the earth; . ;
living beings; © explain the reason causing waning
: and waxing of day-night;
e describe the formation of subterranean; eexplain the causes resulting in
eshow the locations drawing the solar changes of seasons in the world;
system and the planets as well; e analyse the relation between annual
« explain the concept of parallels of equator’ § motion and the change of seasons in
latitude and meridians of longitude, prime § Bangladesh;
meridian and international date line; ecalculate the time by applying
* assess the role of the imaginary lines in mathematical cognition in a new
respect of the world's time deciding; situation;
* explain the causes resulting the difference ¢ explain the surmise of ebb and flow,
eee a ts eet = oe their causes and classifications as well;
3 ° ara tie figures of toate of different | ° eaplnin the:etients of ebb and, flow
ss lines; on the earth;

52 Bangladesh and Global Studies

e explain the concept of motion of the earth; — e establish the relation with the environment
and adaptation as well.

Section 3.1: The Solar System

The sun-family comprising the sun and its planets, minor planets, asteroids,

comet, aeroliths, is called the solar system. The sun is the centre-point of the solar

system. There are 8 planets, more than hundred satellites planets, thousands of

asteroids and millions of comets in the solar system.

The Sun

The sun is the regulator of all planets and ;

minor planets or satellites existing in the

solar system. It is a bright star. It has a close ae ee

ties with the earth. It is greater than the tgs EE :

earth by 13 hundred thousand-fold. The [r) Py. WY on

earth is away from the sun by approximate ‘ fo vv" \

150 million kilometers. It is about 13 ‘ Co; sthrojd

hundred 84 thousand kilometers in width. Mars ty 4

The temperature of its surface is 57,000° Se LP

Celsius. A very light temperature from the —=

sun arrives at the earth since the sun stays Cran

very far. Such a light temperature and rays

adequately suffice the need of the living Figure 3.1: The Solar System

beings on earth. The sources of heat and

light in other planets and minor planets are the sun itself too. The sun has neither

any hard nor any liquid substance.gen, 44% of 1% of other gases. The black spot

that is sometimes seen in the sun is called the Sunspot or Solar infamy. The heat

of Sunspot is less than that of its other parts. Under the atomic energy generation

process, hydrogen existing in the sun transforms into helium gas, and energy is

being generated from this gas in a continuous process. The sun revolves on its

own axis once in about 25 days, and it strolls around its own galaxy through the

long rotund way at a gap of about 200 million years. The vibration of life, plants,

and animals could not exist in the earth without the light and heat of the sun, and

the world had remained in ever darkness.

The Planets: Some luminaries influenced by the gravitation revolve around the

sun in the space through certain orbits maintaining a particular duration are called

planets. They have no light or heat of their own. The number of planets in the solar

system is 8. They respectively stay from the sun in accordance with their distance,

namely Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. Jupiter .

is the largest among the planets and the Mercury is the smallest planet in the solar s

system.

The Solar System and the Earth 53
Mercury: Mercury is the closest planet to the sun and the smallest planet in the
solar system. Its diameter is 4,850 kilometers and its weight is equivalent to
three-fiftieth of the earth. It orbits the sun once in about 88 earth-days. The
average distance of it from the sun is 5.8 crore kilometers. It has no natural
satellites. Its temperature is very high since it is the closest planet to the sun. Many
holes and mountains with level ground have been noticed on the surface of
Mercury. Mercury surface area is 74,800,000 square kilometers.
Venus: Venus is the closest to the Earth and its position is the second from the sun
by distance. It is 10.8 crore km away from the sun and only 4.3 crore km from the
Earth. We find it in the western sky as the evening star, and at dawn as vesper in
the eastern sky. It orbits the sun once in 225 earth days. It has no natural satellites.
Like earth, Venus has a substantial atmosphere but has no oxygen in it. The
presence of carbon dioxide gas is about 96%. This planet orbits on its own axis
very slowly. Therefore, the sun rises and sets twice a year in its sky. Acid rain
showers due to the dense cloud of carbon dioxide in this planet. It is much drier
than the earth, and the pressure of air is ninety times stronger in its atmosphere
than that of the earth. Its surface area is 460,230,000 square kilometers and
diameter is 12,104 kilometers.
The Earth: The Earth is the third closest Canim Laie schanicieneuee ek ce
planet to the sun. . It has an area of luminaries in the Solar System in a table
510,100,422 square kilometers. Its diameter
measures 12,752 km in the East-West and 12,709 km in the North-South. The
average distance of the earth from the sun is 150 million km. It orbits the sun once
in 365 days 5 hours 48 minutes and 47 seconds. This planet has sufficient oxygen
and nitrogen as well. The average temperature of the surface of the earth is
13.90°C. It has necessary water on its crust. Of all the planets, the Earth is the
only planet which is ideal for living for the creatures and plants. It possesses one
natural satellite, the moon, the only large satellite of a terrestrial planet in the solar
system. The average distance of the Earth from the Moon is 381,500 km. It orbits
the Earth once in 29 days and 12 hours. Holes, mountains, hills have been
observed in the rear part of the Moon.
Mars: Mars, after the Earth, stands close to the Sun by distance. Its average
distance from the sun is 22.8 crore km and 7.8 crore km from the Earth. Its
diameter is 6,779 km and its weight is equivalent to one-tenth of the Earth. It has
an area of 144,798,500 square kilometers. It takes 687 days to orbit the Sun, and
«it orbits once on its own axis in 24 hours and 37 minutes. It has two tiny natural
$ satellites (Deimos and Phobos). Living is impossible here. It possesses an

54 Bangladesh and Global Studies
atmosphere containing 3% of nitrogen and 2% of argon gas. The amount of water
is very scant here. It is colder than the Earth and its average temperature is below
the freezing point. Its surface is peppered with gorges and vast volcanoes. Its red
color comes from iron oxide (rust) in its soil.
Asteroids: Numerous small planets are orbiting together in between Mars and
Jupiter. There is no other planet in this extent. A luminary with a diameter less
than 1.6 km to 805 km is called 'asteroid'. They are called asteroids in a body.
Jupiter: Jupiter is the largest planet of the solar system. It stands fifth from the
sun by distance. Its measure is equivalent to about1300-fold of that of the Earth
that is, it has an area of 61,419,000,000 square kilometers. Its diameter is 139,822
km. It is about 77.8 crore km away from the sun. Jupiter orbits the sun once in 12
years and on its own axis in 9 hours and 53 minutes. The sun rises and sets in this
planet twice in one earth-day. It possesses a dense atmosphere. The up-level
temperature of this planet's surface is very low and its internal temperature is very
high. It has 67 satellites of which Ganymede, Callisto, Lo and Europa are the most
important.
Saturn: Saturn is the second largest planet of the solar system. It has an area of
42,700,000,000 square kilometers and diameter of 116,464 km. It is 143 crore km
away from the sun. It orbits the sun once in 29 years and 5 months and on its own
axis once in 10 hours and 40 minutes. Saturn is larger than the Earth by 9-fold
approximately, and it can be watched with open eyes. It possesses an atmosphere
containing mixture of hydrogen and helium, methane and ammonia gases. Three
bright belts have surrounded Saturn. It has 62 satellites of which Capitas, Tethis,
Hua, Titan, Enceladus are to be mentioned.
Uranus: Uranus is the third largest planet. It is 287 crore km away from the sun.
It orbits the sun once in 84 years. Its average diameter is about 49,000 km. Its
volume is larger than Earth by 64-fold and its weight is heavier than that of the
Earth by 15-fold only. Its atmosphere possesses a vast amount of methane gas. It
has 27 satellites of which the largest ones are Miranda, Ariel, Oberon, Unbriel and
Titania, etc. It is discovered that Uranus has belts like Saturn.
Neptune: Neptune's average diameter is 49,244 km. It is 450 crore km away from
the sun. It has an area of 17,618,300,000 square kilometers. This planet is cold
since it stays much far away from the sun. It is largely bluish to look at. It orbits
the sun once in 165 years. It has 14 satellites -Triton and Nereid are its
significant satellits. Neptune is accompanied in its orbit by a number of minor
planets termed Neptune Trojans. %
>
N

The Solar System and the Earth 55
The Causes for Habitation of Living Beings in the Planet Earth
All sides of Earth are surrounded by miscellaneous gaseous elements. Such
invisible gaseous covering is called the atmosphere of Earth which is implicated
in the surface of the Earth being attracted by the gravity, and being rotated along
with the Earth. Its density is most on the sea-surface due to air-pressure, and its
up-level density is comparatively less. Nitrogen and Oxygen have supremacy in
the atmosphere. Oxygen is a must for all kinds of creature. The extent of other
elements other than that of carbon dioxide gas remains almost invariable, but
some elements like dust, smoke, aqueous vapour, etc. remain at particular places
in different extent. The atmosphere plays a vital role in order to help all creatures
live in the Earth. It protects the fauna from the harmful rays of the sun, and its
gaseous element namely carbon dioxide(CO,) saves plants and oxygen (CO,)
saves the fauna as well. Troposphere is a level adjacent to earth-surface and the
lowest level of the atmosphere. This level possesses an average depth of about 13
km. It is the most essential level for human beings, because moistness, clouds,
fogs, rains, steams of air, etc. are noticed at this level. Due to the increase of
height, the velocity of air gets enhanced at this level, and air moves up and down.
Most of all the processes of the climate and weather happen at this level of
atmosphere. The atmospheric boundary between the troposphere and the
stratosphere is called | Tropopause. The depth of Tropopause is narrow, and the
air remains standstill there, and spacecraft routinely pass through this level with-
out any trouble for not having any prevalence of rainstorms. Ozone gas possesses
a level in the atmosphere known as
Ozone level. Its depth is approximate | reasons why other planets are not
12-16 km. Since it absorbs the suitable for habitation except the Earth.
ultra-violate ray of the sun, temperature reaches at about 40°C. This level of the
atmosphere has made the Earth habitable for the living beings.
The Earth receives light and heat from the sun. This Earth would remain ever dark
without the light of the sun. No life vibration could remain in the Earth, and all
creatures, plants and fauna could not live. The human activities on Earth help form
the atmosphere and bring about changes in the elements. For example,
deforestation, smokes emitted from the mills and industries, and burning of fuels,
coals and natural gases enhance the pollution of the atmosphere. It is necessary to
keep the atmosphere fresh for the sake of existence of the living beings.The
humans and animals need light, air and water in abundance. The average
temperature on the surface is 13.90°C. Its surface possesses sufficient water. The
heat and light that reaches the Earth from the sun are also endurable by the fauna.
co These are very essential and suitable elements for the existence of the flora and
S fauna as well. That is why the humans and animals can live comfortably live on
Earth.

56 Bangladesh and Global Studies

Interior Structure of the Earth

It is very difficult to collect actual information about interior structure of the earth

and its various layer. But earth's interior rock's density-variation and different

layer's characteristics known by various seismic wave velocity of interior earth.

So the Geologists have divided interior structure of the earth into three layers on

the basis of velocity and nature of seismic wave of interior of earth. These layers

are- (1) Core, (2) Mantle and (3) Crust.

(1) Core: The radius of round shape earth is 6371 km (approx.). Around the

earth's centre, there is a spherical object having 3486 km (approx.) radius. This

spherical object is defined as core. Specific gravity of this layer is 10 to 13.6.

According to the scientists, core is composed of some solid and heavy materials

such as iron, nickel, mercury, lead etc. This layer is called Nife because of excess

nickel and iron portion. It is 10/12 times dense more than water and two times

than other portion of the earth. Probably it is not in solid form because of excess

heat and pressure. Based on seismic wave core is divided into two part- external

part and internal part. It is assumed that outer part of core is liquid and inner part

is solid. The extent of outer portion of the core is near about 2270 km. Inner

portion of core is still solid having 1216 km radius from earth centre and it is

mainly composed of iron and nickel.

(2) Mantle: The surrounding up to 2885 km. radius Part ust

from upper level of the core is defined as mantle. This =

layer contains heavy metals like silicon and OT ep, | km.

magnesium. As its upper layer 1448 km. composed of \* ** fF

basalt like materials, it is called basalt region. This \\;+: Ween? &

layer is also named as Sima because of its vine ce ec Retay [Mane

composition of silicon and magnesium. ape eta

(3) Crust: The upper part of the mantle is called - ~

crust. It is composed of various rocks and minerals. a

Its depth is the highest in the beneath of continental Re aise ba)

region and the least in oceanic region. There isa 62

debate about its actual depth. Its depth is considered

up to 30 to 64 km. according to location. The

mentionable elements of the composition of this layer 26

are oxygen, silicon, aluminium, iron, calcium, a

sodium, potasium, etc. It is mentionable that Silicon

and Aluminium are abundant at this layer. That is gee

why this layer is called SiAl layer. The upper part of 2
S
N

The Solar System and the Earth 57
the crust is called earth-crust and lower part of the crust is called substratum.
Earth-crust is hard portion of the earth. Its depth is 3km.(beneath the ocean) to 40
km.(beneath the mountain) but average depth is 1 7 km.

Section 3.2 : The Method of Calculating Time at Different Regions of the World
A few imaginary lines are drawn in the world's map across the East-West and the
North-South in order to decide location of any region in it. These are respectively
called Axis and Meridians of Longitude. The location of any region can be known
through the Axis and the meridians of longitude. Any regional time can be known
from the position of the meridians of longitude. As the locations in the North and
South can be known from the equator through the axis, the meridians of longitude
is used to know about the locations in the East or West from the prime meridian as
well. Though the Earth's surface seems level, it is an approached globe in fact.
That is why the distance from the prime meridian can be easily demonstrated in an
angular measure as the Earth is almost round.

The Axis, Equator, Latitude, Meridians of Longitude and Prime Meridian
The Axis and Equator: The line imagined at the North-South over the center of
the Earth is called Axis. Its northern end point is called the North Pole or the
Arctic, and its southern end point is called the South Pole or the Antarctic. The
line that is imagined hemming the Earth across the East-West by keeping the same
distance from both the poles is called Equator or Equinoctial Line. This line is
circular in size for round shape of the Earth. So it is also called Equinoctial
Circular. The Equator has divided the Earth equally into two parts across the
North-South. A half of the Earth existing at the North to the Equator is called
northern hemisphere, and the other half of the Earth at the South to the Equator is
called southern hemisphere. An angular distance of any region within northern or
southern hemispheres can be decided through the Equator. A unit of latitude
measure like the geometrical angle is called Degree.

The Parallel of latitude: An angle of 360° originated at center of the Earth's
circular is divided into Degree (0), Minute (‘) and Second ("). Angular distance of
each pole from the Equator is 90°. A parallel line of the Equator which is imagined
by dividing this angle into degrees and minutes is called a parallel of latitude.
These parallels of latitude are stretched out towards the East-West, reciprocally
parallel, each is a full circle, if latitude increases, the circumference also
increases, and the maximum latitude is 90°. The well-known parallels of latitude
are 23.5° north latitude known as the Tropic of Cancer, 23.5° south latitude known
as Tropic of Capricorn, 66.5° north latitude known as The Arctic Circle, and 66.5°
south latitude known as The Antarctic Circle. The angular distance of any region
Forma- 8: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

58 Bangladesh and Global Studies
situated either at the North or the South from the Equator is called the latitude of
that region. In order to know the location of any region, it is necessary to identify
where the region exists and how far it is in the North or South from the Equator,
or in the East or West from the prime meridian. All regions __ situated at one Axis
have the unique latitude.A latitude possessing 0° to 30° is called the Lower Lati-
tude, 30° to 60° the Middle latitude and 60° to 90° the upper latitude.
The Meridians of Longitude
By dividing the Equator into Degrees, Minutes and Seconds, the lines that have
been imagined throughout from the North Pole to the South Pole over each of
division points are called the Meridians of Longitude. It is also named the
meridian. The Meridians are semi-circle and not parallel. Each of the meridians
of longitude possesses the equal length. The highest meridian becomes 180°.
Considering any of the meridians of longitude a particular prime meridian, an
angular distance of the other meridians of longitude from this line, can be
measured. The Local time is decided through the meridian.
The Prime Meridian
North pole
There is an international es. Prime Meridian
agreement that the meridian ZHI
running through Greenwich, remiphee/ PINS. ... Greenwich
London of the UK over the LEHI ee of cancer
Royal Observatory in (tL nescence Center
Greenwich at a vicinity of TEE Equator
London city, which is spread a as s capri
out over the North Pole and goth WO. ‘pies i oto
the South Pole is considered hemisphere WA
the official Prime Meridian. , 665° WY
Any line of the longitude (a South pole
meridian) can serve as the 0°
Figure 3.2 : Important Geographical meridians
longitude line. The other meridians can be drawn from the Prime Meridian by the
angle originated at the Earth's centre. The meridian existing at the East by 45°
from the Greenwich Prime Meridian, meridian
2
R

The Solar System and the Earth 59
of all region over it is 45° Eastern stp mci
Meridian. we can say that an angular
distance of any region in the East or West | Sere) ina table.
from the Greenwich Prime Meridian is the Meridian of that region. We also know
that Greenwich meridian serves as the O degree. Any angle originated with the
diameter of the Earth possesses 360 degrees. The Prime Meridian has divided
these 360 degrees equally into two divisions after every one degree i.e. by 180° in
the East and 180° in the West. Since the Earth possesses a round shape, both the
180° East Meridian and the 180° West Meridian remain within the same meridian.
Like the Latitude, the meridian is divided into minutes and seconds as well. Each
minute meridian is equal to 60/1 of a degree. Where there the Equator and the
prime meridian intersect each other lengthways, both the latitude and meridian
fall in Zero (0) degree. That is the region of the gulf of Ginny. It is possible to
determine the meridian of any region from the Local time and the Greenwich
Mean Time.
The Difference in Local Time: The earth is round and it continuously moves
around its own axis from the West to the East. So the different regions of the Earth
face the sun at different duration. When the prime meridian of any region reaches
just the front of the sun, the sun is found exactly overhead at that region, and then,
the midday occurs at that region and it is 12 o'clock by watch over there. The other
timings of the day are decided in accordance with the midday. We know that one
degree of meridian difference results in difference of time by 4 minutes, and the
distance of one minute meridian results in difference of time by 4 seconds. When
it is 12 o'clock at any place or region, the time of any region existing 5° East to
that place or region, will be 12+(5x4) minute or 12 hours 20 minutes. The time of
any region existing at 5° West to the same region, will be 12 o'clock (5x4) minute
or (12H-20M) 11 hours and 40 minutes.
Through Greenwich Mean Time: The Greenwich Meridian serves Zero (0)
degree. The exact time of Greenwich can be known by the Chronometer watch.
The meridian of a place is calculated by the sextant apparatus, and the midday of
that region at that time is determined by observing the highest position of the sun
in the sky. The meridian of such region is ascertained from the difference of time
between Greenwich Mean Time and the time of that region at a particular
duration. If any region is situated to the eastern side of Greenwich, the local time
of that region will be more than that of Greenwich, and if it is situated to the

- western side thereof, its local time will be less than that of Greenwich.

S

x)

60 Bangladesh and Global Studies
The Local Time and the Standard Time

Local Time: Every day the Earth orbits its own axis from the West to East
regularly. Consequently, the sun rises earlier in the regions located at the eastern
part of the Earth. In the course of Earth's rotation, when the sun remains overhead
or at the highest site, midday occurs at that region and it is 12 o'clock by watch
over there. The other timings of the day are determined from such meridian while.
It is termed as the local time of that region. The local time is decided by the
sextant apparatus too. The measure of angle at the Earth's centre is 360 degrees.
The earth orbits such 360° angular distance once in 24 hours or (24x60) = 1,440
minutes. So the Earth orbits 1 degree in (1,440-360) = 4 minutes i.e. time differs
by 4 minutes due to the difference of every one degree meridian.

The Standard Time: If the local time is determined by ascertaining the duration
of midday sun over the meridians of longitude, the calculation of time faces
confusion in the same country. For that reason, a separate standard time for each
country is determined where necessary. In every country, the time that is
determined as per the meridian at any region of its center is called the standard
time for that country. If the country is larger, it may have several standard times
itself. Such as The United States of America have 4 standard times, and Canada
has 5. The local time of Greenwich (0° meridian) has been accepted as the
standard time for the whole of Earth. The Standard Time of Bangladesh is +6
hours from the Greenwich Mean Time. 90° — -

East meridian is situated almost Individual
work: Decide local above the middle of :
Bangladesh territory. For this time and standard time. For this reason, the local
time of this meridian is considered the standard time of Bangladesh accordingly.
The difference of time between Dhaka and Seoul is 2 hours 32 minutes. What is
the meridian of Seoul while it is situated at the 90° East to the meridian of Dhaka
(Seoul is situated to the East of Dhaka)?

The meridian of Seoul will be more since it is situated in the East of Dhaka.

The difference of time between Dhaka and Seoul is 2 hours 32 minutes = 152
minutes.

The Meridian differs by 1° at a difference of 4 minutes.

So the meridian differs at a difference of 1 minute by (‘/4)°

So the meridian differs at a difference of 152 minutes by (2) = 38°

So the meridian of Seoul stands 90° +38°= 128° Eo
Answer: The meridian of Seoul stays at 128° East. 8

The Solar System and the Earth 61
The Meridians of Dhaka and Chennai are respectively 90° East and 80° 15' East.
What is the local time in Chennai when the midday occurs in the sky of Dhaka?
The difference of meridian between Dhaka and Chennai is 90° - 80°15'= 9°45".
Time will vary for 9°45' meridian, and the time differs by 4 minutes for 1 °
meridian's difference.
So, the time variation for 9°meridian is 9°X4" = 36 minutes. Time differs by 4
seconds due to 1 °meridian's difference.
So the time difference due to 45' of the meridian by 45'X4" = 180 seconds = 3
minutes. So the time difference due to 9°45' meridian by 36 minutes + 3 minutes
=39 minutes.
Chennai is situated at the West of Dhaka (Chennai's meridian is less).
Accordingly, its time is less.
So, when the midday occurs in Dhaka, i.e. 12 o'clock at noon, the local time of
Chennai will be 12 hours 39’ minutes - 11 hours 21 minutes a.m.
Answer: The local time of Chennai is 11 :21 a.m.
The Antipode
A point that stands opposite to any point existing on the Earth's surface is called
the Antipode of that point. The Antipodes exist entirely to the opposite of one
another. In order to decide antipode, an imaginary line from any point of the
surface through the Earth's center is drawn towards the side contrary to the Earth.
The point where the so supposed line reaches at the opposite side of the surface,
the very same point is the Antipode to the previous point (see figure). If a latitude
of any region is known, its Antipode's latitude is also known as well. The degree
of a latitude of any region is the degree of its antipode's latitude. Either of both
the regions will be situated at the North and at a
the South of the Equator. Both the regions will ZAR cha
be in both the hemispheres. If one region's WA
latitude stands at 70° North, its Antipode's i {A
latitude will be at 70° North as well. If a mz
meridian of any region is added to its “N_| a, Kaha
antipode's meridian, the summation will be Vf
180°. So, if the meridian of one region is ZA
deducted, its antipode's meridian is got. If the << \
meridian of one region stands at the East, its cme SALE
antipode's meridian will be at the West. For Figure 3.3 : The Antipodes

= example, a meridian of antipode of a region Antipode of place Ka is Kha

Q Antipode of place Cha is Chha

62 Bangladesh and Global Studies
situated at 40° of the East meridian, its will be 180-40° = 140° to the West.
The time will differ in between both the regions by 12 hours. In the figure 4.6, the
antipode of Chapoint is Chha point (see figure). The antipode of Dhaka is situated
over the Pacific Ocean near Chile within the territory of North America.
The International Date Line
While traveling a long way from any particular region to the East or West, days of
weeks sometimes get confused along with the local time difference. Problems
arise to pass through 180° meridians of longitude to the East or West from any
specific venue. In order to solve such problems, a line extending across the
North-South over the water surface is imagined by having the recourse to 180°
meridians of longitude. This imaginary line is named 'The International Date
Line’. S38
Th . 4 ARTIC] JOcEAN

¢ Importance of the International 3. 9s | |
Date Line: We know that the time fd
differs by 4 minutes for 1 ° of difference ee | ASeals
in the meridian. So, the time difference ys |= = RUSSIA > GaSe:
will be 1 hour for 15° of difference inthe 9 * (MN Sania Ey SS aioe
meridian. If it (the meridian of Green- ee coe le reoarnaeoces
wich) advances forward from the prime =e Pa we
meridian to the East, 12 hours will be oh | Se oree rch s
more at 180° meridian, and if it gets ,. =o se
ahead towards the West, 12 hour time A z ll. °
will be less at 180° meridian. So, when it |. SPN 2 E % § 7 |
is 10 o'clock on Monday at the prime wtt|t--t.1-- fe Td.
meridian, the local time will be 10 7 TROMC oF CANCER °GSHAWAI ISLAND
o'clock night on Monday at 180° East “,, NAS ALSLAYD | |
meridian as well. Accordingly, if the — ,, THEEquaTor :
meridian of longitude is calculated by P< Soy, | a | Reelanan
the Wes tem side, the local time will be US. pa suaige \2 S55
10 o'clock at night on Sunday, i.e. the at promeor eM SS bol al eben an
previous day at 180° West meridian  ,,- AR) caso _ —
instead. But the line at 180° East and YS few zen |
180° West is the same. So, itis observed _,,. | Ss |, CHATHAM ISLAND |
that the local time differs at the same NT
meridian by 24 hours or a whole day. At LJ |
the same region, where there is Sunday, Ne Tee ao 6s wee
there is Monday elsewhere, but at the Fig.3.4: International Date Line %
same meridian, 10 o'clock on Sunday s

The Solar System and the Earth 63
night and 10 o'clock on Monday night cannot happen at the same time. In order to
solve this problem, a line that has been imagined having recourse to the 180°
meridian in the atlas over the water-surface of The Pacific Ocean under the
International recognition is the International Line. Since passing through this line
results in changes of day and date, that's why it is called International Date Line
(see figure). It passes through the northeast region of Siberia, Allucian, Fiji and
Chatham islands. In order to solve problems of the local people in calculating 30°
dates, this line has been designed over the water-surface in Bering system making
it bent towards at 12° East Allusion islands 70° West, and 11 ° East at Fiji and
Chatham islands.
By ship or aircraft towards eastern region, while people routinely pass through
this line, they deduct one day from their extended time in order to maintain
harmony with the local time over there. Similarly while passing through it
towards western region, people calculate their date by adding one day to their
curtailed time.
The Role of Imaginary Line to Determine Time
The Earth is almost like a globe. So the imaginary line plays a great role in the
world's map in order to determine time within its territory. The round shape Earth
orbits its own axis from the West to the East in due course. Consequently, different
parts of the Earth's surface face the Sun at different durations. While the meridian
of any part stands just in front of the sun at a particular time, the midday occurs at
that part and it is 12 o'clock by watch over there. The other timings of the day are
determined in accordance with the Noon or Midday. The Earth orbits from the
West to East, so the sun rises earlier in the parts existing in the eastern side. If it is
1 o'clock, the time at its 1° East will be 4 past one, and at 1° West 4 minutes to
one. In Greenwich (0°) when it is 8 am, it is 10 am , ~
somewhere else, and the meridian of such place LORS
will be Medi 30° East, Again, when the time eS ae
runs behind than that of Greenwich, the said place IN
will be at the West of Greenwich. 6% Te,
Section 3.3: The Motion of Earth Serr
We regularly notice that the sun rises in the East S Oo
and sets in the West in due course. But have we
ever thought on how it happens? It is because the ae 7
Earth is on motion. The Earth being regulated by

a the gravity, rotated on its own axis following the —_ Figure3.5: Earth's Rotation from

S sun in its front and moves round the sun through West to East

64 Bangladesh and Global Studies
particular orbits. This is the Earth's motion. The Earth's motion is classified into
two ways - The Annual Motion and the Diurnal Motion.

The Diurnal Motion: Let us have a look to the EVENING

figure 3.9. What do we see there? There are a ME

burning candle and a globe. We can see and wacker Ee ———
notice that one side of the globe is illuminated FER") noon aa
and the other side is dark. The day and night We

come alternatively in the same manner due to HE

the diurnal motion in the Earth. The Earth Cen

rotates on its axis from the West to the East — Figure3.6: Occurrence of Day-night
regularly. It rotates in this way almost 24 hours

or a day. The time for one complete rotation is 23 hours, 56 minutes and 4.09
seconds. This motion of Earth is called the ‘Diurnal Motion’. The time for one
compete rotation of Earth is called a Solar Day. The days and nights come due to
the Diurnal Motion. The Earth possesses no light itself. It gets illuminated with the
sunshine. Since the Earth is round, the sunlight cannot reach the whole of its
surface at a time. During the rotation, the part where the rays fall in, day occurs,
and the other part remains dark, and vice versa. The time can be calculated on
recourse to the diurnal motion. Considering the complete rotation 24 hours, the
time is calculated by dividing it in hours, minutes and seconds as well. The ebb
and flow takes place in the Earth by attraction of the Moon and the Sun due to
the diurnal motion. The diurnal motion affects to a great extent the sea-streams
and air-ventilation.

The Experiment: Supposing a burning rT =

candle on the table in a dark room as the = ( EB AZREN

Sun and the globe as the Earth, we can 2() = (KX tt-\\) Night
find that the front part of the candle is ny Day ‘(7 7 A)
lighted and its opposite part remains SEY

dark by moving the globe before the |, | a a
burning candle. Day occurs in the light- | / : cy '

ed part and night in darkness. The circu- (Gamacnaucaena

lar region in between the lighted and the —<—<#@£$—_
dark regions of Earth is known Figure 3.7 : With the candle and the globe
as the shade-circle. The part of the Earth that just reaches the lighted part due to
the rotation by passing through the shade-circle from the darkness dawn occurs
over there. The time when meager light exists sometimes earlier from the
daybreak is called the dawn, and the time when meager light exists before sunset .,
is called twilight. S

The Solar System and the Earth 65
The Annual Motion: The Earth moves round the sun continuously on its own
axis through a certain semi-circular orbit, to a certain direction and in a certain
duration. Such rotation of Earth to the East from the West is called the Annual
Motion. The Earth moves round the sun in a speed of 30 km per second. The time
required for the earth to make one complete rotation around the sun is 1 year. It is
called the solar year. The exact time is 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes, 45.51
seconds, As the solar year is calculated on 365 days, every fourth English year is
calculated with an additional day, i.e. 366 days. In that year, February possesses
29 days instead of 28, and such year is called the 'Leap Year’. The waning and
waxing of the day-night and changes of seasons happen in the Earth in
consequence of the annual motion.

The Role of the Annual Motion to the Waning and Waxing of Day-Night and
to the Changing of the Seasons

We have noticed that the time of different days and nights in the year have
discrimination, i.e. sometimes days are longer and sometimes nights are longer.
Have we ever thought on how it differentiates? It can be replied that such disparity
occurs due to the annual motion. An annual motion causes to wan and wax days
and nights and to change the seasons.

The Reasons that Make Days and Nights Longer or Shorter

Let us have a look to the following figure. While moving round the sun, the four
stays of the earth have been specified in the orbit such as June 21, September 23,
December 22 and March 21.

June 21: While moving round the ee

sun, the earth upon its course reach- sx snmsrorroun oun Me

es at such a place on the orbit on “

June 21, where the North Pole a : —s

mostly inclines (23.5°) towards the *2CTUS ee cua” soncusraw) A Teg
sun, and. the South Pole: remains iS ae SHORTEST NIGI NG
farthest away from the sun. On this “el Shouresr Nour $OKTEST Ba 7
day at noon, the sunlight falls over PS. litte Se?
23.5° North Latitude lengthways (at ““"" te. Sunnie SOLSTICE
angle 90°). The day on this date PAUALOURATON

becomes the longest in the north Shou

hemisphere and the night becomes Fi In aD {day-night
the shortest. The opposite situation eure 3.8 : Increase and Decrease of dey-nigh
exists in the south hemisphere

Forma- 9: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

66 Bangladesh and Global Studies
instead. The day lasts for 24 hours from the Arctic Circle (66.5° North) towards
the North to the North Pole, and the night lasts for 24 hours from the Antarctic
Circle (66.5° South) towards the South to the South Pole as well. After June 21 the
Sun no longer moves towards north hemisphere, and starts moving towards south
hemisphere. This position of the Sun is called Summer Solistice.

September 23: While June 21 becomes over, the North Pole continues to move
away from the sun and the South Pole continues to draw near gradually.
Consequently, day gradually becomes longer and night shorter in the north
hemisphere, and in the south hemisphere, day gradually becomes longer and night
shorter. The Earth stays at such a place on September 23, where both the Poles
remain equally away from the sun. On this day, the sunlight falls lengthways
towards the Equator (at angle 90°), towards both the Arctic and Antarctic circles
at angle 66.5°, and towards the Poles at angle 0°. For this reason, day and night on
this day remain equal across the Earth.

December 22: While December 22 becomes over, the North Pole continues to
move farther away from the sun, rather the South Pole draws nearer.
Consequently, the daytime gradually becomes shorter and night longer in the
north hemisphere. Once when the Earth stays at such a place on December 22, the
South Pole remains most inclined (23.5°) towards the sun. The sunlight falls
lengthways (90°) towards the Tropic of Capricorn this day. On this date, the day
becomes the longest and the night shortest in the south hemisphere. After
December 22 the Sun no longer moves towards south hemisphere, and starts
moving towards north hemisphere. This stay of the Sun is called Winter
Solistice.

March 21: Subsequently after December 22, when the Earth gets farther ahead to
its own orbit, the North Pole gradually draws near the sun, whereas the South Pole
moves away instead. For this, day continues to be longer and night shorter in the
north hemisphere. Al last on March 21, the Earth reaches at such a place on its
own orbit, where both the Poles remain equally away from the sun. Like
September 23, day and night become equal on this day. This stay of Earth is called
the Vernal Equinox. After 21 March, the Earth restores to the previous position of
21 June through moving on its own orbit. The waning and waxing of days and
nights happen for the annual motion.

The Change of Seasons

Let us have a look to the adjoining figure. Here while moving round the sun, an
explanation regarding the change of seasons has been provided from the four stays
of the Earth. The sunrays fall somewhere lengthwise and somewhere else S

The Solar System and the Earth 67
obliquely because of the annual motion N. ages

which also results in waning and waxing day tify

and nights. Since the sunrays fallen Meng C~
lengthways reach by cleaving less layers of (=

= they make the surface more es and i here ou =)

e rays fallen Obliquely do not reach by ,,,_, OT «  Heiilspheré
cleaving more layers Of air Only, but they wiser a eC =
get extensively spread out in comparison to ony. —
the rays fallen lengthways. Consequently, ;
temperature on all over the surface varies at Figure3.9 : The Change of seasons
different times of the year and it results in the change of seasons in the course of
time. The difference or transformation of temperature in the Earth in the
discrimination of time is called the change of seasons. While moving round the
sun, an explanation regarding the change of seasons has been found from the four
stays of the Earth.

The Summer in the North Hemisphere and The Winter in the South
Hemisphere:
The 21% day of June is the last day for the summer solstice of the sun. The sunrays
fall lengthwise towards the Tropic of Cancer this day. Accordingly here the day
becomes the longest and the night shortest. Heat prevails much within the territory
of the North Pole for a total period of three months from one and a half months
earlier as well as one and a half months later since June 21. During this period, the
summer season occurs in the north hemisphere. Since the sunrays fall
obliquelyduring this period for the days being longer and the nights shorter in the
south hemisphere, the winter season occurs over there.
The Autumn in the North Hemisphere and the Spring in the South
Hemisphere: On the 23" day of September, the sunrays fall lengthways over the
Equator and day and night remain equal all over the Earth. For this reason, during
a total period of 3 months pervading over one and a half months earlier as well as
one and a half months later since the date, heat remains in moderate state. During
this period, the Autumn occurs in the north hemisphere whereas the Spring in the
south hemisphere.
The Winter in the North Hemisphere and The Summer in the South Hemisphere:
day for the ster solute of the an
;
S Accordingly, here the day becomes Dee. 11 |
longer and the night shorter. One and a :

68 Bangladesh and Global Studies
half months earlier and later since this date, the summer season occurs in the
South hemisphere whereas the winter in the north hemisphere for opposite reason.
The Spring in the North Hemisphere and The Autumn in the South Hemisphere:
Both the North and the South Poles stay equally away from the sun on 21 March.
The sunrays fall towards the Equator lengthwise this day, and the day and night
become equal everywhere. One and a half months earlier and later since 21
March, the spring season occurs in the north hemisphere whereas the Autumn in
the south hemisphere.

The Reasons for the Change of Seasons

As the consequence of the annual motion of the Earth, the sunrays fall somewhere
lengthwise and elsewhere obliquely, which result in regular change in temperature
and the change of seasons. The annual motion of the Earth causes waning and
waxing of the days and nights as well. When the daytime at a place becomes
longer than that of night, the atmosphere of that place becomes hotter. In this way,
the heat becomes different in the different times Tndlvideal works Wleniity te
of the year all over the earth, and the change of
seasons occurs, and the waning and waxing of

day and night occir in the course of time. While moving round the sun, the Earth
always rotates inclining at the angle of 66.5°. Consequently, an angular disparity
occurs in respect of dropping sunrays to different sites and seasons get changed.
The length of the Earth's orbit possesses a measure of 93 8051827 km. Since this
orbit of Earth is elliptical in shape, while rotating, distance of Earth from the sun
does not always remain equal. The sun stays closest to the Earth during January
1-3 which is called the Earth's perihelion. In other words, the closest point to the
sun in a planet's orbit is called Perihelion. Similarly, the sun stays remotest from
the Earth during July 1-4. It is called the Earth's Aphelion. In modem times,
Earth's perihelion occurs around January 3, and the aphelion around July 4. It is
proved from the decrease and increase of the distance in between the sun and the
earth, and from the actual change of the relative volume, it is proved that the
Earth's orbit is elliptical in shape. Consequently, the sunbeams vary and seasons
get varied as well. Our Bangladesh is situated within the north hemisphere and the
Tropic of Capricorn line passes (23.5° North Axis) through the middle of the
country. So, the seasons of Bangladesh get changed in accordance with the change
of solidity in the north hemisphere.

Section 3.4: The Ebb and Flow

Apart from the oceanic current in different seas and oceans, the mass-water has a
motion of itself. Consequently, the seawater gets inflated for a while every day FS
(the water heights get up), rather it comes to a stop for some while. Such inflation %

The Solar System and the Earth 69
of the seawater in a regular manner is called the high tide or flow, and
disembarking of the same is called low tide or ebb. The ebb and flow mainly
occurs due to the earth's motion itself and under the influence of the moon and the
sun thereupon. The ebb and flow has diverse categories. Besides, it affects the

Earth in various angles and aspects.

The Surmise of the Ebb and Flow, their Reasons and Classifications

The sun and the moon continuously attract the surface of the Earth. The water of

its surface gets inflated because of FBR TIDE y v

such attraction at a site and gets | <<= ee, \

descended elsewhere at intervals ofa | (: aa ees = -

particular duration, sea-water | |X SHY, : Z

regularly ascends and descends once iicu rings sy: i //|

after every 12 and a half hours in due

course. Both the ebb and flow Figure 3.10 : The Ebb and Flow

successively occurs after every 6 hours and 13 minutes. Such inflation of the

seawater in a regular course is called the high tide or flow, and descending thereof
is called the low tide of ebb. The water at the middle-sea generally ascends high
or descends below by 1-3 feet only. But because of the depth of the seas and
oceans at littoral regions, the mass-water ascend and descend very high and low.

That is why the ebb and flow is observed few kilometers from the estuary

throughout the rivers' course.

The Reasons of the Ebb and Flow: In the ancient period, different fanciful

suppositions about the reasons of tide were customary, but nowadays the scientists

have proved that the high and low tides occur in consequence of the centric force
generated due to the Earth's rotation and of attraction from the sun and the moon
over the Earth.

The Influence of Gravitation Force: Each substance of the Earth has an

attraction, and one attracts the other. This attraction is called the gravitation force

or the gravity. Due to the gravity, the Earth moves round the sun, and the moon
moves round the Earth. One that is so large possesses the gravitation force so
much relatively. But when the distance becomes far, the gravity becomes weak.

Though the sun is larger in size than the moon by 2.60 crore-fold, but the distance

of the sun from the Earth is comparatively much more than the distance of the

moon, the attraction force of the moon over the Earth is more than that of the sun
by twofold. Thus the moon's attraction causes generating the ebb and flow.

The Centrifugal Force: Since the Earth staying on its own axis or spine moves
- around rapidly, liquid mass-water has the tendency of getting scattered from its
3 surface. Such force is named Centrifugal Force. Due to the rotation of the earth

and the moon, the influence of the Centrifugal Force over the liquid and light

70 Bangladesh and Global Studies
mass-water of the surface prevails extensively. For this reason, the mass-water
gets ejected outside all the while and trends to become isolated from solid ground
of the liquid mass-water. In the same manner, the Centrifugal Force helps
originate the ebb and flow.
The Classifications of the Ebb and Flow: The ebb and flow or tide may be
divided into a few categories such as the Major Tide, the Minor Tide, the Flood
Tide or the Spring Tide and the Neap Tide or the Ebb Tide. The moon moves
round the Earth. During the rotation of the moon, the part of the Earth that draws
near the moon, the moon's attraction prevails mostly over there. Consequently,
water arrives from the neighboring sites and gets inflated just below the moon,
and tides originate. This tide is categorically called Major Tide, or in other words,
direct tide. To the opposite of the Major Tide, the landsite below the water is
firmly tied with the Earth's centre, because of which an attraction of the moon
over there remains equal in comparison with that of the centre. Consequently, the
landsite becomes more attracted towards the moon than the water-site of the
opposite side. Resultantly, the Centrifugal Force is generated. Water from both the
sides flows towards that extent, and causes the generation of tide. Such tide is
called Minor Tide or Indirect Tide. When a major tide originates at one side of the
Earth, and a minor tide at the other side, water flows out of the middle between the
two tides, The state of water existing at the middle is called the ebb.
In the new moon \
Figure 3.11 : Flood tide (in the duration of new moon) Figure 3.14 : Flood tide (in the duration of fall
moon)
On a new moon lunar day, the moon and the sun stay at the same side of the Earth,
and on a full moon day, the moon stays at one side of the Earth whereas the sun
stays at the other side instead. Consequently, the sun and the moon stay at the
prime vertical circle during these two lunar days, and the tide that strongly got
generated due to their combined attraction, is called the Flood Tide or the Spring
Tide. %
ES

The Solar System and the Earth 71

Since the sun and the moon stay at a right angle of the Earth on the 7" and **

lunar days, the tides originate towards the moon because of its attraction. But

these tides' velocity does not get the severity because of the sun's attraction at the

same time, Such tide is called the Neap Tide or the Ebb Tide. The Prime Tide

originates twice and the Neap Tide also twice a month.

The Interval of the Ebb and Flow

As the Earth rotates upon its own axis from (a)

the West to the East so the moon orbits Va Sameday otras

round the Earth from the West to the East Lars

too. The moon moves round the Earth on

its own orbit once in 27 days, so the moon i

passes its regular route (360/27) or 13 ° in al?

the duration of its one complete rotation

around. As both the sun and the moon . . a

rotate from the West to the East, the Earth Figure 3.12 ; Ebb-tide on the 8” day

passes through the said 13° in further (13X4)=52 minutes. So, when the Major

Tide originates at any certain site at a particular duration, a minor tide also

originates over there after 12 hours and 56 minutes from the originating time of

the major tide, and again a major tide originates over there after 24 hours and 52

minutes from the time of the major one. So, at every concerned site, there

originates an ebb after 6 hours and 13 minutes from the originating time of a flow

in due course.

The Influence of the Tides on the Earth

The tide has an influence directly or indirectly on the Earth or the ground-surface,

the mass-water and the economic activities of human beings. Due to occurrence of

the ebb and flow twice a day, the Taliciinal warka Bacio a

: ieting i F ndividual work: Describe the reasons for

free of filths or dirt, and silts gathering at the river-channel and river-mouths

hinder the flow. The river-pits become deeper due to the current of ebb and flow.

The tide of water is kept confined by cutting canals beside a number of rivers for

the irrigation purpose. Hydro-electricity is generated at lots of rivers in the world

by utilizing the tide such as the Larance Power Plant in France, and a

hydro-electricity center at Bandala Port in India. As salty water inundates the

interior side of the country by the ebb and flow, the river water movement remains
« favorable in the countries characterized by the predominance of cold. Due to the
$ increase of river water, big ships, vessels to the ocean can easily enter the rivers;

72 Bangladesh and Global Studies
again, they can go back to the ocean with the ebb. In Bangladesh while the depth
of river extends at the Chittagong and the Mongla ports during tide, big vessels
can easily enter or leave the port. The vessels, ships, etc. cast their anchors at the
river-channel before entry to the port waiting for tide. The tide from the Bay of
Bengal reaches near Goalanda at the river Padma and at the Meghna near Bhairab
Bazar. Salt is also produced from the sea-water keeping confined through drying
process. The sea-water largely enters the land-site passing through the
river-channel during the spring tide in strong waves, and causes Tidal bore. Tidal
bore holds the height of 3-4 feet to approximate 40 feet. The rivers whose
estuaries are narrow or facing sand damp in their front, originate strong tidal bore.
In Bangladesh, strong tidal bore usually takes place in the new moon's tide during
the rainy season. But its velocity gets increased after its entrance into the land
surface. The Meghna, the Vagirothi, the Amazan, etc. rivers become usually
succumbed with the excessive tidal bore. A havoc wear and tear including
submersion of boats, steamers, ships, etc. inadvertently happen due to such tidal
bore from time to time.
Exercise

Short Questions:
1. Why does acid-storm fall in the Planet Venus?
2. Why does Jupiter require much time to move round the Sun?
3. Why can aircrafts pass through the Tropopause?
4. Why does Ozone level possess excessive temperature?
Descriptive Questions:
1. Why do the day and night get changed at the time of passing through

the International Date Line?
2. Which imaginary line is more important in deciding the location of any place?
Multiple Choice Questions:
1. Which one of the following is the satellite of uranus?

a. Capitus b. Ariel

c. Nereid d. Ganymede
2. Which gases remain mixed in Saturn's atmosphere?

a. Nitrogen and Helium

b. Hydrogen and Helium

c. Carbon dioxide and Helium eo

d. Oxygen and Helium S

The Solar System and the Earth 73
3. Due to the rotation of the Earth through the space elliptical in shape —
i. Different seasons come into view
ii The Gravitation force gets increased or decreased
iii Disparity occurs in the length of day-night
Which one is correct in the following —
ai b. i&ii
c. i& iii d. ii & iii
Read the following passage and answer the question No. 4 and 5.
Orpita regularly sits to study very early in the morning. Once she noticed that a
star is being observed at dawn. She understands that she has noticed a planet.
4. What is the name of the planet noticed by orpita?
a, Venue b. Saturn
c. Mars d. Neptune
5. What dissimilarity of that planet with the Earth can be found?
a. The planet possesses no natural satellite
b. Temperature in the planet remains below the freezing point
c. The planet has belts around it
d. The planet is of bluish color
Creative Questions:
1.
Meridian of Longitude
30° Nok | 105" Wes
8 | s0° Sout
a. What is an Axis?
b. What is the Sunspot?
c. When the local time at the place marked with A in the table is 6:15, what is
the local time at the place marked with B?
d. Will the length of day-night be same at both the places on that date? Give
reasons in favor of your answer.
Forma- 10: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

74 Bangladesh and Global Studies

2. Mysha lives in Sweden (at 66.5° North Axis and 15° East Merdian). She
congratulated her younger sister Maliha staying in Canbera (35° Axis and
150° East Meridian) at local time 6 AM on September 25 on her birthday. In
the course of time, Maliha informed her that she is going to visit Sweden on
the following December 28.

a. What do you understand by a Solar Year?

b. What is a Leap Year? Explain.

c. When did Mysha talk to as per the local time of Canbera?

d. Will the same season exist in both the places when Maliha will go to visit
over there? Give arguments supporting your answer.

3. Synthia went to visit Cox's Bazar accompanying her parents. They became
highly attracted seeing the calm disposition of the sea in the presence of the
full Moon' rays in the evening. Afterwards, they noticed the inflation of
seawater falling to the bank with a severe force. Her father told her not to be
afraid.

a. What is the Vagirothi?
b. What is the Centrifugal Force? Explain.
c. Explain the reasons why such reaction was held in the seawater then.
d. Does the incidence seen by Synthia have any effect on the economic
activities of the human beings?
4,
Tie
Willing 50° South 75° West June 22 7AM
we eee
a. What is an Antipode?
b. Why is the Planet Neptune cold?
c. What will be the time difference in between Mexico's local time and
the Willing Islands mentioned in the table?
d. Give a relative explanation to the length of both the days-nights on the
same date.
x
Rg

Chapter-4
The Configuration of Land and the Climate of Bangladesh
Bangladesh is one of the large deltas of the world. The whole of Bangladesh is
formed with generic hilly region, limited high land and a vast area of plain land
washed by river-water. The land configuration of this country is of low and level.
The climate of Bangladesh is on the whole equable. The monsoon has a great
influence over the climate. As a result, different seasons come in rotation at
different periods of the year. Sometimes we feel hot and sometimes cold because
of the climatic change in different seasons. A heavy rainfall takes place here due
to the climate. For this reason, an excessive rainfall, untimely tide and tidal wave
influence people's lives. The people have to confront with different disasters and
difficulties. In this chapter, we will be acquainted with the configuration of land,
climate and natural disasters of Bangladesh.
Beem A le om) Varn
eG i een -. = Mh go ag — J : Td
After reading this chapter, we will be able to—
e describe geographical location and periphery * explain the influence of climate over
of Bangladesh; the people's lives and their livelihood
® identify the geographical location in the an aime: and prepare a statement
. ‘ in this respect;
a ois as e explain the surmise of earthquake and
. ae . its reasons;
© explain the classification and formationof =, narrate situations of some countries
land of Bangladesh; termed as earthquake-prone regions;
e explain how the formation of land © explain why Bangladesh is called
configuration extends its influence over earthquake prone region;
spreading of population (habitation); ¢ explain preparedness and necessary
e explain the influence of spreading habitation steps of Bangladesh in confronting the
on the use of land in Bangladesh; tisk of earthquake;
© be awakened in preservation of environment; * be alert on encountering difficulties
© compare features of climate of Bangladesh ed ot each ini oon saiameaiia
i } capability for adaptation;
to that of some countries of South Asia (like 3 re cyan eer
% India. M: AN : © grow supportive attitude in nting
Ss a, Myanmar and Nepal); situation after-earthquake.

76 Bangladesh and Global Studies

Section 4.1: The Configuration of Land in Bangladesh
Bangladesh possesses a moist region comprised of alluvium. The whole of
Bangladesh except some generic hilly areas at its northeast and southeast parts and
some limited highlands at the northwest thereof comprises of a vast level ground
washed by river water. Bangladesh is situated at the basin of three largest rivers
the Ganga, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna of South Asia. The configuration of
land of this country is of low and level in nature.
The Geographical Location and Periphery
Bangladesh is situated to the South of Asia Continent, in between 20°.34' North
Axis and 26°38' as well as 88°.01' East Meridian of Longitude and 92°41' East
Longitude, and the Tropic of Cancer passes through (23°.5') over the middle of
Bangladesh. The maximum extent of East-West 440 km, and the maximum extent
from north-northwest to south-southeast 760 km. West Bengal of India, Me-
ghalaya and Assam are situated to the North of Bangladesh; Assam, Tripura,
Mizoram and Myanmar to the East; the Bay of Bengal to the South and West
Bengal of India to the West of Bangladesh. A total area of Bangladesh is 1,47,570
square kilometers or 56,977 square miles.

“| wow 130 aw cx ; = et Cig iat a .

i ora ea Seat

i. RY if) GE ence _§ 4 ed

Heke apa |

a's! 7 ; G ras lass

ws “ = a ANTARCTICA id]

Figure 4.1: Bangladesh in the World's Map

The Classification and the Formation of Land-Configuration
Bangladesh is one of the largest deltas of the World. A number of rivers flow
through it. Among them, the main ones are the Padma, the Jamuna, the Meghna,
the Brahmaputra, the Shitalaksha, and the Karnaphuli. Since the region of
Bangladesh possesses a gradual sloped ground from the North towards the South,
these rivers, tributaries and effluents flow from the North to the South towards
the Bay of Bengal. Almost the whole region except the hilly areas at northeast and 3
southeast side of Bangladesh, is level in shape and washed by _river-alluvium. “

The Configuration of Land and the Climate of Bangladesh 77
The Entire Bangladesh possesses almost a vast area of level land. Bangladesh
possesses a small area of high land. She, on the basis of her land configuration,
may be chiefly divisible into three categories - the hills of Tertiary age, Flight of
steps of Pleistocene age and Flood-level land of the recent age.
The Hills of the Tertiary Age: The Hills of the Tertiary Age possess an
approximate 12% area of the total volume of Bangladesh. These hills were formed
while the Himalayas was formed in Tertiary Age at about two million years ago.
The hills existing in this part, have been divided into two categories, such as The
Hills of the South-Eastern region and The Hills of the North and the
North-Eastern region.
The Hills of the South-Eastern Region: This
region comprises of Rangamati, Bandarban, Sars
Khagrachhori, Cox's Bazar and the Eastern region pork:
of Chittagong district. The hills and mountains MO btees =
existing in this part possess an average height of / Sr Grbee N
610 meters. At present, the name of the highest peak fistetetatets ber me
of Bangladesh is Tajiodong (Bijoy) possessing a canny ake
height of 1,231 meters. It situates within Bandarban | 0.880000 /
District. The second highest peak of Bangladesh is Nees ped
Cucradong possessing a height of 1,230 meters - I
only. Besides, there are two other mountain peaks, ee
Modokmual (1,000 meters) and Pyramid (915 Figure 4.2 : Extent percentage
Meters). The hills and mountains in this region of the Configuration of Land
comprise of sandstone, clay and shell-stone as well.
The Hills of the North and the North-Eastern Region: This part of the
Configuration of Land comprises of the hills of the northeastern region existing
at the northern region of Mymensingh and Netrokona, at the north and
northwestern region of Sylhet, and at the south of Moulvibazar and Habiganj.
These hills possess an average height not exceeding 244 meters. The hills of the
North are locally known as Tila (hillock). Their heights vary 30 to 90 meters. Chi-
knagul, Khasia and Jayantia are the main hills in this part. The Flights of
steps/the plains of the Pleistocene age: This part comprises of about 8% of the
total volume of land of Bangladesh. Approximately, the Pleistocene age is the age
before 25,000 years. It is guessed that such flights of steps were formed due to
originating of floods with the internally melted icy waters of that period. The
flights of steps of the Pleistocene age may be divided into three categories - The
8 Barendra Bhumi (ancient gauda), the Modhupur and Bhawaler Gar (fort)
“and the Lalmai Hill, The Barendra Bhumi comprises of some parts of the

78 Bangladesh and Global Studies
districts of Naogaon, Rajshahi, Bogra, Joypurhat, Rangpur and a particular region
of the district of Dinajpur. This region has an area of 9,320 square kilometers. The
height of such areas is more than the flood level land by 6-12 meters. Soils of
these areas are of grey and red colors. The courtyards of the Modhupur and
Bhawal comprise of some parts of the districts of Mymensingh, Tangail, and
Gazipur. It possesses a volume near about of 4,103 square kilometers. The height
of such areas is more than the level land by 6-30 meters. Soils here possess radish
and grey hues. The Lalmai Hill stretched from Lalmai, 8 km far away to the West
from Comilla city upto Moynamoti. It possesses an area of 34 square kilometers.
The average height of these hills is 21 meters. Such soils also possess radish hues
and are mixed with pebbles, sands and gravels.

The Flood Level Land of the AR *

Recent Age: Bangladesh possesses |.» _f elk s feat

a vast level land comprising about | {ws

river-water. As a number of rivers |... 7b, suantinitin +
flood during the rainy season. Silts | 24828 Be
formed this flood level land. This > Fe oe “sora
of 124,266 square kilometers. The SS -_
recent age may be categorically |g
divided into several divisions such |” |; oe ae od ;Y
as the region that spread over most [)),,°)\ 3°" * —=
parts of Rangpur and Dinajpur situ- : day-Gé RbnlEd SA |
ated in the northwest region of the |, , ,,,. *,
country. In fact, this region is | ———, . y*
ig mv Te econ 4.3 : Land Configuration of Bangladesh
stretches out over the districts of Dhaka, Tangail, Mymensingh, Jamalpur,
Comilla, Noakhali, Sylhet, Pabna and some parts of Rajshahi. This region
comprises of Sylhet, Sunamganj, Moulvibazar, the most part of Habiganj and a
small part of the district of Kishoreganj and Netrokona to the East. In addition, S

The Configuration of Land and the Climate of Bangladesh 79
this level land is streched in the major parts of Chandpur and Brahminbaria and
some parts of Laxmipur and Feni. This region is comprised of the alluvium carried
down from the Himalayas. The Delta plains comprise of Faridpur, Kushtia,
Jessore, Khulna, Barisal, Patuakhali and a part of Dhaka. The coastal level land
comprises of Noakhali and from lower part of Feni river up to Cox's Bazar. The
watercourse level land comprises of Khulna and Patuakhali regions and a part of
the district of Barguna. The soil of these regions of Bangladesh is very fertile and
plays a vital role in producing agricultural produces.
The Formation of Configuration of Land in Bangladesh and Human Habitation
Bangladesh stands 9th considering its population in the world. The population
density of this country is, in comparison to its land, very excessive. Besides, the
growth rate of population here is also very high. The population of Bangladesh
was 12.93 crore according to the census of 2001. Population growth rate was
1.48% and the density of population per square km is 876 heads in that census. At
present, population of Bangladesh is about 14.97 crore, and the growth rate is 1.37
and the density of population per km is 1015 heads (Source: Census: 2011). But,
disparity of population density varies in consideration of diverse regions of this
country due to formation of land-configuration.
Since Bangladesh possesses continual land |Idividual work: Identify the land
configuration, people live almost everywhere Sen gurenon PE ae ree EisaIed
: aid . ag | beside your school.
on its territory. As the provision of livelihood is
toilsome in the Hill tracts and the Sundarban region, density of population is
comparatively very less in these two areas. Provisions of livelihood are difficult
due to lack of good road and railway communications in these areas. These areas
are sparsely populated due to undeveloped communication system, woodland and
its land configuration. Centering round the tea industries in Sylhet, habitation has
been developed here.
The level areas at the basin of rivers are formed of fertile silts. Cultivation of land
is somewhat easy in such areas. That is why dense habitation has been noticed to
grow in that region. Navigability of the rivers, convenience and opportunity of
highways and railways attract the people to a great extent. Moreover, distribution
of mass habitation is regulated due to the influence of climate over there. People
prefer residing at such places having the equable condition to places having
extreme climate. Weather condition in the whole area of Bangladesh is almost
same, but the difference of cold and hot in the weather of northern region is
relatively observed more. The mass people are preferably inclined to dwell in the
% level land due to the useful climate for cultivation and helpful condition for
‘production of corns.

80 Bangladesh and Global Studies
In Bangladesh, the regions where mineral resources have been discovered, a large
number of labourers and employees gather there in quest of livelihood, and made
the places crowded with habitations. Pursuing the mineral resources, agricultural
assets, forest-grown assets and livestock, the mass habitation has been developed.
At such places, a lot of sundry incidental industries along with the leading
industries have been established. Such areas have been turned into densely popu-
lated areas based on the leading industries because of augmentation of industrial
trading. Thick cluster of habitation has been developed in these districts since the
industrial cities have been grown particularly in Tejgaon, Tongi, Narsingdi,
Khulna, Chittagong, etc. Easy communication may be maintained if there exists
enough scope for modem communication in an area either by highway, railway or
by rivers. Consequently, the area becomes numerously inhabited in the course of
time.
In recent days, education and culture have influenced the human society to a great
extent. The region that provides much opportunity to exercise and practice
education and culture, etc. the mass habitation also gets crowded normally.
The Influence of Spreading Habitation on the Use of Land in Bangladesh
Bangladesh is a thickly populated country. It has a larger population than its
volume. Mass habitations also increased due to the growth of population. This
country possesses less cultivable land comparing to its necessity. Rather its
measure is getting lessened due to spreading out of further habitations which
results in causing a fatal pressure over the land. Since our population is gradually
increasing, a further pressure is being made on the agricultural land. The pressure
increases on the land suitable for making habitations too. Already habitation
problems in Bangladesh have been detected
both in villages and cities. On the other hand, a | Individual work: Identify the
cultivable piece of land is being divided into meats OE HPCeaGIng GE ESS

. : abitation over land management
parts among the heirs. Continuously land | o¢ Bangladesh.
becomes separated into pieces, and scientific
cultivation is not possibly made in such divided pieces of land. The cultivation in
scientific cultivation is not possibly made in such divided pieces of land. The
cultivation in scientific system is not possible due to division and distribution of
the land. For rapid population growth, a lot of dwellings are being constructed on
a large extent minimizing the agrarian land. A family that possessed 100 Bighas of
land 30 years ago, now has 10 Bighas or less than that. In 1974, the land per head
was .28 acre, which has been .25 at present. It will be reduced in near future.
People have brought changes in the nature and usage of land for excess of 2
population. For example, people need to make their dwelling places by filling %

The Configuration of Land and the Climate of Bangladesh 81
canals, marshes with earth and cutting down trees at random. If such acts
continue, natural disorder may be inevitable in future.

Section 4.2: The Climate and Natural Disaster of Bangladesh
A climate implies the daily average state of climate's constituent pervading in a
vast region. The influence of climate over human lives is multifarious and
important. Climate somewhat gets varied at different times over the year due to
monsoon. While in the Rainy Season, a heavy rainfall takes place and vast areas
of Bangladesh get overflowed. It causes excessive rainfall and untimely flood.
The change of climate causes different types of natural calamities.
The Climate of Bangladesh and of Some Countries of South Asia
The climate of Bangladesh: The climate of Bangladesh is moderately warm,
humid and equable. The influence of the monsoon in this region is so high that this
climate is known as tropical monsoon climate as a whole.
Three seasons of diverse characteristics are observed in Bangladesh which
harmonize the overall climate of South Asia. Those are the winter, the summer
and the rainy season. Disparity in climate is somehow observed in consideration
of season, but no extreme weather is perceived here like that either of a cold
country or of that of the tropical country. In fine, the dry and comfortable winter
season and the hot and moist summer are the main features of the climate in
Bangladesh.
Features of climate on the three separate seasons prevail all over Bangladesh are
described as follows:
The Winter: The winter extends in Bangladesh from November to February
every year. Since the Sun stays in the south hemisphere, its rays fall obliquely
towards Bangladesh and in that time temperature of heat gets reduced in
abundance. The highest and the lowest temperature during the winter range from
29°c to 11 °c. January is the coldest month in Bangladesh. This month possesses
an average temperature of 17.7°c. During this period, the temperature gradually
reduces from the seashore at the South towards North, and equal-hot-lines become
largely erect, and stay at the east-west side. In January, an average temperature
remains 20°c in Chittagong, 19.4°c in Noakhali, 18.3°c in Dhaka, 17.7°c in Bogra
and 16.6°c in Dinajpur. But, sometimes the temperature in the northern zone gets
more reduced.
Forma- 11: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

82 Bangladesh and Global Studies
The Summer: The months from f° 4x cio pay eee eet ary)
November to February make the Summer [| tas (CELSIUS) 2
Season in Bangladesh. It is the hottest be na iy
season of the year. The maximum [ior { oe A
temperature in this season remains at 38°C ms
and the minimum temperature at 21°C. Lae
April is the hottest month on an average |[,,. rae " INA ae
temperature. The temperature during this rd 4 fe fe
season gradually increases from the z j =
southern part towards the northern part x
due to maritime climate. Such as, an INDIAN SOOT %

‘ . ee f ) 4 %
average temperature during April remains ; \ hy / oD) 2s
27.64°C in Cox's Bazar, 28.66°C in [ * hes eine 0
Narayanganj and 30°C in Rajshahi. As the BAYOFBENGAL S \y le
Sun draws near the tropic of cancer during |, ,, sim Ng
the summer time in the north hemisphere, | —*— oe wy
air pressure gets varied, and the southeast Figure: 4.4: The Average Temperature of
monsoon usually blows over the territory Bangladesh (January)
of Bangladesh. At that time, dry and cold air also blows from the West and
northwestern sides. It is called (Northwester). Besides, the coastal areas of
Bangladesh are frequently hit by the devastating cyclones in April and May due to
downward pressure created in the Bay of Bengal. On 29 April 1991, a cyclone
along with tidal wave hit the coastal areas of Bangladesh, particularly Chittagong
coastal zone, and it resulted in a heavy destruction of assets and loss of lives.
The Rainy Season: The months from June to October cover the rainy season in
Bangladesh. This season starts with the arrival of monsoon at the end of June.
During this period, the Sun emits its rays lengthways towards Bangladesh. That is
why an excessive heat is observed here. But a heavy rainfall takes place during
this period which results in increasing temperature not so high, as it was expected
for the same; rather the weather always remains hot. An average temperature
during this period remains approximate 27 degree celsius. June and September are
the hottest months during the rainy season.
Monsoon Rainfall in Bangladesh
A Four-fifths of the total rainfall takes place during the Rainy Season in
Bangladesh. An average rainfall is minimum 119 cm and maximum 340 cm.
Comparatively more rainfall happens in the eastern part of the country than inthe
western part. For example, the amount of rainfall reaches 114 cm in Pabna, 120 S$

The Configuration of Land and the Climate of Bangladesh 83
cm in Dhaka, 140 cm in Camilla, 180 [* iy By
cm in Srimongal and 190 cm in|, ‘a Bangladesh
: bs eee. £200 MONSOON RAINFALL *

Rangamati. The Monsoon causes P*¥ imnmnnin (une-October) +
heavy rainfall in Bangladesh. During | 10 I Il Centimeters
this season, rainfall takes place not |= SSS ; A
less than 200 cm anywhere in the | "= = (Nii
country either at the hill tracts or on | @253: === Miia
the coastal belt. It pours up to 340 cm | Sl ll wv ;
in mountainous areas of Sylhet, 200 F bon
cm in Patuakhali, 250 cm in _———SSSS ee
Chittagong, 280 cm in Rangamati Sle wHett
and 320 cm in Cox's Bazar. 1s imal" maa
India possesses a vast volume of # AN oo ae lc
land, and diversified climates. It is qo pig
because a difference happens in her BAY OF BEN GA LEE
axis, oceanic distance, stream of air toon Sa yy YANMAR|
etc. India is situated in the monsoon | 1.1 oe nat a 5
region. Consequently, her ; —_
temperature, rainfall, moisture, etc. Figure: 4.5: Monsoon Rainfall in Bangladesh
entirely depend on the flow of monsoon. The climate of India may be divided into
four seasons in consideration of disparity in her temperature and rainfall - the
Winter, the Summer, the Rainy Season, the Autumn and the Late Autumn.
The Winter: As the Sun stays in the south hemisphere during the winter season,
temperature all over India gets reduced to a great extent. The Winter covers from
December to February in India. During this period, the eastern monsoon flows
over India because it flows out from the frigid zone and blows through her
land-surface and consequently causes blowing of dry and cold air over there.
Since the Himalayas stand like a wall spreading over the northern region, dry and
cold air cannot enter into India's atmosphere. Thus India gets protection from
winter effect. During winter, the climate all over India remains dry, cold and
comfortable. Sky remains lucid, fair and cloudless, and air possesses lesser
amount of aqueous vapour.
The Summer: The months from March to May make the summer in India. The
sun stays at the Equator from the south hemisphere and it gradually moves

%6 forward towards the Tropic of cancer. Since the sun begins its summer solstice,

Ss

x)

84 Bangladesh and Global Studies
temperature of India gradually | ™ wor”
increases accordingly. During this AVERAGE TEMPERATURE (CELSIUS)
time, an average temperature of 3 @ULY) A
27°C is observed at the valleys of L,,-  ™ ¢ ia ere
the Ganges. | Temperature A . '
gradually —_ continues to increase | »s =
as much as ahead towards the x ns ; y
northern region. And, in that time, R
temperature in the desert areas at |...
the northwest of India reaches to nash
48°C. Although the maximum + BAY OF BENGAL by
temperature in May reaches to | ““°""** a:
43°C in Kolkata city, but an . Hy jie snomun
average temperature during L,. <<‘: i SEA
summer does not exceed 20°C so | "NI on
far. 70° 25 80° we % e
Figure: 4.6: Winter-Equal-Hot Line of India

The Rainy Season: The Rainy Season in India lasts from the months of June to
September. Asthe Sun stays above the Tropic of Cancer at the end of June (June
21), the northern part of India serves excessively increased hot temperature
(above 32°C), and temperature in the southern part thereof gradually gets reduced
even below 27°C. Excessive hot ® & -_

<i 5 INDIA LEGEND
temperature causes growing of a strong low oN versace Ml sm
pressure belt in Punjab within the northern h nN u nine. sterebte |[[[{] ston-neon
India. The southeastern trade wind from the Lo en.
high-pressure belt of the Capricorn within ee = oe
the south hemisphere does not enter the 7 Ss fi =
equatorial low-pressure-belt, but moves <== FI) yp
directly towards Punjab after being «&¥ all i 7 WE sraaun
attracted by the more powerful low pressure. ~ — Wy 3
of Punjab. As this wind passes through a @ SU LPL \
long way over the sea, it contains much  - | hse yp ft BAL ORBENGAE
aqueous vapour with it. That is why it  ~ Kos LS “7 &:
causes a heavy rainfall at different regions =~ Yee? 7 fen
of India after being resisted at the wy ee
Himalayas and the walls of other high - wet Mes,
mountains. For this reason, an approximate E PE ryt
75% of the total rainfall of India pours Figure: 4.7: Rainfall and Stream of Air
down during this season. during the Rainy Season in India Ss

The Configuration of Land and the Climate of Bangladesh 85
The southwest monsoon being divided into two wings enters India, such as, the
Arab oceanic wing flows over the Arab Sea and the Bay of Bengal wing flows
over the Bay of Bengal.
The Autumn and the late Autumn:
October and November are the two months that make the Autumn and the late
Autumn in India. During this season, the southwestern monsoon changes its
direction and turns into the northeastern monsoon. It causes rainfall along with
strong storm over some parts of India. Rainfall takes place during these seasons at
West Bengal, Tamilnadu, Urishya and Medinapur coastal area. This strong storm,
in the West Bengal, is called Ashwina Jhar. The climate and the amount of rain all
over India gradually reduces at the end of the Dewy season.
The Climate of Myanmar
The Climate of Myanmar is similar to that of the Indian Subcontinent and seems
like tropical monsoon. The climate of this region possesses a clear presence of
three diverse seasons in consideration of differences in her temperature and
rainfall, namely the Winter, the Summer and the Rainy season. The season wise
features of climate of this region are discussed as follows:
The Summer: The Summer in Myanmar comprises of the months from March to
May. During this season, most part of the country gets very hot and an average
temperature reaches almost to 29°C. The Sun stays in the north hemisphere during
this season and a great low pressure is formed in the middle of Asia. Monsoon
begins to flow over there. During this season, temperature remains 19°C in
Bhamo, 32°C in Mandalaya and 27°C in Yangoon as well.
The Rainy Season: The Winter in Myanmar comprises of the months from May
to October. A heavy rainfall takes place in this region due to the southwest
monsoon, and at the middle of May, normal rainfall takes place in Yangoon, and
at the end of that month, it prevails all over the country and continues to do so
until October. A great difference in the amount of such rainfall is observed in
different regions of Myanmar. A heavy rainfall persists up to 200 cm on the
coastal belt of Arakan and Tenaserim for the monsoon in the southwestern part,
whereas only 80 cm rainfall takes place in the northern hilly regions.
The Winter: As the sun stays in the south hemisphere during this time, a great
high pressure is formed in the middle of Asia in the north hemisphere. A low
pressure is formed from here in the relatively more hot areas in comparison to that
wo in the sea at the southeast side that causes the blowing of the northeast trade wind
3 towards the southwest side instead. Although it is expected that Myanmar would

86 Bangladesh and Global Studies
possess excessive cold due to the influence of cold stream of air in the North, but
cold cannot be so severe due to the existence of hilly region in the North. This
stream of air prolongs to blow till the month of March. During this time, snowfall
pours over the high hilly region in the North of Myanmar, and its temperature
reaches almost at the freezing point.

The Climate of Nepal

in ee fate oh i nee ee Group work: Make a list showing
and rain in climate, two si asons ar features of the climate existing in
clearly perceived over there. Heavy rainfall | Bangladesh, India, Myanmar and
persists in this region during the months from | Nepal.

June to September, and this period is called

at Katmandu remains 24.4 °C. On the other hand, a very dry condition and lack of
rains persist over there from the months of November till January in Nepal. The
temperature is also reduced during this season to a great extent, so, it is
considerably termed as the winter. The temperature at Katmandu remains
approximately 10°C in January. The condition of temperature of any other parts of
Nepal does not increase at the high hilly regions, and much difference of
temperature in between cold and hot is observed over there. The yearly average
rainfall in Nepal is 145 cm, most of which takes place within the months of June
to September.

The Influence of Climate upon the People's Life and Livelihoods in Bangladesh
The socio-economic condition of the people of Bangladesh depends largely on
nature and natural resources due to its geographical position and the climate as
well. A lot of changes take place in people's life and livelihoods here due to the
change of climate. Depending on its climate, frequent natural calamities and
disasters, long-lasting floods, disintegration of rivers cause changes in the living
and livelihoods of the people. A heavy rainfall takes place in Bangladesh due to
the influence of the southwest monsoon during the rainy season. Consequently,
diverse crops and fruits grow here. A little rainfall takes place in this country
during the winter season due to the influence of the northeast monsoon.
Consequently, diverse rabi crops like paddy, wheat, tobacco and different sorts of
pulses, oilseeds, round potatoes, onions, garlic, coriander, etc. and various
vegetables, can be produced here, flood is caused by this wind. Silts carried by
flood water overflowed to the agricultural land that enhance fertility of
agricultural sites, and cause to grow better crops as well.

An average temperature across the country has increased due to the change of ,
climate. A heavy rainfall is taking place during the rainy season and sometimes $

The Configuration of Land and the Climate of Bangladesh 87
the advancing of the rainy season is delaying. The heavy rainfall within a short
time, landslip, flood and hill-slide due to heavy rainfall are the common
phenomena here. Sea level has heightened. The sea level of the Hiron point, Char
Changa and Cox's Bazar has also been increasing by 4 mm to 6 mm every year
(NAPA- 2005).
The rivers flowing through this coun rotect ;
human lives and their livelihoods as well Homan ei Ua Ne ie
life-styles are experiencing change because of the arenes came a
disappearance of the rivers. Besides, about 4,00000 i a
people have become homeless because of river erosion, and have taken shelters in
cities for their livelihoods. A number of ordinary farmers are getting employed in
the cities due to obstruction in agricultural production, which consequently causes
disintegration of family, insecurity of children, aged persons and women as well.
Living and livelihoods have a close relation to the environment they exist in. A
number of creatures of the animal kingdom, being failed to cope up with the
change of climate and with environment has been extinct, animal variegation has
been vanished and food production has been reduced in the course of time.
Accordingly, the hunger and poverty have increased. The Fishermen residing at
the coastal belt are changing their profession and a number of Fishermen are
moving towards the cities for their livelihood in quest of employment over there.
Livelihoods of the coastal area people, by any means, depend on the natural
resources. People residing at this region, the poor people, the hardcore poor,
middle class people and the rich people pass their lives depending on natural
resources like ponds, canals, arable land, gardens, trees and plants, fish, etc. The
foundation of their living existence is getting lost due to different kinds of
disasters because of the change of climate. Various natural calamities such as
water lodging, salted water, flood, deluge, storm, Sidr, Ayla, cyclone, etc. have
influenced human lives and their livelihoods immensely.
The Concept of Earthquake
Earthquake is one of the natural disasters. This tendency of earth is observed
almost in a number of countries and regions of the world. Earthquake is held liable
for lots of devastation in human civilization. It is supposed that approximate 15
million people died caused by earthquake over the last 4000 years. The
earth-surface is being transformed through different natural processes. The
scientists resolve that heat from the radioactive substances is dispersed beneath
the earth's crust. This heat being amassed causes convectional stream within

oo

S the Earth, and there generates a strong force which causes agitation and

88 Bangladesh and Global Studies
metamorphosis at different parts of the crust. Such metamorphosis within the
crust by the internal force takes place either in sudden course or in slow course.
Earthquakes and volcanoes are major force among all other forces causing
metamorphosis in sudden process.
The Earthquake
Sometimes some parts of the earth-surface get an unexpectedly shake for some
reason. This quake or shake turns to severe state from its very tender state which
normally lasts for few seconds. Such sudden and momentary vibration of the
surface of earth is called ‘earthquake’. The region within the interior side of the
earth where an earthquake is formed is called the Focus of earthquake. The name
of the outer surface of earth at just above the focus is called Epicenter. The
velocity of the quake from the Epicenter gradually is reduced around.
The Reasons for Earthquake: While searching the possible reasons for
earthquake, the scientists noticed that some regions of the world are earthquake
prone. In this zone, the new mountain ranges are situated. The cross section of
the Earth shows that the crust is comprised of eight vary raps
large pieces and six regional pieces. These are known as the ow.
“Tectonic Plates’. Of the many reasons earthquakes heppen, / DIRK J\
the displacement or dislocations of these plates are the most ENN VF
significants reasons. In addition, the other reason for ON

*
earthquakes are as follows - earthquake takes place when Focus
any sudden shakes stimulate the earth all along the Fok jabs bes
detachment or crack of the foundation rock. Besides, earthquake also takes place
whilesaliva of a volcano comes out of the interior side of the earth. When the
earth's crust gets compressed by dispersing heat,
crack or plait is created in order to mini] Td rr |
consistency of load at the rock-level down the |_800s causing an carters
earth, and a quake of earth is also observed. When rock is collapsed or displaced
at any place of the earth's crust due to earth-agitation, a vibration in earth is
observed. Besides, when either of the two plaits staying abreast enters the bottom
all along the others' periphery or fluctuates horizontally, a quake in earth is
observed within such fractious environment.
The Consequences of Earthquake
A lot of changes and damages take place in the world due to earthquake. A direct
or indirect consequence of earthquake is discussed below:
An innumerable cracks and dislocations are created in the earth's crust because of S

The Configuration of Land and the Climate of Bangladesh 89
earthquake. Sometimes a vast area of land at | Group work: Make a list showing
the bottom of the sea rises for the earthquake. | the impact of the earthquake.

Again, sometimes a large area of land at the surface submerges at the bottom of
the sea. Sometimes, a river-motion is changed or blocked. Big ice-pieces
suddenly fall down from the hillsides because of the arthquake, and causes
heavy damages of the hills. The sea level gets down from the shore for the shake
of the quake, and then the seawater falls out towards the shore in the form of
waves arising at a height of 15-20 meters with horrible roar. Such tidal waves are
called Tsunami. On 26 December 2004, with the blows of Tsunami created due to
earthquake, innumerable lives and assets were lost in different countries such as
in Indonesia, Malaysia, Sri Lanka, Thailand and India. Sometimes, the highlands
get submerged into the sea-water. And sometimes, a place at the bottom of the sea
gets up and forms islands in the sea. Because of the influence of earthquake, a
horizontal side-pressure on the surface of the earth persists. Consequently, it gets
contracted and makes fold. Landslip gets sloped from hilly region for earthquake,
and resists the river-motion which causes the eformation of a lake. Because of
earthquake, famine and devastating epidemic continue in the damaged area for
which a heavy loss of lives takes place. The telephone lines, electricity, etc. get
disconnected, and make the communication system disrupted. The road commu-
nication is damaged too. If a strong earthquake takes place at the bottom of the
sea, big dams, culvert and bridges existing on the surface are damaged. Some-
times, it causes Tsunami .

The Steps to Minimize the Losses of Earthquake: A correct forecast on any
natural calamity may help minimize the measure of destruction. Particularly,
correct forecast on the origin of disasters, duration of staying, force limit and the
areas that may be victim by the same is very important. The nature of earthquake
is different from that of the other disasters. Moreover, it takes place suddenly,
continues momentarily, and occurs within the interior of the earth. That is why
there is no scope to observe it directly. If some steps are taken, it may help guess
about an earthquake. The scientists have guessed that the regions where no
earthquake has taken place during the last 100 years but are normally identified as
earthquake prone zone, the possibility of earthquake is greater in that zone.
Among this region, the most mentionable are South California, Middle Japan,
Middle Chile, Taiwan and the west coastal areas of Sumatra, etc. A high-degree
earthquake measured in the Richter scale may take place in these regions within
several decades to come. It is possible to minimize the losses if the following steps
are taken in the earthquake prone regions.

Forma- 12: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

90 Bangladesh and Global Studies
While constructing any infrastructure anywhere, the soil should be tested by
experts, and the foundation of the structure should be made firm and strong. A safe
distance should be maintained in between two constructions that must have
several doors instead of one, and any multi-stored building should possess
emergency exits where necessary. Lines of electricity, gas, etc. should be
maintained in a faultless state. The furniture of the house should preferably be
made of wood as much as possible. There should be a helmet for each of the
family members in a residence. At the time of earthquake, switches of electricity
and gas line should be kept off, and people should take shelter in an open space.
World Earthquake Prone Region rT z I TA]
The virulence of earthquake is not the vi me e

same all over the world. The |}, #% en rN — —- y
earthquake prone zone may chieflybe | 7% \\%9°, MM
divided into three regions: 4,4, NEES % A tC /
The Regions Extending over the| %, Wet SP 7 Jy
Pacific Ocean: Earthquakes are mostly we $< wner __A Gy
observed alongside the extemal i " A
periphery of the Pacific Ocean. Within |} J fa ~
this region, Japan, Philippines, Chile, | ggg ssove enone snes H 0 a0 °
Allician islands, Alaska are known as | [22] sow moneaea % xm
the most earthquakes prone regions. —_ Figure 4.9: World Earthquake Prone Region
The Regions Extending over the Mediterranean-Himalayas: This region
comprises of the part extending over the Aleppo Mountain through the north bank
of the Mediterranean and through Kocacious, Iran, the Himalayas, the Indo-
China and the West-Indian islands up to New Zealand. The Regions extending
over the Ridges of the Middle Atlantic-Mediterranean: The middle Atlantic
ridge along with the North-South and the Indian Oceanic ridge being conjoined
have run into the part of the Mediterranean to the Red Sea in Africa. Besides these
three main belts, the virulence of earthquake is also observed at some parts inside
the surface of earth and at the pits of the oceans.

Bangladesh

The Reasons for Earthquake in Bangladesh

Bangladesh is situated, for its geographic location, at the periphery of the Indian
and European plaits. For this reason, it has been in an earthquakes prone region.
Earth's agitating force is active in Bangladesh for her earth's category and the
internal structure. That is why, the country remains in an active earthquake zone $

The Configuration of Land and the Climate of Bangladesh 91
For different human and natural reasons, some parts of the country are getting
compressed downward and some parts are getting a lift. For such position of earth,
the possibility of earthquake may increase gradually. When cracks are created in
hilly regions due to earthquake, and when such cracks cause to increase further
cracks, then an earthquake occurs. An earthquake is likely to happen because of
the category of earth. Different reasons created by human beings including cutting
down of hills have increased the possibility of earthquake in Bangladesh.
The experts opine that Bangladesh is > - 7
situated at an active earthquake prone O Q o,
zone. An earthquake takes place in ao, &° o*"'9 wat O,2
Bangladesh because of the collisions |’ aN & ail Yo. a?
happened in tectonic __plaits. ee ( 2
Bangladesh stands in between the | yy5,, =), “nous 2, 20 O.
earthquakes prone Indian plait and the eee ran Orie °Q
Myanmar sub-plait. The geologists Sara RRO
say that liniamote extends over the SSS ia e
region starting from Assam up to |q SS oo
. Lo an SOS INDIA
Pagla of Dhaka. This liniamote is dl PF 0° ap 0
linked with the Assam Douki x | =e oe
Danger-fault at the East-West. Sylhet Ly Vass f°
of Bangladesh is situated at this] |, i x _—— 2
Danger fault-line. A French . MN it oe I °
Engineering Consortium drew a map |,, A ‘i it i ) i) paar ’
mixed with earthquake belts of | d HO q {jane ae, °
Bangladesh in 1989. These belts have o “pay OF BENGAL. y |
been shown therein. It termed the first | 12 1" ~ , eat = -
belt as 'Terribly Disturbing’ the second | =.5 —= vn 7
one as ‘Dangerous' and the third one Bede eer FI sowed / 0
as ‘Venial'. These belts are called | Lbeweneuermenno( )ssm<7 a
‘Seismic Risk — Zone’. Bandarban, Figure 4.10: Earthquakes Prone Region of
Chittagong, Sylhet, Mymensingh and Bangladesh
Rangpur are situated in the first belt; and Dhaka, Tangail, Bogra, Dinajpur,
Camilla and Rangamati in the second belt; and all other regions in the third one as
well.
The Preparations and Necessary Steps of Bangladesh to Confront Risk of
Earthquake
co No minimum preparation exists in Bangladesh to confront topsy-turvy of any
S severe earthquake. For its poor rescuing measures and capability, a medium scale

92 Bangladesh and Global Studies
earthquake may cause a catastrophe in Dhaka. Millions of people may be the prey
of death in a helpless situation. The risk of earthquake is getting worse as the
consequence well. of population density, unplanned cities, lots of multi-stored
buildings, lack of open spaces, narrow lanes, poor rescuing measures and
equipments. If all the concerned people with earthquake can consciously take
necessary steps, it may be possible to restrain the earthquake and to minimize its
losses to a great extent. If we take a careful look, we will notice that an earthquake
takes place in our country for 30-35 seconds, more loss of lives will occur because
of the delay and failure in rescue operation than the loss of lives may be caused by
the same. For this reason, it is necessary for us to have proper idea on preparation
in confronting the earthquake. An earthquake may cause a heavy loss within short
time, and lasts for short while. It suddenly occurs within the interior side of earth.
Consequently, there exists no scope to directly observe the earthquake anyhow.
Notwithstanding, the geologists Can refer to some advanced steps to confront the
earthquake which may largely help minimize the loss.

The Preparation of Bangladesh in Confronting Risk of Earthquake

The preparations that should be taken for an earthquake are as follows:

Those who will construct new buildings should comply with the National
Building Code while compiling structure and designs for the same accordingly,
and they should construct their buildings with the quality construction materials
under the supervision of expert engineers as well.

While constructing walls with bricks, no building should be built above 4-storey
height; if a building is above two stored-heights, an erect steel rod should be put
in between the bricks at each comer, and an erected steel rod should be put in
between each windows and door too. It is not good to make windows or doors at
comer-side any way. If such alertness is taken into consideration, brick-built
buildings' resistance capacity increases. Although cracks may take place on the
wall during earthquake, they will not collapse so easily. But, it will cost more 1 %
to 2% than the average construction cost.

Tin-shed houses in the village have hardly in a risk because of the earthquake. But
the house made of earth have no resistance power. In order to increase the
resistance force, bracing of wood or bamboos may be diagonally used to serve the
purpose.

If a building does not possess so resistance force, the building may further be
made strong even after its construction work. In respect of concrete building, .
volume and shape of poor sites can be increased with concrete moldings by using S

The Configuration of Land and the Climate of Bangladesh 93
extra amount of rods. Moreover, coating on walls by using Ferro cement may
increase the resistance force. The ground floor should not be kept vacant.
Resistance force of Semi-brick-built rooms may be increased by fastening the
same around in the form of dragging.
The Do’s and Don’ts of a Person in the Preparation of an Earthquake
As a part of the preparation of earthquake, one aa 7 :
should keep a battery-run radio .and a torch light Bue enal Wore abs 2
. aes of the responsibilities of a
in the house. of the responsibilities of a He person during the earthquake.
should keep a first-aid box ready to administer,
He should know where the main switches of gas, water and electricity lines of the
house remain and how to tum them off. He should identify the most protected site
within the house. He should keep the contact numbers of hospitals, Fire Brigade,
etc. He should also provide the concept of earthquake to the children at schools,
and instruct them on the do's and don'ts at the time of earthquake. Finally, he
should stay away from the brick-built buildings.
The dos and don’ts of mass people during earthquake
Each and every of the common people keep oneself easy and tranquil at the time
of earthquake. He should run away from the house if it is one -stored construction.
He should not be greedy confining at the home for something. He should not enter
the house if he stays outside at the time of earthquake. If earthquake takes place
during night and if he stays within any multi-storied building, he should stay
under the table or the cot and should stay away from glass-windows. If it is
necessary, he should take shelter at the comer of the room or at the bottom of the
column.
If anybody stays outside the house at the time of earthquake, he should stay away
from any large trees, lines of electricity, water, gas, etc. He should not try to jump
from any high-rise building, windows or roofs. If he is driving on the road, he
should not continue driving but should keep the engine stopped. Landslide is most
likely to take place at hills, mountains, high ditch or sloping land, one should take
shelter at safe places from such risky sites.
The Responsibility of a Conscious Individual after Earthquake
While earthquake is over, a conscious people should examine his own injury as
well as the injuries of others and provide first aid where necessary. He should
check the lines and connections of water, gas, electricity, etc. He should open the
windows and the doors of the house. He should keep the radio on in order to hear
announcement centrally broadcast regarding confrontation of the disaster. One
se should not walk bare footed. He should be aware of plundering and work
§ according to the advice of the experienced individuals.

94 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Exercise
Short Questions:
1. Where is the location of Bangladesh by degrees at Axis and at Meridian
of Longitudes?
2. Why are the hill tracks in the Northern regions of Bangladesh called hillocks?
3. What does Ashwina Jhor mean?
4. What is an Epicenter?
5. What is 'Seismic Risk Zone'?
Descriptive Questions:
1. Explain why a heavy rainfall takes place at different regions of India
during the period starting from June to September.
2. Explain the roles played by the internal earth's force and its plaits for
causing earthquake.
Multiple Choice Questions:
1. In which district does the highest mountain peak of Bangladesh stand?
a. Chittagong b. Khagrachhori
c. Bandarban d. Rangamati
2. Due to the change of climate-
i. change has been made in people's occupations
ii. sea-surface height is getting up
iii. different species of animals are being endangered
Which one of the following is correct
a i&ii b. 1& iii
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
Read the following passage and answer the question No. 3 & 4:
Ristana once in an afternoon in December, along with her parents, went to visit
a fair. Suddenly, it began to rain and they immediately took shelter under a tree
but after a scant rainfall, clouds went off.
3. What type of wind did influence the rainfall witnessed by Ristana?
a. North-East Monsoon
b. North-West cool air
c. North-West Monsoon
d. North-West dry air. Ss
8

The Configuration of Land and the Climate of Bangladesh 95
4. Which crop can be produced with such rainfall?
a. Maize b. Wheat
c. Jute d. Cotton
Creative Questions:
1.
orth Ay
a
1)
4 § SSN.
is 5)
an ( Bay of Bengal &
India ft
yo .
Figure: The part of the Map of Bangladesh Figure: The part of the Map of Bangladesh

a. Which line has passed through the middle of the territory of Bangladesh?

b. Why do rivers of Bangladesh flow towards the Bay of Bengal?

c. Explain the formation of land-configuration of the region marked with ‘A’
in the figure.

d. What will be observed more in the region marked with 'B' & 'C' in the
figure? Give arguments in support of your answer.

2. Sabbir was watching a disaster report on the television. The report was
showing a sudden quaking of a city in Philippines that resulted in breaking
down a considerable number of habitations and disconnection of electricity
lines from several locations. Sabbir, after watching this terrible condition of
that disaster felt the necessity for taking preparatory steps in order to resist
such awful condition.

a. What is Chiknagul?
b. Explain the concept on Kalboishakhi.
c. Explain the causes of disaster taking place in the above report watched
by Sabbir.
d. What type of preparatory measures did Sabbir feel necessary to take in
respect of confronting the risk of such disaster? Explain in the light of the
= perused subject-matter.
Ss
aq

Chapter-5
The Rivers of Bangladesh and the Natural Resources

Bangladesh is a land of rivers. Rivers make the lives active in Bangladesh.
Numerous rivers flow down the North of the Himalayas and the hilly regions of
India through Bangladesh. These rivers move crisscrossing the country. Many of
the rivers are so long and wide. Some are narrow. Many rivers are now
non-existent and wiped off the map, and some of the rivers are on the verge of
death. At present, Bangladesh has a total of 700 rivers and rivulets. The total
length of these rivers is 22,155 km. These rivers are our main resources. Besides,
we have some land, soil, forest, agriculture and mineral resources including some
other natural resources. The existence of Bangladesh largely depends on the
accumulation, use expansion and preservation of these resources. In this chapter,
we will learn about our rivers and the natural resources of our country and will try
to preserve this wealth.

After reading the chapter, we will be able to —

e describe the main rivers of Bangladesh e realise the necessity of preserving the
such as the Padma, the Brahmaputra, the Tivers to overcome water-crisis;
Jamuna, the Meghna, the Kornaphuli, the : :
Tinta, the Fone, tha Sang, Cit Wat end. © explain the concept of natural resources;
the Matamohuri, and to describe the CS eae the eine geod
sources, the routes of flowing and realise , 2 re, >
the importance of peedar ing them; and solar) of Bangladesh with several

e explain the inter-dependence of rivers comiries of South Asi. (India,
and dwellings; Myanmar and Nepal);

e analyse the cause of water-crisis ina * explain the a of water resource
certain part of Bangladesh for the impact sical
of the rivers of concerned countries; © explain the a rel eae! resource

e analyse the problems created by the RS nee Se oe Soe
water-crisis in some parts of Bangladesh of Bangladesh;
and explain the opinion to resolve the e describe the alignment of forestry of
issues; Bangladesh;

e analyse the importance of rivers for e analyse the significance of these
communication, hydroelectricity and Tesources in the economy of Bangladesh;
trade; © be aware of preserving the natural x

resources. &

The Rivers of Bangladesh and the Natural Resources 97
Section 5.1 : The Rivers and the Water Resources of Bangladesh
The main rivers are the Padma, the Brahmaputra, the Jamuna, the Meghna, the
Kamaphuli, the Tista, the Posur the Sangu etc. Most of the known rivers of
Bangladesh originated from the Himalayas, Tibbet, Borak of Assam and the hills
of Lusai. All these rivers flow into the Bay of Bengal in the end.
The Padma: The river 'Padma' in India and in the North Bengal of India, it is
familiar with the people as the Ganges, and in Bangladesh, it is known as the
Padma. It has its source in the Gangotri Glacier of the middle of the Himalayas.
Flowing through several states of North India, the Ganges entered the district
ofRajshahi of Bangladesh. The main flow of Brahmaputra has connected with the
river Jamuna near Goalanda. It has united with the Meghna at Chandpur assuming
the name Padma which has fallen into the Bay of Bengal flowing through Barisal
and Noakhali. This is one of the largest rivers of Bangladesh, and the total area
adjacent to the Ganges-Padma is 34,188 square kilometer. Of the numerous
branches ofrivers flowing from the East to the West, the mentionable are the
Bhagirathi, the Hugli, the Mathabhanga, the Isamoti, the Bhoirab, the Kumar, the
Kapataksah, the Naboganga, the Chitra, the Mothumati, the Arial Kha, etc.
The Brahmaputra and the Jamuna: The Brahmaputra originated at the Manos
Sarobor (large lake) of Tibbet. It has entered the district of Kurigram of
Bangladesh flowing through Assam. Before 1787, the main stream of river
Brahmaputra flows through Mymensmgh from * cosa
the northwest to the southeast comer. But in & KL _
1787, the bed of the river rose up due to the Sy aoe +
earthquake, and the bed lost the containing sour en ei
capacity of water. So a new stream was created Ms
and it was named as the Jamuna. It was known CNY WK 4
as the Jamuna up to Goalanda to the South. | bey to ig sth
Being united with the Ganges, it assumed the ["” RANE: \
name Padma. The branches of the Jamuna are Ni SV ig (Ce
the Dholeshiri, and the Buriganga, the Dhorola, f] LEN. \ Y ‘ A "
the Tista, the Karatoa, and the Atrai. Up to the |, js Vays "Ve
confluence of river Ganges, the length of the 2 J iy di War eat
Brahmaputra is 2897 km and the length of the Rai Sire nar ov aanoan NA
shore is 5,80, 160 square km of which 44,030 | Keown
square km is situated in Bangladesh. + £ \
Figure 5.1: The rivers of Bangladesh
The Meghna: The Meghna has been created at the confluence of the river Surma
and Kushiara in the district of Sylhet. Both the rivers originated from the river
Forma- 13: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

98 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Borak of Asham in Naga-Monipur zone, and entered Sylhet of Bangladesh. It was
named the Meghna, and moved towards the southwest comer after assuming the
name Kalni near Azmiriganj of Sunamganj. Passing through Bhairab Bazar, it is
united with the old Brahmaputra. The confluence of the Buriganga, the
Dholeshori and the Shitalaksha has connected with the Meghna, and meeting with
the Padma near Chandpur, the river has created an estuary. In the end, it falls into
the Bay of Bengal. The river Monu, Titas, Gomoti, Bowlai are the branches of the
Meghna. The alluvium soil and flood during the monsoon make the land of Ban-
gladesh more fertile.

The Karnaphuli: The main river of the southeast region of Bangladesh is the
Kamaphuli. Its inception point is the mountain of Lusai. The river stretching the
length of 320 Km falls into the Bay of Bengal flowing near the Chittagong city.
The main branches of the Kamaphuli are river Kaptai, Halda, Kasalot, and
Rangkhiang. Chittagong, the main sea port of Bangladesh, is situated on the bank
of the river Kamaphuli. This river is important for the hydroelectric power station
and the Chittagong port.

The Tista: It originated in the hilly area of Sikkim, and fl.owing through
Jolpaiguri and Dargiling of India, the Tista entered Bangladesh through the Dimla
area. It changed its directon because of the flood in 1787 and started fl.owing
through a dried up stream of the Brahmaputra. Before changing the direction, it
was connected with the river Ganges, but now it is flowing together with the
Brahmaputra. At present, the length of the river is 177 km and the wide ranges
from 300-550 meters.

The role of the Tista in draining away water in the northern region of Bangladesh
is vital. The Tista barrage project had been constructed in 1997-98. It plays an
important role in preserving and discharging water, in irrigation and in protecting
flood.

The Posur: The Bhairab or Rupsha, flowing by the south of Khulna, advanced
further and by the right side of the landmasses of Trikona and Dubla and through
the southern Sundarban of the Mongla port has fallen into the Bay of bengal. The
length of the river is 142 km, and the width

ranges from 460 meters to 2.4 km. This is so | Individual work: Identify the
deep that the ships can either enter or leave the | impacts of the rivers on rural
Mongla sea port easily throughout the year. | CConomy. .

The Posur plays an important role as a | dividual work: Identify the
river-route of Khulna to Barisal and vice versa. | ©¥S¢s of low tide of the rivers.
The Sangu, Feni, Naf, Matamuhuri : Having originated from the Arakan hills
and entered through Thanchi of Bandarban district, it was named 'Sangu'. It has
fallen into the Bay of Bengal. It is 294 km of length. On the other hand, the river §

The Rivers of Bangladesh and the Natural Resources 99
Feni had its origin in the hilly area of Tripura, and entered the district of Feni. The
river Feni has fallen into the Bay of Bengal flowing by the north of Sandeep. The
river Naf is situated at the border area of Bangladesh and Myanmar. Its estuary is
very wide. It has fallen into the Bay of Bengal. Its length is 56 km. On the other
hand, the river Matamuhuri has its source in the Maiver hills of Lama. This river
has fallen into the Bay of Bengal by the western side of the district of Chokoria.
Its length is about 120 km.
The influence of these rivers on the economy of Bangladesh knows no bounds.
Those are the sources of irrigation, industrial use and the generation of
hydroelectricity. Not only that, the rivers are the sources of fish and proteins.
Those are the main routes of transportation and communication too. These rivers
carry the silt to increase the fertility of the land. The importance of these rivers is
immense in our economic development since the agriculture, industry, trade and
business, transportation, etc. largely depend on the river. The flow of our rivers
has been feeble, water is being polluted and the navigability is lost for creating
obstruction against the flow, throwing industrial waste, maritime waste, untreated
sewage, etc. We all should be aware to protect these rivers from being destroyed.
The Reciprocal Relation between the River and Dwelling
Human beings started living on the riverbanks since the ancient time because
rivers would ensure their necessary water. On the other hand, water for irrigating
cultivable land was also possible to get from the rivers. Rivers are closely related
with catching fish for survival. Their roles as the main sources of food and
earnings are also significant. Rivers have a great contribution to the building of
human civilization. Subsequently, human beings used rivers for the development
of life and livelihood. They would establish their dwellings near the rivers and
search for livelihood too. As a result, the relation between rivers and the human
being has been reciprocal. At present, this relation has been multifarious and
close.
Human beings have set up the villages and towns as the permanent dwellings
through catching fish, carrying goods, and developing trade and commerce, etc.
depending on the rivers. The rivers have become water resources. The population
growth was utmost on the riverbanks. So, most of the towns and cities are built-up
on the banks of the rivers such as Dhaka is built on the bank of the river
Buriganga, Chittagong on the bank of the river Kamaphuli, Narayangonj on the
bank of the river Shitalakksah, Sylhet on the bank of the river Surma, and Comilla

sx on the bank of the river Gomoti.

S

x)

100 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Now the use of rivers in establishing industries, factories, etc. is utmost. Rivers
are given priority for developing a modem irrigation system to cultivate land by
the modem technology. It is planned to bring the vast area of Kustia, Jessore and
Khulna under the irrigation system from the project of the Ganges-Kapotaksha
project. The people of that area will be benefited in agricultural production. From
the multifarious project planning of the Kamaphuli, ships are being moved
through the waterway of 644 km, cultivation is being possible in 10 lakh acres of
land, and hydro-electricity is being generated building a dam at Kaptai. Besides,
it has been made possible to keep Chittagong free from the devastating flood. The
people of Rangpur, Bogra and Dinajpur are getting benefit from the Tista barrage
project. On the other hand, taking water from the river Meghna it is been possible
to develop the cultivation in Comilla, Noakhali and Chittagong. Various
agricultural projects have been taken on the use of river water. As a result, the
agro-economy of the country is being developed day by day, employment of
human being and food security are being ensured. In respect of communication
with the people of the southern zone of the country through the waterway, the
number of water vessels are being increased day by day. River route is picked for
the transportation of goods. It is also chosen to give India the transit. As a result,
Bangladesh gets the opportunity of earning a huge amount of foreign currency.
The role of rivers is being increased day by day to develop the economic condition
of the people of Bangladesh, to protect their health, to ensure fresh air and the
supply of water in the cities. In the northern zone of the country, as the rivers are
being dried up, crops fail, and the human life is facing the threat of destruction.
That is why, dredging is needed to keep the navigability of the rivers immediately.
All the rivers of the country should be protected to develop the economy, and the
tural as well as the urban life. For this reason, the ecologists are carrying on
awareness programme like 'save the rivers.'

The Reasons for Water Crisis, its Impact and Steps for Solution

The Reasons for Water Crisis

in the dry season. The Tista, the Padma, and the Kapotakkho have been dried up.
The north-west zone of the country faces acute water crisis for constructing dam
at Farakka. All the rivers including the Padma rivers including the Padma face
negative consequences. The water crisis causes an ecological imbalance
especially in the dry season.

The flow of water in the main stream of the
rivers is being low for pumping out a huge | the problems created by the
quantity of water for irrigation and other | low tide of the rivers. %
essential works. So, the rivers have lost their g

The Rivers of Bangladesh and the Natural Resources 101
usual course and complexion. Many rivers are being dried up for constructing
bridges, culverts, and dams disregarding the rules and regulations.
The rivers are gradually losing their navigability in the dry and winter season for
low tide, and it has an adverse effect on the society, economy and human life.
Trade, fishing, communication are almost being closed. Those who dwell on the
banks of the rivers are compelled to leave in search of different livelihood. The
tide of the rivers becomes low in the dry season, but high in the rainy season. As
a result, the dwelling places of the people are washed away because of tremendous
pressure of the water, and people become homeless and destitute. If the rivers are
dried up, there will be crisis of fish, and malnutrition may occur for protein
deficiency.
If the rivers lose their flow, the trade and profession that have been created a long
ago may be destroyed, and the people who earn a living from the trade may be
poor and destitute. The greenery on the bank of the rivers may be pale without
water. So the existence of human beings and animals may be endangered. So, the
rivers should be dredged regularly to keep the usual flow of the rivers, and
unnecessary barrages, bridges, and culverts should not be built over them.
The Role of the Waterway in Communication, Hydro-electricity and Trade
The importance of the waterway in the fields of communication, hydro-
electricity generation and trade is mentioned below:
The Communication: The Rivers play a significant role in communication
systems in the land of rivers. The Padma, the Kamaphuli, the Jamuna, the
Kushiara, the Matamuhuri, the Atrai, the Modhumati, the Gorai, etc. rivers play an
important role in providing service of carrying the passengers. All consider the
waterway as the busiest route. The length of the waterway of this country is about
9833 km of which 3,865 km remains busy with the movements of marine vessels.
Through the waterways of this country, millions of people travel by boats,
launches, steamers, ships, etc every year.
In this country, several government and non-government organizations have taken
the responsibility of running these transport system. 'Inland Water Transport
Authority’ is an important agency of Bangladesh. In 1958, the Inland Water
Transport Authority’ was formed. Its abbreviated form is IWT A. This agency
arranges water vessels as per the public requisition. The traveling cost on water
route is moderate as there is no construction cost except some preservation cost.
The Hydro-electricity: The electricity that is generated by using either the
current of river-water or waterfall with the help of a turbine is called the
co hydro-electricity. It is a renewable power resource. The hydro-electricity started
§& generating power during the Pakistani period by constructing a dam across the

102 Bangladesh and Global Studies
river Karnaphuli at Kaptai. This | “ ‘ a |
electricity can be produced at a very low |. oan, eee
cost. In the present world, the cost of |; we laee A
electricity which is produced by oil, gas or a) vee Lt Ss
nuclear burner is very high. eg a EF
As the generation cost of the : . - ~ 5
hydro-electricity is very low, the increase | ~““*y —y Lief
of the production of electricity by using ~ of eG, ge. [ ]
water resource is more profitable for the s See \
economy of Bangladesh. But, the rs, — a
mountains and hills convenient for | aa.>. |
eit. om A
generating hydro-electricity are few in ay
number in our country. That is why ‘ Yvan |
Bangladesh has a few scope for © ' = |
producing hydro-electricity. say or pensat y QO
Trade : A total of 75% commercial goods | N |
are transported through the inland water Picture 5.2 : Map showing communication
system of Bangladesh.
way in Bangladesh. In 1972, the trade and commerce through waterway was
institutionalized by establishing ‘Bangladesh Shipping Corporation’. Once upon a
time, we did not have any ship. Now the number of cargo ships are being
increased day by day. Goods are being transported through almost all the
waterways by the government and private enterprises. Goods can be transported
easily even though unrest prevails in the country.
In the rainy season, most of the goods transports are run by the waterway. But in
the dry season, due to the navigability problem, the movement of ships in some of
the rivers is rapidly decreasing. There is no alternative of water transport to
develop our agriculture, fishery and industry. All the government and
non-government institutions and organizations should come forward to make
long-term planning and implement afterwards to -
make the trade and commerce of Bangladesh Group work: Make a list of
forceful. Then Bangladesh will be capable to | the activities that depend on
achieving economic solvency by using the therivers.
facilities of waterways and water resources.
Section 5.2 :The Natural Resources of Bangladesh
The Concept of Natural Resources in
The goods that are obtained by the nature are usually called the natural S

The Rivers of Bangladesh and the Natural Resources 103
resources. Those are soil, water, forests, solar energy, fish, minerals, etc.
The Natural Resources of Bangladesh and Several Countries of South Asia
The natural resources of Bangladesh are almost same in comparison with the
resources of several South Asian countries like India, Myanmar and Nepal. The
descriptions of these natural resources are given below:
The Agricultural Resources: The South-Asian countries like India, Bangladesh
and Nepal are agriculture-based in nature. The farmers of these countries grow
agricultural products depending on the land, nature, climate, soil, and rivers. Rain
and temperature of a certain degree are needed to grow these agro-products. As a
result, production varies in different areas. In some areas of India, the production
of crops hampers either for immense cold weather or for scanty rainfall. At the
bottom of the Himalayas of Nepal, crops grow very little, but in the river washed
fertile zone of West Bengal of India, Bangladesh and Myanmar, paddy, wheat and
other corps grow several times in a year. Paddy, potato and wheat grow plenty in
Bangladesh. In the eastern zone of India and in the hilly area of the northeast zone
of Bangladesh, tea is being produced. The production of wheat, maze, mustard,
etc. are plenty too. The soil plays an important role in producing these crops.
Cotton, tea, pepper etc. are grown well.
The Forest-born Resources: The relation between the forest and the climate is
very deep. The climate of Bangladesh is different from that of the South Asian
countries like India, Myanmar and Nepal. In the hot and moist climatic zone, deep
and extensive forests grow for heavy rainfall. In the hill tracts of Chittagong, the
eastern zone of India and the northern zone of Myanmar, the ever green forests
have been developed.
The Fisheries: The land and the climate have a direct relation with the fisheries
of a country. Bangladesh is regarded as a country of fishes for having rivers,
canals, ponds, pools, marshes and fens in plenty. Many kinds of small and big
fishes are found here. The Bay of Bengal is a big source of fishes. The neighboring
countries of Myanmar, India and Nepal have sufficient fish resources.
The Mineral Resources: Various kinds of mineral resources such as gas, coal,
oil, limestone have been found under the ground of hilly districts of the eastern
zone of Bangladesh. The demand of gas of the country can be fulfilled by
collecting these resources. Natural gas has been found at the bottom of the sea.
Still there are the possibility of having many kinds of animal and mineral
resources. India is a large country of the southeast Asia. It is enriched with various
eo mineral resources for having geological varictics. Myanmar is in an advanced
& stage regarding mineral resources, but Nepal is still lagging behind.

104 Bangladesh and Global Studies
The Solar Energy: The sun emits rays 7

Group work: Make a list of the
lenge liways alist throughout the natin year | natural resources mentioning the
in the southern latitude of the equatorial zone. important roles on different
8° Bangladesh ame the ae cuanice of the | fields of the economy.

outh Asia gets a huge quantity of solar energy ;
easily for being situated in the equatorial or Broup ete aires oe
E 3 : mentioning the steps that should

tropical zone. In the countries of this zone, the

be taken to preserve the natural
temperature never falls down. So the people resources of Banpladesh
never have to stay in dark. In several countries :
of Europe and American continent, the sun gives rays in a slanted way.
Sometimes the sun cannot be seen even.
That is why the people of those country have to spend a huge quantity of fuel to
keep their residence suitable for living. The countries of our zone have not to do
so. The sunlight that we get easily from the nature is a very valuable solar
resource. We can use this solar energy through modern technology, and fulfill the
demand of electricity. The possibility exists that we can develop in the fields of
food, health care, and residential facilities by using the solar energy.
The Concept of Water Resource Management
The role of water is important for the existence of the animal and the human
beings. So, water is a very valuable resource. The role of water is immense in the
development of agriculture and industry. Though we can get sufficient water from
the rainfall, the agricultural and industrial productions are hindered and life
becomes complicated for the want of individeal works What care he
water in the cold and dry season. For that | certs that might be taken for water
reason, the flow and distribution of water | and food safety of your locality?
should be ensured through the proper
management. Getting and using water in a planned way is called the water
management.
Water usually exists in the solid, liquid and steam form. In the cold and dry
season, the use of water can be ensured through proper management by reserving
the water in the rivers, canals, ponds, pools and marshes. In the modem age, the
management of water resource has been emphasized for the welfare of human
beings, or the misuse, scarcity, and toxicity may cause environmental disaster and
existence of the flora and fauna may face the threat of extinction.
The Importance of Water Resource Management for Water and Food Security of
Bangladesh
Bangladesh is the most densely populated country of the world. It is hard to ensure
the food, water and other securities of this large population. So, it has been |
difficult to cope with the increasing number of population. The problems of land S

The Rivers of Bangladesh and the Natural Resources 105
management, water, food, and shelter are increasing in the country day by day.
Though the population has been doubled in the last four decades after the
liberation, the food production has increased three times as it was before, and the
country has no big food crisis. But there is still the possibility of crop failure
because of the water pollution and water crisis as well. So, all should extend hands
for a permanent solution of food safety through the proper management of water
resource of the country. The measures that should be taken to water management
are given below:
1. The Preservation of Environment: The rivers, ponds, canals, pools,
marshes, fens, forest and land should be preserved.
2. Ensuring Proper Use of Water: In the dry and winter season, the policy
and strategy of misusing water should be implemented in the country.
3. Dredging Rivers Solve the Navigability Problem: The rivers of the
country are filled-up with silt. Almost every year water gets polluted due to
flood in different regions of the country. To get rid of this we need preventive
steps-flood control and embankment of which we have to be careful. Many
rivers have been dried up. The proper dredging will ensure the flow of water
and the necessary supply of water for agriculture and industry will be got
from here.
4. Excavation of Connecting Canal and Reservoir: If several reservoirs
can be excavated in the northern zone of Bangladesh, it will be possible to
fulfill the demand of water in the dry season. The demand of water for
producing crops will be fulfilled too. Pisces culture and fish-cultivation will
be normal.
5. Saline-free Water: The soil of the southern zone of the country is salty
for red colour. A thin layer over the soil spoils the fertility and causes crop
failure. So, Pisces culture, agriculture and afforestation programmes are
being hampered. Small dams should be made in these areas for keeping the
supply of freshwater normal. As a result, the water and food security will be
ensured.
6. The Protection of River Erosion: In the rainy season, new shore emerges
and the river beds are filled-up with silts. The water safety should be ensured
by dredging and protecting the erosion of rivers.
7. Using Limited Fertilizers and Pesticides: In our country, fertilizers and
pesticides have been indiscriminately used in the agricultural sectors for a
long time. So, the cultivation of Pisces culture and agriculture is hindered for
acute water pollution. If the indiscriminate use of chemicals can be stopped,
the qualities of soil and water can be protected.
Forma- 14: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

106 Bangladesh and Global Studies
8. The Proper Use of Science and Technology: The water resource of the coun-
try should be used in the welfare of the human beings. The scientific concepts and
the technology should be used in increasing the production of agriculture. If the
water resource of the country is ensured, the agricultural production will be
increased gradually after fulfilling the need of water of the whole year. That is
why we should ensure water and food security, and we should make the ‘National
Water Policy’ properly effective in the country.
The Classification of Forests of Bangladesh
Where the trees grow in plenty is called the forest. Timber, honey, bee-wax, etc.
are the resources of the forest. Bangladesh does not have sufficient forests. A
country should have 20-25% of forest of the total area of land. But in Bangladesh,
itis only 13%. The increasing population of the country requires valuable timber
to make house and furniture. The requisite timber is collected from the land of
forest of the country. As a result, the forest is gradually being decreased.
Different types of forests are created in the different areas of Bangladesh on the
basis of the climate and the variety of soil. The forest areas of Bangladesh are
divided into four distinctive classes - the forest zone of Chittagong, the forest
Zone of Sylhet, the Sundarbans, ? ‘ °
and the forest zone of Dhaka-Tan- ‘Gant .
gail- Mymensingh. As per the char- a? WR, Be A
acteristics of trees, forests have been MIT open oo Soret
classified as follows: 1. The Tropical ey oe ttt
Evergreen and Deciduous Forest; 2. ||,.""s ae a, 4
The Tropical Deciduous Fore st; :
and 3. The Mangrove or Goran x a
Forest. 1. The Tropical Evergreen 4. ae
and Deciduous Forest: The hilly |" a nom
regions of the southeast and north- || mo» foi
east of Bangladesh are known as the N
tropical evergreen and deciduous ||, ran a
forest area. Usually various kinds of Ae
trees such as the creeping plants, nibs tle. , nee \ 4 A
shrubs, and herbs grow in the hot and ee i fee ree |
moist areas. The leaves of these trees | oe ie ~~
do not sprout and fall down at a time. : savorernea Ty ."|
As a result, the forest remains green TS sa
throughout the year. That is why ||. %
these forests are called evergreen

Picture 5 3 - The forest land of Bangladesh
forest. Chittagong, Khagrachori, Rangamati, Bandarban and Sylhet are included &
in this zone. The total area of this forest is about 14 thousand square kilometers. %

The Rivers of Bangladesh and the Natural Resources 107
The chapalish, moina, telsur, mehogani, jarul, segun, gorjan are the mentionable
trees of this region. Bamboos and canes grow in plenty in the hilly region of
Sylhet. Rubber is cultivated in Chittagong and Sylhet zone too.
2. The Tropical Deciduous Forest : Mymensingh, Tangail, Gazipur, Dinajpur
and Rangpur comprise the tropical deciduous forest area. In the forests of these
districts, leaves of the trees fall once in a year in the Winter. Besides the shal or
gozari, the koroi, bohera, hezol, shiris, horotoki, _jackfruit, nim etc. trees grow
in plenty. In this forest, as the shal is the main tree, it is called the shal forest. In
Mymensingh, Tangail and Gazipur, this forest is known as the Modhupur Vowal
forest, and in Dinajpur, it is called the forest land of Borendra.
3. The Mangrove or Goran Forest Area: The trees that grow at the salty and wet
soil washed by the ebb and flow of the sea near the seashore of Noakhali and
Chittagong to the southwest zone of Bangladesh are called the Mangrove or
Goran forest area. It grows in the Sundarban too. On the wet and salty soil, the
sundari, gewya, poshor, dhundal, kewra, bayen, goran, golpata etc. trees grow in
plenty. Bangladesh has 4,192 square kilometers of Mangrove or Goran forest
area.
In the national life of Bangladesh, the forest land is important not only for forest
resources but also for leading a healthy life in the midst of light, wind and in the
green nature.
The Importance of Natural Resources in Economy of Bangladesh
In the economic development of Bangladesh, the importance of natural resources
knows no bound. Land, forests, Pisces culture, minerals, solar energy, water etc.
are the important natural resources of the country. In economy of Bangladesh, it is
possible to alleviate poverty, ensure food security and standardize life style. These
natural resources accelerate the economic development. The land is the most
important resource of Bangladesh. The soil of this country is so fertile that the
farmers do not need much money for cultivating crops. By ensuring the utmost
use of this fertile land, we can extend the production of agricultural crops, flower,
and trees. The production of crops has been increased three times during the last
forty years after the liberation of Bangladesh. By using the modem technology,
high quality seeds, and scientific system of cultivation, Bangladesh may produce
more crops. By cultivating various native and foreign fruits, it is possible to fulfill
the demand of nutrition, and after fulfilling the local demand of vegetables, it
might be exported to foreign country. The use of fertile land of Bangladesh has
been increased in a large scale to meet the demands of housing, mills and
factories, culverts, roads, towns, cities for the increasing population that has been
developed financially as well. Unless the land is used in a planned way, the
%° catastrophe in the national life is inevitable. In our economy, the importance of
& water as a natural resource is especially mentionable. The economic development

108 Bangladesh and Global Studies
of our agriculture and industry completely depend on the water of the rivers,
canals, pools, marshes and fens. The communication system depends on the
natural resource like water too. The country is going to be economically solvent
by using the solar energy, mineral and forest resources of the country. The major
portion of the national income of the country comes from the use of these
resources. The natural resources of the country contribute a lot to the
development of the mills and industries. As a result, the people are getting
opportunity for employment, commodities of the local demands are being
roduced, and the export-oriented goods ; ;
are being produced. by using “these Sronp aes eee
resources. In the economic development, Phen ral Sees ie eee eip
new efforts are being adopted. The use of Shei pm or Daeeleean
natural resources is helping to take those efforts ahead. The demand and supply of
the natural resources are being increased as raw materials, those are being
treated with importance, and after fulfilling the demand of the country, these
commodities are being increased of exported to the foreign countries. As a result,
the economic condition of the people is being developed. People are being more
interested and conscious in producing crops, using forests and other natural
resources. In this way, the economy of the country is rapidly progressing through
the use of the natural resources and the economic efforts of human beings, and the
people are moving towards a developed life.
Short Questions: Exercise
1. What is the solar energy?
2. What is the facility of the production of hydro electricity?
3. How will you define the idea of preservation of rivers?
Descriptive Questions:
1. How are the human dwellings expanded centring the rivers? Explain.
2. What steps might be taken for keeping the flow of the rivers?
3. Analyse the influence of climate on agriculture and forests.
4. Analyse the importance of preserving the natural resources.
5. Explain the cause of water crisis in the northwest zone of Bangladesh in dry
season.
Multiple Choice Questions:
1. What is the source of the river Matamuhuri?
a. The hill of Saiver
b. The hills of Lusai
c. The Manos Sarobor &
d. The Gangotri Glacier ES

The Rivers of Bangladesh and the Natural Resources 109
2. What is the characteristic of the Gozari trees?

i, All the leaves fall down because of the difference of season.

ii. Its leaves remain evergreen.

iii. It grows on the salty soil.

Which one is correct?
ai b i&ii oc. iii d. ii & iii

Read the paragraph below and answer to the question No. 3 & 4:

Sajib went to a forest of the eastern zone of India on a study tour and noticed that

the trees of that place are high and dense. The teacher told them that trees like such

height grow in plenty in a zone of Bangladesh.

3. Which trees are grown in the forest watched by Sajib?

a. The Segun b.TheBohera _ c. The Shiris d. The Dhundol

4. In which place of Bangladesh such similar forest is seen?

a. Tangail b. Dinajpur
c. The hill tracts of Chittagong — d. Noakhali

Creative Questions

1. Zahid is a student of Chittagong University. He went to the forest of that place
with some of his foreign friends on vacation. They were spell bound seeing
the beauty of the forest abundant with the segun, gorjon, jarul trees. On the
way back, Zahid took them on the bank of the main river of that region, and
told them that this river was the source of endless power.

a. What is the Naf?

b. Explain the cause of the creation of branch of the Brahmaputra.

c. Explain the characteristics of the trees mentioned in the paragraph.

d. Analyse the aptness of the comment made by Zahid in the light of the
subject read by you.

2. Azmol Miah was a dweller on the bank of a river at the northern zone. Once
he used to live on catching fishes. But now, he has to change his profession as
the course of the river is changed, and he has become very poor as the river
has devoured his land and hut. In his region, people have fallen in deep crisis
due to water shortage in the dry season.

a. What are the mineral resources discovered in the lower bed of the
Bay of Bengal?
b. Why is the huge solar energy found in the South Asian countries?
c. Explain the causes of changing the flow of the river in the zone where
Azmol Miah lived.
% d. What kinds of steps might be taken to eliminate the crisis mentioned
= in the paragraph?

Chapter-6
The State, Citizenship and Law

The state is the most important political institution of a social life. The state had
emerged to unify all citizens and resolve their problems as well as ensure their
welfare. In a certain level of the evolving process, the state emerged from the soci-
ety. In the ancient and middle ages, the state was considered an organization
formed by the God. The .modern political thinkers explain the state as an organi-
zation ‘to provide common welfare’ and ‘indispensable for the independence of the
people and flourishing their personality’. The state is for the citizens. The state has
to discharge many responsilibilites to ensure citizens' peace and happiness. Some
of these works are mandatory and some of the works are optional. Besides, the
citizens also have some duties and responsibilities to the state. On the other hand,
rules and regulations are necessary to ensure security of the citizens, and solve the
existing problems of the society, In this chapter we will learn about the state,
citizen and law.
After reading this chapter, we will be able to —

e explain the concept of state; e explain the concept of law;

e explain the works of the state; e explain the sources of law;

e explain the concept of citizen; e explain the necessities of laws for good

e explain the duties and responsibilities to governance;

the state as a citizen of Bangladesh; e describe the application of the Right to
e encourage ourselves to discharge Information Act of Bangladesh and be
responsibilities as a citizen; aware of it.

The Concept of the State
Every human being lives in a certain state. A state never evolves suddenly. The
ancient people would live in groups. The state emerged as time changed. People
make the state. Every citizen of the state has to obey the rules and regulations of
the state. The people of the states are called citizens. The state discharges many
duties for the citizens so that they can live in peace and harmony.
The political scientists and political theorists described the state in various ways.
According to Aristotle, 'The state is a union of families and villages having for
each end and perfect and self sufficing life.’ According to R. M. Maclver, 'The
state is an association which acting through law as promulgated by a government
endowed to this end with coercive power maintaining within a community territo-
tially demarcated the universal external condition of social order,’ Professor
Gerner gave the most complete and clear definition of state. According to him, S

The State, Citizenship and Law 111
'The state is a community of person more or less numerous permanenetly
occupying a definite portion’ of territory independent (or nearly so) of which the
great body of inhabitants render habitual obedience.'
So we can say that the state is a society based on a certain territory which has
organized government and citizens, and have sovereign power upon all
organizations in a specific geographical area.
The basic elements of the State
If we analyse the concept of state, we will notice four essential elements of it: the
people, the specific geographical territory, the government, and the sovereignty.
Each state consists of these four elements.
The People: : The primary element of the state is its people. People means the
people organized politically. People are necessary to form a state. The state
evolved from the intention of people to be united and to build up relationship
among them. However, there is no such pre-requisite on the number of people to
form a state. Politically the number of people of a state can be some crores. Even
it can be few thousand, for example, the people of China and India are more than
one hundred crore. On the other hand, small countries like San Marion and
Monaco have 33225 and 38000 respectively (according to 2016 census).
The Specific Geographical Territory: The specific geographical territory is the
second mandatory element of a state. Every state is surrounded by a specific geo-
graphical border. The territory also includes land, sea and air. The sovereignty
over the geographical territory is essential for the
eople of the state to live in that land. To uphold the a ;
right upon a specific territory, the citizens united cane ns nore Which
launch the nationalist movement, organize epee ees Pee
aie: : element of the Bangladesh
agitation and fight or take steps according to the stata and why?
people of the state to live in that land. To uphold the right upon a specific territo-
ty, the citizens unitedly launch the nationalist movement, organize agitation
and fight or take steps according to the constitution. Every state establishes a
security system based on its border. The geographical land can be big or small, for
example, Russia is a huge country and Darus Salam, Switzerland, Bruni are very
small countries. The territory of Bangladesh emerged as an independent state in
the world map after a liberation war in 1971. Sometimes, the specific geographi-
cal area of a state can be formed with some small islands, for example, Japan,
Malaysia, Indonesia.
The Government: The third essential element of a state is the Government. The
S

112 Bangladesh and Global Studies
control over a specific land is established after the formation of the government.
The partial formation of the state is complete. There are three divisions for
running of the government — the law, the administrative and the judiciary. Usual-
ly in a democratic system, the people form a government through the general elec-
tion. The system of government can be different in different states. The Govern-
ment is meant by eveiyone of the administration who participates dirrectly or
indeifectly in running the state, i.e. the power of the state is administered by the
government. According to Professor Gerner, 'If we consider state as a body of a
life, government is its brain’.
The Sovereignty: The principal element to form a government is the sovereignty.
The meaning of the word 'sovereignty' is the highest and absolute power. The
formation of the state becomes complete when the sovereignty is ensured. This
power distinguishes the state from the other organizations. The" sovereignty is a
characteristic of the state which is not bound to any other legally except its own
will. In each social system, there will be a central authority which will execute the
supreme power. And this power is the sovereign power. The ideal of sovereignty
is the law. Everybody is bound to obey the law or the ideal of sovereignty. The
sovereign power has both the inner and outer entity. By exercising the inner
power, the state establishes its supremacy over all its citizens and organizations.
No authority can exist over this sovereign power. The meaning of outer sovereign-
ty is that the state will be free from the control and influence of outside power in
the international arena. If any state has citizens, specific territory’ and govern-
ment, but it lacks the sovereignty, will not be recognized as a state. As long as a
state exists, the sovereignty will also prevail. The sovereignty will not be damaged
by the change of the government.
So the people, the specific territory, the government and the sovereignty are the
four components that constitute the state. A State will not be formed for lack of
any of these components.
The Activities of the State
We need to know that what a state does or can do as a part of the society. That is
we will learn what service a state can provide to its citizen and what its capacity
is. We know that a state emerges from the necessity of the people, and it plays the
role of ensuring, overall welfare of the human beings. According to the political
analysts, the state discharges two types of duties— controlling and ensuring wel-
fare. Based on these two types of roles, the responsibilities of the modern state are
divided into two parts such as the mandatory or prime activities, and the welfare
or optional activities.

ES

8

The State, Citizenship and Law 113
The Mandatory or Prime Activities: The responsibilities discharged by the state
to protect the entity of the state, the independence and the sovereignty, and to
preserve the rights of the people living in the territory are called the mandatory or
prime activities of the state. The mandatory job of the government are described
below:

R.M. Maclver in his book The Modern State says, 'maintaining law and order situ-
ation is the prime work or responsibilities of a state’. The organization called state
has been evolved to ensure security of life and property of the citizen, and protect
the freedom of the individuals. The key responsibilities of a state are to make the
people abide by the laws, punish the offenders who break the peace and tranquility
of the society, and maintain overall peace and harmony of the country. The state
establishes political authority in local, regional and national levels to achieve this
objectives. The state establishes the police and the para military forces to maintain
the law and order situation. The Police, RAB, Ansar, Village Defense Party, etc.
are working to maintain law and order in Bangladesh.

The Protection of national security, independence and sovereignty is another man-
datory responsibility of the state. Establishment of a powerful defense force is
another mandatory responsibility of the state to protect the country from the
foreign intervention and to maintain the geographical integrity. In modern age,
each of the independent states builds up powerful defense forces. The capability
and modernisaiton of the defense force give a country special facilities in the
international fields, for example, the USA or the UK has a leadership role in the
world due to the power of their defense forces. The defense force is established
with the army, navy and air forces.

Introducing the country in the foreign field, establishing the rights upon the
resources within the territory, establishing diplomatic, relationship with other
countries, signing various treaties and conventions, establishing regional courts
and commercial market in foreign countries and extending them, ensuring securi-
ty of the citizens residing in foreign country and providing them with various
services are the mandatory responsibilities of the foreign offices of any state.
The enactment of laws and its implementation, and ensuring justice are the funda-
mental duties of a state. The laws are enacted by the parliament. The establish-
ment of the judicial council, Supreme Court, High Court, Judge Court and other
courts to ensure justice are the mandatory work of the state.

Every state establishes an administrative structure to accomplish the routine
works, control and run the state smoothly. In this structure, recruiting staff and
officials, distributing their works, providing instructions, supervising and
directing are the mandatory work of the state.

Forma- 15: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

114 Bangladesh and Global Studies
The appropriate management of the finance and resources, and the collection of
funds and proper distribution are the other key resposibilities of the government.
A huge amount of money is required to run the various activities of the govern-
ment. The collection of this amount from various resources is the mandatory work
of a state. Imposing tax and revenue on various goods, business organizations,
individuals, traders, and collecting as well as sensible utilization of the money are
the other important works of the oUtte. Formulating budget, introducing currency,
facilitating investment of money, determining unit of measurement, fixing the
price for essential commodities are other important duties of the state. Managing
economy, controlling inflation rate, controlling price of essential commodities are
the other key responsibilities of a state.
The Welfare or Optional Responsibilities: : Almost all the countries of the
world demand that they are welfare states. The political theorists are now of one
nine that the role of a state should not be confined to protecting law and order, and
collecting revenue. The state should play roles fpr the overall development of the
society and improve moral, social, cultural and economic conditions of the citizen
and ensure their welfare. These welfare and
development works are the optional and less
important work for a state. The more the state | ™entioning the works the state.
develops in the economy the more its optional works extend.
The most important work of the state is to educate its people. The educated
citizens are the most valuable resources of the state. The educated persons are
aware of the citizen's rights, duties and responsibilities and are encouraged to be a
patriotic. The state gives much importance to the development of the education,
and extends the facilities of educations to its citizen's door steps. The Government
introduces compulsory primary education, organizes adult education with
emphasising women education, and initiates various programmes for eradicating
illiteracy.
The state also plays a significant social role for healthcare of the citizens and for
wiping out various disparity and bad customs existed in the society. The state also
establishes and runs hospitals, free medical centres, mother and child healthcare
centre, family planning centre, temporary health camp around the country for
ensuring healthcare services for its citizen and for arranging treatment facilities
for the patients (nominal or free of charge). "Besides, the state also provides
services to ensure healthcare for its people, arranges pure drinking water,
sewerage system, disease prevention measures and immunization programme.
Besides, the state also plays a vital role to eradicate dowry and racism, tribalism,
prevent child marriage, and ensure gender equality, etc.. 2%
S
AQ

The State, Citizenship and Law 115
By ensuring the constant supply of essential commodities such as rice, pulses,
flour, coarse flour, sugar, etc. is an important function of the state the government
should consolidate food security, through the modernization of agricultural
systems, and providing subsidy to the agriculture, fertilizer, seeds, pesticide,
irrigation system, and increasing production, food storing become important
responsibilites of the state. Because of the increasing population, demand for food
has been increased. As a result the state has to give more attention to the food
security compared to the previous time. Bangladesh has gained encouraging
success in this sector.
The economic development of any state depends on the industrialization and
improvement of trade and commerce. Establishing new industries, -providing
logistic support and loan to the entrepreneurs for setting up big industries, estab-
lishing industrial zone, expanding trade and commerce, creating markets for prod-
ucts and extending support to boost up export are the important works of a state.
Every state should focus how to be self-sufficient rather than depending on
import. For this, the state has to emphasize on the scientific and technological
research. Besides, setting up and running industries under the supervision of the
state, it should create employment opportunities for a good number of people, and
it's aother optional work of the state.
The infrastructural development of a country such as constructing roads, bridges
and culverts, establishing, railways, waterways and air communication systems,
ensuring post, telegraph and telecommunication services and connecting with
modern mode of communication are some optional works of the state. A huge
revolution in communication system has been taken place in the present world.
The inter connectivity has been increased in this world due to the use of the Inter-
net, networking and frequency. The technological improvement in the field of
domestic and international communication are considered as the important
optional works of a state. The establishment of appropriate transportation and
communication system are essential for the development of a state.
To maintain the harmony and unity among the people, projecting the national
tradition and developing nationalism by the local culture, music and song,
maintaining local diversification, conserving local crafts, establishing museum,
organizing cultural programmes, initiating cultural exchange are the important
optional work of the state. Setting up stages for performance, establishment of
playgrounds, parks and gardens for recreations are also included among the
responsibilities of the state.
The most important optional work of the government is to defend the
independence and rights of the people. The state will ensure freedom of speech,
co freedom of movement of its people and assist them in participating in the political
& activities. In this regard, it will organize free, fair and neutral election, create an

116 Bangladesh and Global Studies
environment so that people can involve in politics, ensure freedom of
establishment of organization and political parties, coordinate among the
conflicting interests of the people, preserve interest of minority, protect
corruption, establish the right of the different ethnic communities, ensure shelter
for the refugees, etc. These are the optional political works of the state.The
modern states take various initiatives to ensure the social security. Providing
financial and other assistance to the poor, widows, orphans and disabled people
residing in the state, providing allowance to the unemployed, giving pension and
grants to the elderly people, etc. are included as the welfare activities of the state.
Running the huge work force and make them healthy are the optional works of the
state. Upholding the rights of the labours, making labour policy, fixing up
minimum wage, determining working hours, creating working environment,
providing bonus, insurance and pension, creating employment, developing skilled
workers by providing training, appointing labour officer for defending the rights
of the workers abroad are important works of the state.

Besides, the state initiates various development and welfare works, for example,
the development of agriculture and irrigation system, the forestation programme,
fight against the natural disaster, assistance and rehabilitation of the disasteer
victims, protecting the people from famine and death by the diseases, creating
facilities for the citizens, supplying power and energy, the appropriate
management of natural resources, the urbanization, the rural development,
preventing the growth of black market, resisting women and child trafficking,
creating awareness, etc. are the works done by the state.

The state is a huge organization. It has to face various new challenges every day.
However, providing overall welfare to the people are the main objectives of a
state. As per demand of the people, the area of optional works of a state is
increasing day by day.

The Concept of Citizen

One of the main pre-requisite to form a state is the mass people. When a state
appeared absolutely, the mass people of this state are considered as citizens. The
relationship between the state and its citizen are very close. The success and
failure of a state depends on the sense of duty and responsibility of the citizens.
So we have to be aware of the duties and responsibilities of the citizen, and to
know how to be a good citizen.

The word ‘citizen’ derived from the Latin word 'civics'. The key elements of ,,
studying civics are citizen and state. Usually, by the word citizen itis meant the $

The State, Citizenship and Law 117
inhabitants who reside in the city. It was earlier believed that those directly
involved in the administration were regarded as the citizen. Aristotle, the father of
the political science also described citizen in his definition saying, 'Who partici-
pates in the administration directly and represents in the city state is called Citi-
zen.' Aristotle, in his concept, did not included most of the people because as per
his opinion, most of them-are not capable enough and they have not enough time
to do so. In the Greek city state concept, women and slaves were not regarded as
a citizen and they could not participate in the state affairs.

Now the national state has been evolved instead of city state. The modern state is
very big and its population is also big and everybody enjoys civic facilities direct-
ly and indirectly. But it is not possible to accommodate this huge number of
people in the administration. So, while awarding citizenship to anybody, loyalty to
the state and the political as well as other facilities he enjoys are regarded as a
parameter instead of participating in the government. Modern political scientist of
Britain Harold J Laski said in his definition for citizen, 'The persons who take
facilities of the state and remain loyal to that state are called Citizen’. Professor
Getel. said, 'Citizen is the member of that political society who is committed to
discharge duties for that society and he is entitled to enjoy all facilities.
The citizen is therefore the person who is bound to discharge duties and responsi-
bilities of the state on the other hand enjoy all civic and political rights. In broader
sense, citizen is the person who live permanently in that state and remain loyal to
the law, constitution and other orders of the states. Citizens play the roles in the
welfare of the state by their own works, and enjoy all the social, economic and
political rights distributed by the state. As a citizen, everyone is equal all men,
women irrespective to caste and creed are entitled to be a citizen.
The Duties and Responsibilities of a Citizen to the State
As the state provides various facilities and rights to the citizens, they have to
discharge some duties and responsibilities as well to the state. Duties and respon-
sibilities are inter-related and inter-dependent to each other. The most Significant
duties and responsibilities of the citizens are described below.
The prime responsibility of the citizen is to be loyal to state, i. e. to obey the
instructions of the state. The citizen has to remain vigil and ready for supreme
sacrifice for the security, integrated territory, independence and sovereignty of the
state. The citizens are responsible for abiding by the existing law and constitution
and showing respect to the law. If anyone breaks the law, it creates indiscipline in
the society. It impedes normal life. So every citizen has to obey the law for

= maintaining peaceful life and discipline.

N

118 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Enfranchisement with honesty and acumen is ;

the sacred duty and responsibility of a citizen. | Group work: Prepare a list of
So qualified and eligible candidates can be | the duties and responsibilities
elected as peoples' representatives. Everyone of the citizens to the state.
should abstain from voting unqualified and corrupted persons.

The prime sources of the state's income are tax and revenue provided by the
citizen. A huge amount of money is needed to run the administration as well as the
defense to initiate various developmental works. The citizens should cooperate
the state providing taxes on regular basis.

The responsibility of the citizen is to perform the assigned duty on him by the
state. Any work initiated by the government is the work of the citizen. The success
and development of a government depends on the morality, concentration and
devotion the of citizens of the state.

Every child is the citizen of the state. Parents work as a guardian of the child: Thus
immunigating, keeping good health and sending the children to the school in right
time are the responsibilities of the parents. As a result the child will be a decent
citizen receiving good education and will contribute to the family, society and the
state.

Every citizen should have patriotic zeal. The responsibility of the citizens is to
wish the state all the success and feel proud of their own culture. They should
remember the National Anthem, the national history and the contribution of the
national heroes and scholars.

Every citizen should have high tolerance level for others. The national unity is
achievable through respect for different cultures difference of opinion. Everyone
should believe that beauty remains inherent in diversity.

Every citizen should protest against the corruption and injustice. It is a moral
obligation of a citizen to protest against the unlawful act of a person, organization
and even the state. But one should not take the law in one's own hand. In this way,
a society'of good governance and free of corruption would be established.

The concept of Law

The laws usually in a social system are some necessary written rules and regula-
tions. Most of the inhabitants obey these rules to control the behavior of the
people as well as maintain peace and harmony of the society. Therefore, law is a
combination of various kinds of rules, regulation, custom, practice, rituals and
codes. The rules and bindings obeyed by the people in social life are called social
law. In the state structure, the laws enacted in accordance with the various national
policies to control the behaviours of the people and to protect various problems of S
the society, the statutory obligations and instructions unanimously promulgated ‘%

The State, Citizenship and Law 119
by the government are considered as the state laws. Various political thinkers and
law experts provided the definition of law.T.H. Green said, "Laws are rights and
bindings imposed by the states'. According to professor Holland, A law is, general
tule of external action enforced by sovereign political authority'. Woodrow
Wilson gave a suitable definition of law. He said, ‘Law is that portion of the
established habit and thought of mankind which has gained distinct and formal
recognition in the shape of uniform rules backed by the authority and power of the
government'.
So, law is the combination of specific rules recognised by the society and
government for betterment of the social welfare of the people.
The Characteristic of Law
From the above definitions, some of the characteristics of law are notices, and
those are as follows:

1. Law controls the external behaviour and work of people.

2. Law is for all because it is equally applicable to everyone.

3. Law is one kind of order or prohibition which everyone has to obey. The

person who disobeys the law faces punishment.

4. Law is recognized and imposed by the authority of the state.

5. Everyone obeys the customs and regulations of the society.
The Sources of Law
There are various sources of law. Political Scientist Holland mentioned 6 main
sources of law. Those are: 1. The Custom, 2. The Religion, 3. The Judgment of
Court, 4. The Scientific discussion, 5. The Sense of Justice and 6. The Parliament.
1. The Custom: The custom is the ancient source of law. The social customs are
habits, thoughts, behaviour, regulations, etc. that are existed in the society. The
impact of these social customs is so strong that conflict and revolution can happen
if those are violated.In course of time, these customs are recognized by the
government and become law, for example, most of the laws in Britain came into
being from the customs.
2. The Religion: The impact of religion on human being is immense. Since the
ancient period, the people are following divine laws. So the religion, regulations
of religion, the scriptures are the important sources of law. As the sense of
justice-injustice, vice-virtue, etc. was recognised by the religion, the influences of
religion were prevalent in the politics of the ancient and the middle age. In the
religion based state, religious norms are considered as a state law. The laws of the

w slamic state are based on the Holy Quran and the laws of the Shariah. The Hindu
Ss laws also principally based on the scriptures such as the Vedas, the Geeta and the

120 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Ramayana. In this modern world, the state laws are enacted based on religious
norms too. For the marriage and inheritance laws, the Muslim and Hindu commu-
nity depend on their respective religious rituals.
3. The Precedence of Court: The verdict of judges or the judgment from the judi-
ciary are the sources of the law. If any judge cannot justify any case using the
existing law, he can resolve it using his insight, acumen and wisdom by providing
new explanation of the existing law, which can be used as the precedence and may
consider as law in future. So the verdicts of judges are the sources of the law too.
4. The Scientific Discussion: The scientific discussion of the lawyers, their books
on laws may be regarded as the sources of law. The state has an idea of the laws
from the explanation, evaluation, and discussion, etc. of the eminent lawyers. The
opinions of the British lawyers Coke, Blackstone, American lawyer Kent, Muslim
scholar and jurist Imam Abu Hanifa were regarded as law.
5. The Sense of Justice: When a justice fails to resolve any case either by using
the existing law or for the absense of relating law, he can provide his verdict by
using social sense of justice. The law derived from the sense of justice may get a
full status of law. Thus sense of justice and fairness can be a source of law.
6. The Parliament: In the modern age, the Parliament is the main source of law.
There is parliament or assembly in every democratic state. Besides, the
constitution of the state, the decree passed by the head of the state, the
international treaty, the ratification of international law and convention are
considered as sources of law.
The Necessity of Law for Good Governance
The necessity of law is very important for good governance. If law and order
prevail in a state, every citizen can enjoy freedom and benefits provided by the
government. Nobody can harm the rights of others. Usually, the rule of law
expresses two concepts : (a). The supremacy of law, (b). equality of everyone to
the law.
If the supremacy of law prevails, the government cannot be autocratic and usually
cannot abuse power. Arresting any one without any crime or confiscating and pun-
ishing any one without trial are the contrary to the rule of law. The supremacy of
law is the protection of freedom of the citizen. Nobody can interfere in other's
affairs if the supremacy of law prevails in the society. The government does not
dare to interfere in the freedom of any one's
life without any logic. The meaning of | Individual work: Why is the rule
equality in the eye of law means everyone | of law mandatory for Bangladesh?
irrespective ofreligion, cast, creed, color, Mention the reasons. FS
8

The State, Citizenship and Law 121
community or of being rich or poor is same. Nobody will be entitled to have addi-
tional privileges. The same law is applicable to all. The freedom of life hampered
in the state, when rules of law do not exist. The law enforcing agency usually
harass the citizen arresting them without any legal reason for the absense of the
rules of law. The Rules of law cannot prevail if freedom of judiciary and
democratic environment do not exist. Progress is noticeable in Bangladesh in
respect of ensuring rule of law.

The Right to Information

The Constitution of Bangladesh, under Section 39, has recognized the freedom of
thought and conscience, and of speech as one of the fundamental rights of the
citizen, and the right of having information and law regarding Bangladesh is the
integral part of it. The Bangladesh Government enacted the Right to Information
Act on 5 April 2009. This law is promulgated to ensure the right of the people to
get information.

Many countries of the world have rights to | [naividual work: Describe how
information law. We have first to know you have been benefited or will be
what the meaning of information is. | benefited by the Right to
Generally any kind of record is a part of the | Information Act.

information. In the Right to Information Act, the meanings of information are the
structure and official works of any authority, book, map, agreement,
data-information, log book, order-notice, record, sample, letter, report, accounts,
project proposal, photograph, audio-video, sketch, film, electronic instrument,
machine readable documents and physical formation and characteristics and any
other matter related information and their photocopy. However, the official note
sheet and copy of the note sheet will not be part of it.

Now an independent organisaiton called Information Commission' is formed
under the Right to Information Act. This commission comprises with one Chief
Information Commissioner and two Information Commissioners.

It is described in this law that each of the citizen has the right to have information
from the authority and the authority is bound to provide necessary information to
the citizen. As per the law, any ministry, department or office attached or
subordinate, related department, office or head office, office in the division,
regional office, district office or upazila office will act as an information
providing unit.

As per the right to information law, to get any information, one has to apply in
wiring or by electronic medium or by e-mail. The responsible office will assist the
person who is illiterate, and submit his appeal after having the person's thumb
Forma- 16: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

122 Bangladesh and Global Studies
print. If the responsible officer fails to provide the information within designated
time, within 30 days of this laps, the applicant can appeal. If the applicant fails to
have justice from the appealed authority, the person can send complaint to the
Information Commissioner. In this regards, the responsibility of the Information
Commissioner is to receive complaint and to take necessary measures
accordingly. In providing information, the responsible officer has to be a
conservator/bank of information. His main duty is to inform the application
procedure to the people, create facility to have information from the authority,
assessing appropriate charges of the information and identify reasons of failure to
provide information. So, we will be conscious about the right to information act
to get information. By the Right to Information Act, the poor, marginal and under
privileged people will be developed. Activities of each organistion will be
transparent and accountable, good governance will be ensured, corruption will be
eradicated, positive impact will be created in preserving human rights and
eradication of poverty by ensuring empowerment of the people and above all root
of democracy will be consolidated.
Short Questions: Exercise
1. The state is the important political organisaiotn of society. Explain.
2. Which one is the prime component of forming a state? Explain.
3. In what logic, Wadood will be regarded as the citizen of Bangladesh?
4. Explain the necessity of law to ensure the rule of law.
Descriptive Questions:
1. ‘The Right to Information Act will be beneficial for the poor, marginal and
under privileged people.’ Explain.
2. ‘The more a country economically developed, the more its optional works
are extended.’ give your opinion against this quotation.
3. Asa citizen of Bangladesh, describe your duties and responsibilities to the state.
Multiple Choice Questions:
1. ‘Law is the rule of external human action enforced by the sovereign
political authority’, who said this?
a. T.H. Green b. Holland
c. Woodrow Wilson d. Aristotle S

The State, Citizenship and Law 123
2. Responsibility of the citizen is to-
a. Obey the traffic law in the street
b. Appointing more people in the industries
c. Prepare skilled manpower
d. Establish political organization
3. The Characteristics of law are to-
i. Control external behavior of the people.
ii. Conserve everyone’s rights equally
iii. Make people abide by the rules and regulations
As per above information which one is correct?
a. i&ti
b. i & iii
c. ti & iii
d. i, i & iii
Read the paragraph and answer to the question no 4 and 5.
One day, Ovi and Rafi caught red handed when they were stealing guava from a
neighbour's tree. As Rafi's father is an influential man, he freed Rafi from the
Police Station. Ovi's poor parents cannot free him despite very humble request.
4. Which part of the rule of law was not maintained for Ovi
i. The supremacy of law
ii. Equality in the eyes of law
iii. The belongingness of the law to common people
Which one of the following is correct?
ai
b. ii
c.ii & iii
d.i, ii & iii
5. If this part is established in the society, according to law-
i. Irrespective of the rich and poor, everyone will be equal
- ii. Law will be applicable to everyone
s iti.Nobody will be entitled to additional advantage

124 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Which one of the following is correct?

a.

bikil

c. li & iit

d. i, ii & iii

Creative Questions:

1. Inastate called 'A' Mobarak Hossain, the elected representative of the people
participates in formulating "Labour Policy' and laws relating to increasing
elderly allowance and pension. The government of the state A has established
two new hospitals, provided books to the students free of cost and formulated
laws to protect child marriage.

a. ‘The state is a union of families and villages having for each end and
perfect and self sufficing life.’ Who said this?

b. Write the concept of ‘Citizenship’.

c. What type of work is it by the state to formulate the Labour Policy
by Mr. Mobarak Hossain?

d. According to the above paragraph, should we call the state ‘A’ a welfare
state? Provide your logic in favour of your answer.

2. Jamila Begam went to Quazi office to get the copy of the Kabin Nama (mar-
riage certificate) to obtain information provided during her marriage. Quazi
Shaheb (relevant official) harassed her in various ways instead of co-operating
her. She appealed to the concerned authority as she did not get the information
with in the stipulated time. Finally she was successful in getting the relevant
information.

a. What are the sources of income of a state?

b. Why does the state give much importance to flourish education? Explain.

c. Explain which law helps Jamila Begam to get the information.

d. ‘The Success of Jamila Begam is encouraging for good governance.’ Evaluate.
oo
S

Chapter-7
The Organs of Bangladesh Government and the
Administrative Systems
We have already discussed the state in the previous chapter. In any state, the
system of government is like a machine. The state serves its purpose through the
government. The government has some organs in order to discharge different
functions thereof. In usual terms, what we understand by the government is the
legislative body, the political parties, the cabinet, the ruler, the court and the
police. A government has three organs such as the Executive, the Legislature and
the Judiciary. These thr.ee basic departments necessarily exist in each political
system because the three key-tasks of the government are running the
administration, making laws and establishing the justice. The administrations are
of two categories — Central and Local. In this chapter, we are to know of the
different organs and the administration of Bangladesh.
PoxkAleeng
a rr
coker 1 Oy Bal ye
1 : ie it i * titan r tiie
After reading this chapter, we will be able to —
¢ explain the important organs of the * explain the roles of the Judiciary towards
Government; the enforcement of Fundamental Rights
+ explain the powers and functions of the of the people and protecting the rule of law;
President and of the Prime Minister; * describe the appointment procedure of the
« delineate the National Parliament and its SHEN,
functions and powers; « describe the administrative structure of
* explain how the parliament dominates Bangladesic ; .
over the administration: * narrate the formations and functions of
; me, the local government of Bangladesh;
* describe the powers and jurisdictions of :
jhe, Jialigianyrof Hang ladicah: * evaluate the importance of local
> government in the sphere of development
ee in Bangladesh;
S ¢ be aware of our rights and responsibilities.

126 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Section 7.1 : The Organs of Bangladesh Government
The Executive
A smooth administrative system is a must for the internal peace, discipline and
development of a country. The Administration is the department that regulates
governance of the state, i.e. conducts the regular and occasional administrative &
official functions, maintains law and order and implements overall resolutions of
the state and the privileges thereof. In a greater sense, the Executive or the
Administration Department consists of all administrative employees including the
President, the cabinet,the government officials, the security, law & order
maintaining agencies, the diplomats, the officers and even a Chowkidar (a village
watchman) altogether.
The Legislature
The Legislature is one of the three organs of the government. The power of
Legislative includes the power of making laws and repealing or modifying or
amending the existing laws without contravening the provisions of the
Constitution where necessary. The Legislature or the Parliament is a part of the
Legislative Department. The legislature is composed of persons elected by the
people, or members nominated in some particular extents. Any law enacted by the
Legislature is finally passed with the President's assent. Every state has a
legislative body, and these legislative bodies are known with different names. The
name of the legislature of Bangladesh is the parliament. The Congress is the
legislature of the United States of America, the name-of Britain's legislature is the
parliament. The legislatures of many muslim countries are known as Majlis. Some
countries have unicameral and same have bicameral legislature. A bicameral
parliament consists of an upper house and lower haouse as well. The Parliament
of Bangladesh unicameral whereas India, the USA, Britain have a bicameral
parliament.
The Judiciary
To establish the justice is one of the solemn tasks of the state. The department of
the government that tries judicially is called the judiciary, i.e. the Judicial
Department. To punish the infringers of law, establish justice and protect
individual freedom of the citizens depends on an independent and unprejudiced
judicial system to a great extent. The Judicial Department consists of all the
courts, justices and judges of the state.
The Power of the Executive
The Status of the President: The President is, by the status he holds, above allin ,,
the state. He is Head of state according to the constitution. He, as Head of State, $S

The Organs of Bangladesh Government and the Administrative Systems 127
takes precedence over all other persons in the State and exercises the powers, and
performs the duties conferred to and imposed on him by the constitution and by
any other law. The president ratifies the laws enacted by the parliament.
The Powers and Functions of the President: : In the parliamentary system of
government, the President is a titular head only. All executive actions of the
government are executed in the name of the President. In fact, he preserves no
executive power. He can exercise his executive actions in formation of
government, in governance, legislation, finance, Judiciary, Defense, and
Diplomatic functions of the country. The executive powers of the President are
discussed below:
1. The Powers and Functions relating to appointment of the Prime Minister
and Administration: The president shall appoint the leader of the party got
majority in the election as the Prime Minister.
The Prime Minister forms the government with Group work: Prepare a table
the ministers chosen by him/her. The President
may not act with the advice of any body in President.
body in appointing the Prime Minister. The President appoints the Prime Minister,
Cabinet Ministers, State Ministers, Deputy Ministers, and distributes the
portfolios amongst them with the advice of the Prime Minister. The President also
appoints the- Attorney General of Bangladesh, judges of the Supreme Court, the
Chief Election Commissioner, the Comptroller and Auditor General, the
Chairman and other members of the Public Service Commission, the
Ambassadors, Envoys and High Commissioners in exercise of his power.
2. The Parliamentary and Legislative power: The President summons the
Parliament. He addresses the Parliament in the first session and at the
commencement of-the first session of. each year. The Parliament holds discussion
on the President’s speech. Occasionally, he sends messages to the parliament. He
may, adjourn and dissolve the Parliament on the Prime Minister’s advice.
3. Ordinance Making Power: At any time, when the Parliament is dissolved, or
is not in session, and if the President thinks that circumstances exist which require
immediate necessary action, he may promulgate ordinances, and any ordinance so
made shall, as from its promulgation, has the like force of law as an Act of the
Parliament.
4. The Appointment of the Chief Justice and Judicial Power: The President
appoints the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. He does not consult anybody for
this. The other justices of the Supreme Court are also appointed by the President.
5. The Prerogative of Mercy Power: The President shall have the power to grant
pardons, reprieves and respites and to remit, suspend or commute any sentence
se passed by any court, tribunal or other authority. The President of Bangladesh
& exercises this power in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister.

128 Bangladesh and Global Studies
6. The Financial Powers and Functions: No money Bill, or any Bill which
involves expenditure from public money, shall be introduced into the Parliament
except on the recommendation of the President. The President has the power to
authorize expenditure from the Consolidated Fund for supplementary or excess
grants.

7. The Powers Relating to the Defense Service: The President is the supreme
commander of the Defence Services of Bangladesh. He may take any defensive
measure against any external aggression or internal disturbance.

The Proclamation of Emergency Power of the President

If the President is satisfied that a grave emergency exists in which the security or
economic life of Bangladesh, or any part thereof, is threatened by war or external
aggression or internal disturbance, he may issue a Proclamation of Emergency,
provided that such Proclamation shall require for its validity the prior counter
signature of the Prime Minister. While a Proclamation of Emergency is in
operation, provisions of certain articles of the constitution and enforcement of
fundamental rights remain suspended for such short period as may be specified in
the order.

The Status of the Prime Minister

The Prime Minister of Bangladesh is the head of the Government in the
parliamentary form of government adopted by the constitution. He/she is the chief
executive of the Government. S/he is the leader of the parliament chief of the
Cabinet, and appoints the Council of Ministers. If the Prime Minister resigns or
loses the confidence of parliament, steps down. The entire Government
machinery revolves round him/her. In the Parliamentary form of government, the
status of the Prime Minister of Bangladesh is very high. Although the Prime
Minister is appointed by the President, the latter has to act with the advice of .the
former. The Prime Minister is the main-stay of the Cabinet. He/She holds a very
prestigious position. As per the constitution, the Prime Minister remains
accountable for his/her governance to the Parliament.

The Powers and Functions of the Prime Minister

1. The Administrative & Executive Power: The Prime Minister gives an
effective lead to the entire system of administration, and all the important
decisions are taken by him/her. All types of executive powers are conducted and
regulated by the Prime Minister in the name of the President. The Prime Minister
appoints the ministers and distributes offices among them in his discretion. All
actions relating to justice, finance, ministry of foreign affairs and administration .
of the government are conducted with the advice and views of the Prime Minister. 3

The Organs of Bangladesh Government and the System of Administrative 129
The Prime Minister appoints the high government officials himself.

2. The Legislative Power: The Prime Minister plays a vital role to legislation.
S/he patronizes the ruling party in the Parliament. The legislative actions of the
Parliament revolve round him/her.

3. The Power of the Prime Minister in Leading Parliament: The Prime
Minister is the leader of the parliament and s/he adopts an effective role for
successful and smooth management of the Parliament. S/he leads to have
confidence and cooperation of the opposition. The Prime Minister has to
discharge many functions for the sake of interest of all members of the Parliament.
The President may summon, adjourn and dissolve parliament with the written
advice of the Prime Minister.

4. . The Financial Power > The Prime Group work: Describe why the Prime
Minister reserves an important authority | Minister is the Chief Executive.

in financial concern of the state. The | Group work: Prepare a table showing
Finance Minister prepares and presents | the functions of the Prime Minister.

an annual financial statement before the parliament, popularly known as the
budget with the advice and directive of the Prime Minister. The financial policies
of the Prime Minister reflect in the budget presented by the Finance Minister. The
President grants the fund for meeting the administrative expenditure with the
advice of the Prime Minister.

5. The Role of the Prime Minister to Coordinating the Government Policies:
The Prime Minister coordinates the government policies. Since the entire admin-
istrative machinery revolves round him, his/her lead plays a vital role to coordi-
nating executive actions of all ministries, offices and directorates. S/he presides
over the inter-ministerial meetings.

6. The Role of the Prime Minister as the Principal Spokesman of the Nation:
The Prime Minister acts as the spokesman of the nation. S/he introduces Bangla-
desh to the world and represents the country. S/he informs the nation of any
national crisis. He/she issues statement on behalf of the state.

7. The Leader of the Majority Party: The Prime Minister is the leader of the
ruling party in a democratic system of government. S/he plays an important
role in determining the party policy and implementing the functions within and
outside parliament as well. A prudent role of the Prime Minister as the leader of
the party and the establishment of a cooperative relation with the opposition are
very important in practice.

Thus the Prime Minister plays a very important role in all the spheres of

Forma- 17: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

130 Bangladesh and Global Studies
administration .of the government, legislation, superintendence of financial
management, political stability with a great sense of responsibility.

The Legislature

The Legislature is one of the three organs, of the government. The other two
organs are the Executive or Administrative Department and the Judicial
Department. The functions of the legislature include the power of making new
laws and repeal or modification or alternation of the existing laws. From the
perspective of Bangladesh, the Parliament is a part of the legislature. The
legislature is composed of persons elected by the people, or the members
nominated in some particular extents. This is the legislative body that legislates,
and any law enacted by such body is finally passed with the assent of the
President.

The Powers and Functions of Jatiya Sangsad, the Parliament

The name of the Legislative Body of Bangladesh is the 'Jatiya Sangsad, i.e. the
Parliament. The Jatiya Sangsad is the predominant part of the legislature. Any law
enacted by the Parliament is finally passed with the assent of the President. The
legislature is an organ of the government.

The Parliament of Bangladesh consists of 350 members as per the 15th
amendment of the Constitution. The 300 members will be elected by the direct
enfranchisement of the people, and the rest of 50 seats are reserved for women.
They will be elected by the 300 members of the Parliament in accordance with the
law. The reserved seats do not preclude any woman from contesting the election
in the general seats. Out of the members of the parliament, a speaker and a deputy
speaker will be elected by the Members. The normal tenure of parliament is five
years from the date of its first meeting unless it is earlier dissolved by the
President.

The Parliamentary system of government has been established as per the twelfth
amendment of the constitution in 1991. As a result, the powers and functions of
the Parliament have been much augmented in respect of legislation, control over
the administration, superintendence of finance, election, etc. in Bangladesh.
Different types of-powers and functions of the Parliament are discussed below:
1. The Legislative Power: Article 65 vests the legislative power of the republic
in the Parliament dictating that 'there shall be a Parliament for Bangladesh (to be
known as the House of the Nation), in which, subject to the provisions of this
constitution, shall be vested the legislative powers of the Republic’. The ,,
Parliament has the plenary power to make any new laws and to repeal or modify $&

The Organs of Bangladesh Government and the System of Administrative 131
or alter the existing laws. The Parliament, by law, can delegate the function of
making subordinate legislation to some other authority to legislate any law,
by-law, rules and regulations provided that such a delegation does not amount to
delegation of essential legislative function. The president has, in exercise of the
power, to assent to the bill presented by the Parliament within 15 days of presen-
tation of the Bill to him.
2. Power to formation of the Government: The Parliament plays an important
role 'to form the government. The member who commands the support of the
majority of the members of parliament is appointed as the Prime Minister by the
President, and he forms the cabinet. But if the =
Prime Minister ceases to retain support of the
nn . list describing the functions

majority in parliament, the government succumbs | of the Parliament.
flopped.
3. The Financial Power: The Parliament virtually keeps an eye on how and why
the funds of the state would be spent. Neither money Bill nor any Bill involving
expenditure from public fund can be introduced without the assent and
jurisdiction of the parliament. The Parliament has the right to impose tax and
collect the same. The Government presents a budget before the parliament every
fiscal year. The government has to bear the expenditure as per the budget passed
by the Parliament. Discussions are also held upon expenditures of the
Consolidated Fund. In fine, the whole expenditures of the state or the government
are made in the discretion of the parliament.
4. The Power to Judicial Affairs: The Parliament may impeach the President on
a charge of violation of the constitution, or of grave misconduct, or on the ground
of physical or mental incapacity. The Parliament also, in exercise of the power,
may impeach the Speaker, Deputy Speaker and Ombudsman where
necessary. The Parliament virtually reserves the right to discharge such actions
relating to different national important judicial affairs.
5. The Power to Electoral Affairs: The Parliament is vested with the electoral
power for different elections including the parliamentary election, elections to
appoint the President, the Prime Minister, the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, the
Ombudsman, etc. The Parliament also has the power to elect different committees
for the parliament.
6. The Power to Protection of an Amendment in the Constitution: The
Parliament plays an important role as depository of the constitution. Any revision

ce in the constitution is presented before and accepted by the Parliament.

S

AQ

132 Bangladesh and Global Studies
7. Miscellaneous Power: : The Parliament has the right to legislate for
establishing subordinate courts other than the Supreme Court. The Parliament has
the power to declare war or sign any international treaty. The Parliament also
legislates for rules and regulations relating to local governance.

The Procedure to Control of the Administrative Department by the Parliament
In a democratic state, the Administrative Department should be kept subdued and
subjected, and such subjection is ascribed by the Judicial Department. The Prime
Minister and his/her Cabinet are held accountable to the parliament for all sorts of
administrative actions. The government remains accountable to the Parliament.
The Parliament may praise the government for its good actions and also criticize
any action of the Government. The government has to pay heed to attitudes and
views of the Parliament. The Parliament, in a democratic form of government,
virtually has the control over the government. The Parliament establishes its
control, in exercise of the power of proposing postponement of parliament,
censuring motion, questioning to the Prime Minister or other ministers, or
non-confidence motion. Any minister even the Prime Minister may be bound to
vacate his/her office if s/he ceases to retain confidence of the parliament in
him/her. The resignation of the Prime Minister automatically terminates the
appointment of other Ministers. In such situation, dissolution of the Parliament
will follow in most cases and a general election will be held de novo.
Jurisdiction and Functions of the Judicial Department of Bangladesh
The Constitution of Bangladesh contains an important feature respecting
separation and independency of the Constitution. The Bangladesh Judiciary is
well-organized and well-administered as well. The Supreme Court helps run the
administration to its specific course in accordance with the Constitution declaring
any rule contravening the constitution illegal. The Bangladesh Judiciary keeps the
rale of law unhampered and keeps the democratic system invigorated at its level
best.

The Judicial system of any country is like a scale measuring the standard of its
justice de facto. So the judicial system helps introduce a competent governance
system by establishing a just and neutral judicial system in the country. As an
important organ of the state, its jurisdictions and functions are very extensive in
general terms, which are mentioned in brief below:

1. To Dispense Justice: The main tasks of the Judiciary include judging the
convicted for the offence and the infringer of law in according with the existing «
laws. To this effect, the judges independently and freely try judicially on the basis S

The Organs of Bangladesh Government and the System of Administrative 133
of equity as per law in due course. The Judicial Department virtually tries to
establish the justice in the society in order to award punishment to the accused
through investigation of the real occurrence in any suit either of civil or criminal
in nature.
2. To Make Law: Usually, the Judiciary is vested with the charge to expound and
apply the law in exercise of the power. Besides, the judges usually unify new laws.
The judges, in absence of appropriate law in some extents of practice, pronounce
a judgment unanimously, which is considered a law with effect.
3. To Protect Fundamental Rights: The court itself is vested with the
responsibility to protect the fundamental rights of the people generally included in
the constitution.
4. To Expound and Apply Law: The key functions of the judiciary include
expounding and analysing the law, and enforce the law accordingly. Law means
law enacted by the parliament, juridical order and different customary usages.
5. To Safeguard the Constitution: The judiciary acts as custodian of the
constitution. It delivers an ultimate expounding of the constitution. Judicial
reviews have a great importance in the US system of governance where the
Supreme Count holds authority to a great extent.
6. To Settle Disputes: From time to time, disputes
in different agencies, bodies of the state and the | describing the functions of
individuals thereof arise, and the judicial | the Judiciary of Bangladesh.
department makes such disputes settled.
7. To Advise the Administrative Department: The judicial department also
provides advices upon request from the administrative department.
8. Miscellaneous Functions: The judiciary executes of miscellaneous functions
in exercise of the power such as awarding citizenship to alien citizens,
determining the guardianship, looking after the properties belonging to minors
and granting licences, etc.
The Role of the Judiciary to Protecting the Rights and the Rule of Law
The judiciary, in a democratic system, prescribes what to do to keeping up the
people's freedom, and may take all necessary arrangement not to infringe individ-
uals' human rights. In other words, it may be said that the judiciary protects
personal freedom of the people. This department virtually acts as a safeguard of
personal freedom by protecting civic rights and fundamental rights recognized by
x the constitution de facto. The judiciary has to, in order to protect such rights, adopt
some particular methods. The procedures are: 1. mandamus writ, 2. certiorari writ,

134 Bangladesh and Global Studies
3. Prohibition Writ, 4. hebeas corpus Writ, 5. quo warranto etc. The judicial
department has the right to issue these writ jurisdiction through which the judicia-
ry, upon application of the aggrieved person, may order the relevant accused
person or authority, to appear before the court in exercise of the power. In recent
days, the judiciary of Bangladesh has issued different important writs suomoto in
order to protect human rights in Bangladesh which has largely been applauded by
the public.
The Appointment Procedure of Judges
The appointment procedure is the first step to maintain independency of judiciary
in Bangladesh. Different types of procedures are applied in order to appoint
judges to High Courts in abroad. Such as a the election by the people, b. the
election by the judiciary and c. the appointment by the Chief Executive of the
government. Qualifications for appointment of the judges have been defined in
the Constitution of Bangladesh. The President, upon compliance with the
fulfillment of provisions for appointment, appoints the judges with the advice of
the Chief Justice. Since there are different intricacies in the other both procedures,
most of the states generally serve appointment of the judges by the Chief
Executive of the Government in these days. The President appoints the Chief
Justice, and other judges to the high court, but subordinate judges get appointed
through undergoing competitive examinations.

Section 7.2: The Administrative System of Bangladesh
A smooth administrative system is a must for internal peace and development of
any state. The administrative laxity may cause the origination of a turmoil
consequence. Cooperation of public with the administration is very essential in
order to properly implement functions relating to administration. Bangladesh
achieved her independence on December 16, 1971. This land was a province of
Pakistan during pre-independence time. A provincial administrative system was
introduced here. During that time, the administrative system of this country could
not become people-oriented. The previous administrative system has become
largely updated in consequence of a vast developmental initiatives during
post-independence. Instead of the US system, a unitary system was introduced.
The existing administrative levels of Bangladesh are- 1. The Central
Administration, 2. The Divisional Administration, 3. The District Administration,
and 4. The Upazila Administration. The Government of Bangladesh consists of
different ministries and divisions. A ministry is vested with the administration of
one or more divisions. The Minister is the head of a ministry, and a secretary is -
the main Administrative Officer thereof. Each department or ministry is linked S

The Organs of Bangladesh Government and the System of Administrative 135

with the divisions or the directorates. The Director General, the head of the

Directorate. Besides, the full or semi-autonomous organizations, boards or

corporations retain included under such directorates. Enforcement of the

Government adopted laws, rules, implementation of programmes or the projects

are made under the concerned organizations. Basement of conducting the

administration by the Government Officials includes cognition and training on the

administrative functions.

The Central Administration

Minister

A secretariat of Parliament holds the central place

within the administrative system in Bangladesh. It

resembles like a nerve in the administrative system. .

This secretariat is the key source of functions of

Bangladesh Government. All government decisions

are first approved in the secretariat. In general terms,

different ministries and their divisional offices are

collectively called 'secretariat'. A minister is

appointed with the charge of every ministry in the

discretion of the Prime Minister. The Minister is a

political member and head of the ministry. A

secretary executes his duties as the Chief Executive

Officer or the Administrative Officer, who, being

appointed by the Public Service Commission, gets

promoted to that position (secretary) through his

service, capability, training following specific

hierarchy The Secretary is vested with the entire

charge of the ministry. The Secretary assists the

Minister in discharging his functions. The Minister,

in order to conduct the ministerial functions, receives

the advice with regard to the relevant matter from the

secretary in exercise of the power. The secretary Organogram of central

serves the Minister in different spheres of functions. government

The Bangladesh Secretariat is based on bureaucratic system in nature. As per

rank-stairs within the administrative structure, the rank of 'Assistant Secretary' is

the lowest, the consecutive upper positions are (gradually upward) as respectively,

Senior Assistant Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Joint-Secretary, Additional
wo secretary, Secretary, Senior Secretary and then the Minister is above all in the
S ministry. The rank-stairs are figured beside : all administrative functions are

136 Bangladesh and Global Studies
implemented through these structure-levels in the course of time. Decisions or
directives descend not ascend. No divisional chief may send anything directly to
the Minister without the advice of the secretary. There may be more than one
secretary,additional secretaries, joint secretaries or junior officers, but the number
of officials depends on the importance of the ministry and its volume of works.
Any resolution held by the secretariat is dispatched to the department, and also to
the divisional, district and upazila administrations as well. Thus noticed that the
secretariat holds the central point of importance within the administrative system
in Bangladesh. All departments, offices and organizations are held accountable to
the secretariat actually in practice.

Composition and Functions of the Local Administration in Bangladesh

There exists any form of local governance in every state, but it differs in form and
nature and usually not alike. Like difference in a political system, the local admin-
istrative system of the same may usually differ from another country's. Behind
such differences, there are reasons following geographic location of a particular
country, variegation of the people, history-tradition, experience, sequence of
transformation, production system, political culture, etc. We, Bangalee Nation-
our local administrative system, like modeling the state, gets ahead through a
historic change of situations and a series of political processes. From time to time,
it often gets laid in an orderly manner.

The Local Administration

A local administration means a form of administration at local levels comprising
of divisions/districts and upazila governance. It is formed for the sake of conve-
nient governance. Through such form of process, the central administration and
control thereof approach outskirts. The main objective of the central administra-
tion is to maintain law and order, collect revenues and implement government
decisions. In this form of administration, working individuals who relate to the
local administration are considered agent or representative of the government,
such as, the Divisional and Deputy Commissioners and the Upazila Nirbahi Offi-
cer (UNO) in our country.

The Divisional Administration

The Divisional Administration occupies the second level next to the central one in
importance. The whole of Bangladesh has been divided into 8 divisions in order
to maintain its administrative system in Bangladesh, namely, 1. Dhaka, 2.
Chittagong, 3. Rajshahi, 4. Khulna, 5. Barisal, 6. Sylhet, 7. Rangpur and
8. Mymensing. The Divisional Commissioner tops the divisional «
administration. A number of employees including an Additional Commissioner &

The Organs of Bangladesh Government and the System of Administrative 137
and a Private Secretary to the Commissioner serve the divisional administration.
The Divisional Commissioner is one of the Principal Officers of Bangladesh Civil
Service, and he holds an office equivalent to that of a Joint-Secretary by position.
He is a revenue officer of the Government of Bangladesh de facto. The Divisional
Commissioner monitors the functions of the deputy commissioners. He serves
like a bridge to establish connection in between the divisional and district
administrations as well. His functions include planning for public welfare
activities and implementing the same. He has to conduct help and service related
works, and to take arrangement confronting natural disasters, etc. He serves as an
agent to the Government of Bangladesh indeed.

The District Administration

The District Administration occupies the third level of the administration system
of Bangladesh. There are 64 districts in Bangladesh at present. The. entire
governance in the district revolves round the Deputy Commissioner. The Deputy
Commissioner is the most prominent person within the relevant district. He is an
experienced member of Bangladesh Civil Service He enjoys the rank of Deputy
Secretary in Administration. His position next to that of the Divisional
Commissioner.

A link of the central administration always exists with the district administration.
All the decisions regarding district affairs that are held accepted by the
Bangladesh Secretariat are directly dispatched to the Deputy Commissioner. The
Deputy Commissioner conducts the district administration in accordance with the
central decision in exercise of the power. The district administration is conducted
and rotated following the Deputy Commissioners. The deputy commissioner is
held accountable for his actions to the Divisional Commissioner, whereas the
Divisional Commissioner is held accountable for all actions to the central
administration. The Divisional Commissioner causes to establish a bridge-like
connection in between districts and the center. The Deputy Commissioner
discharges an extensive volume of functions.

Functions of the Deputy Commissioner

The Deputy Commissioners execute a comprehensive functions which are
described in brief below:

1. Functions Relating to the Governance: : He implements all decisions and
policies relating to governance which are accepted by Bangladesh Secretariat,
Forma- 18: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

138 Bangladesh and Global Studies
superintendents works of different government offices within the relevant district,
provides all out support to the government in respect of deciding public policies
and maintaining smooth governance.

2. Functions Relating to Revenues: The Deputy Commissioner being the Chief
Collector may impose and assess land revenues and other taxes and collect the
same in exercise of the power. An Additional Deputy Commissioner (revenue)
helps him discharge his functions.

3. Functions Relating to Coordination: Role of the Deputy Commissioner
towards coordination affairs is not less important. He maintains inter-official
communication among all the government offices existing in the territory of the
relevant district. He, for making development in the district, also keeps close con-
tact with important and respectable individuals in order to solve different prob-
lems of the locality.

4. Functions Relating to the Local Governance:

The Deputy Commissioner plays a vital role | Group work: Prepare a list
towards the local governance affairs. He
superintendents the local organizations having oes ees
concern with the local autonomies. He appears in the role of caretaker in respect
of the Upazila and the Union Council within the jurisdiction of the relevant
district.

5. Functions Relating to Humanity: The Deputy Commissioner or DC plays his
role in different humanitarian. functions too. He virtually controls business firms
and markets of the district. During any natural calamity; he remains engaged in
welfare activities to alleviate woeful conditions of the people in danger. During
such situations, he distributes centrally allocated money, food garments and medi-
cine among the victims of the district.

6. Activities about Education and Culture: He maintains law and order to
establish peace and tranquility with the help of the District Police Super.

7, Functions Relating to Disciplinary Measure: He maintains law and order to
establish peace and tranquility with the help of the District Police Super.

8. Other Functions: The Deputy Commissioner being the Principal Officer,
discharges a number of responsibilities. He is the Chief Controller to the District
Publications and Newspapers Division. He stands by the people who sustain loss
due to different natural disasters like flood, cyclone, drought, heavy rainfall,
shortage of rainfall, etc. Power to issuing licenses for firearms, spirit, venom, etc.
is vested in him. The deputy Commissioner discharges preventive magistracy.As &

The Organs of Bangladesh Government and the System of Administrative 139
the District magistrate he looks after the law and order situation and co-ordinates
everything. So the Deputy Commissioner may be called the Director, Superinten-
dent and Controller of the District.
The Upazila Administration
In our country, Upazila is considered an important administrative level. Each
district is divided into several Upazilas (sub-districts). Every administrative
Thana (Police Station) is an Upazila itself. At present there are 490 Upazilas in the
country. The Upazila Nirbahi Officer (UNO) is the administrative officer of the
Upazila, who coordinates directives sent to him by the DC and the Chief Execu-
tive Officer of the District, and other functions. He also one of the members of
Bangladesh Civil Service. He implements all development programs of the Upazi-
la with the cooperation of other officer at Upazila level to his level best. Besides,
he superintendents the Upazila administration, and peace and tranquility in the
Upazila. His functions include all kinds of development and administration of the
Upazila on the whole.
The Local Autonomy
A local autonomy means self-governance of the people-in a particular area, and is
managed by the representatives elected by the people, who are held accountable
to them. The main features of the local self government are: a. legal basis, b.
elected body, c. opportunity for the people to participate decision-making process,
d. ability to, collect funds by imposing and assessing taxes, e. widened and
multi-faced functions, designing plans and implementation, f. conducting func-
tions independently without any control of the Government central or local. Such
is the democratic political system Or the practiced form of the governance system.
Notwithstanding the units of the local administration, in such situation, are not
totally independent from the control of the central or high level authority, but they
enjoy the freedom to a great extent. Local autonomous organizations of Bangla-
desh are the Union Council, the Upazila Council, the District Council, the Munici-
pality and the City Corporation, Hill District Councils etc.
The Union Council
The comparatively most ancient local organization of our country is the Union
Council. Since the pre-British period till date, it is found by reviewing the
development of this organization, that it has been rendering service aiming at
establishment of a real representative local governance in the rural areas. 'The
co Chowkidar Panchayet Ain-1870' was introduced during the British rule in order to
& cooperate in maintaining the law or order in rural areas. That system was

140 Bangladesh and Global Studies
introduced in order to maintain the law and order and to conduct different
development activities by a five-member authority. In 1885, The Bengal Local
Act' was passed with a view to forming a governance system which would be
more accountable at local extent. According to this Act, a Union Committee was
composed at the Union level, a Mahkuma (sub-division) Board at the Mahkuma
level and a District Board at the district level. In 1919, only one local government
was established in the name of Union Board' by 'The Palli Ain' abolishing the
Chowkidari Panchayet and the Union Committee. During Pakistan period, it was
named as the Union Council. After Bangladesh achieved her independence, as per
a local government ordinance, local government system having 3-layers including
Union Council, Thana Council and District Council, was introduced in the
country in 1976. A radical change is made in composition of Union Council by the
Local Government (Union Council) Amendment Act-1997, accordingly a Union
Council will generally consist of an average 10-15 villages to be headed by a
chairman, 9 general members directly elected by the people, besides 3 elected
female members (in the reserved seats). Earlier a Union was divided into 3 wards,
whereas by the revised Act, the number has been increased upto 9 wards, one
member from each of the wards which amounts to 9 members to be directly
elected by the people. Female members, basing on 1 in each 3 ward, to be directly
elected by eligible voters. The tenure of the Union Council is five years. There
are 4553 Union Councils in total in Bangladesh.

Functions of the Union Council

All functions of a Union Council have been categorically classified into mainly
two kinds, such as, 1. major functions, and 2. optional/voluntary Activities.
Major Functions Include

1. Maintaining Mass Discipline: One of the key functions of a Union Council is
to maintain security for the villagers.This Council in order to discharge its some
specific functions plays a vital role such as to appoint few Chowkidars and
Dafadars in each Union, to take steps for restraining crimes, indiscipline and
smuggling, to play role in refuting quarrels, continuous riot and disturbances, to
execute the charge relating to village court, take initiatives to settle family
disputes and discontents, and so on.

2. Welfare of and service to the people: : To acquaint the people with different
services and programmes taken by different public and private agencies in the
spheres of agriculture, health, Pisces-culture, live-stock farming and education, .,
and to undertake projects and to implement the same under programmes ofthe $&

The Organs of Bangladesh Government and the System of Administrative 141
tural structure organization, relieving poverty, sanitation, water supply and water
extraction, self-employment and socio-economic development programs, etc. are
included in the key functions of the Union Council.
3. Planning on the Local Economic Development and Implementation
thereof: Union Council has to take overall steps for agricultural development in
the area to attain development of rural handicrafts, grow markets, make people
informed of advanced method on Pisces-culture and live-stock farming, establish
smooth distribution of highbred seeds, plants and
fertilizers, provide the community people with | table describing functions
suggestion on income increasing activities, create | ofa Union Council.
employment, constructing damps, etc.
4. Functions Relating to Administration: The Union Council has to direct,
superintendent and control the Secretary, Rural Police and other employees of the
Union Council, arriange all meetings, compile and dispatch different statements,
execute the responsibility entrusted by the competent authority, etc.
The Optional/Voluntary Activities
Inter alia, to provide public and royal passages and to maintain them, to help the
widows, orphans, poor and destitute persons financially, to take arrangement for
providing first aid, to supervise the primary education system and to spread the
light of education door to door, to protect environment, and plantation; to
maintain cleanliness of the Union, to set up library, to provide arrangement for
garden and playground, public relations, to perform disaster management and
relief activities, to list out the destitute, to execute all kinds of census related
responsibility, to look after the public properties like- roads, culvert, canal, damp,
telephone and electricity lines, to take initiatives to rural electrification, etc.
The Upazila Council
Another important unit of the local governance system in Bangladesh is the
Upazila Council. There is a provision in law to compose a Upazila Council
through election in order to ensure the autonomous rights of the local people in
490 Upazilas under 64 districts of the country. Upazila system was first introduced
earlier in 1983, but this system could not take a permanent basis for different
reasons later. To this effect, The Upazila Council Act-1998 is reintroduced and
whereas it is expedient further to amend the said Act, The Upazila Parishad Ain'
was passed on April 6, 2009 which is known as "Upazila Council (Reintroduction
o and Revision of the repealed Act) Act, 2009. According to the Act, a Upazila
$ Council will consist of the following individuals, namely-

142 Bangladesh and Global Studies
a. 1 Chairman
b. 2 Vice-Chairmen including a female
c. Chairmen of all unions within the territory of the Upazila
d. Municipality Mayor
e. Female members elected in the reserved seats.
The Chairman and the Vice-Chairman will be directly elected by the people.
Number of seats equivalent to one-thirds of both the Union Council and the Mu-
nicipality included in the Upazila territory shall be reserved for female represen-
tatives who will be elected out of and by the female members/councilor from the
reserved seats of both the Union Council and the Municipality included in the
same Upazila territory as well.
The Upazila Council will act for overall development in the Upazila. Success in
all actions will depend on participation by the people.
Formation of the District Council
The Government of Bangladesh introduced an Act namely The District Council
Act, 2000' on July 6, 2000. According to this Act, a provision provides the
formation of District Council in every district other than Khagrachhari,
Rangamati and Bandarban hill districts. A District Council will consist of 1
Chairman, 15 members and 5 female members of the reserved seats. The tenure of
a newly formed District Council will be five years.
Functions of the District Council
Functions of the District Council are of two categories, such as, compulsory and
voluntary.
Compulsory Functions Include
1. Reviewing all development programmes within the district;
2. Reviewing implementation progress of projects undertaken by the Upazila
Council or the Municipality;
3. Providing arrangement for general library and maintaining the same;
4. Constructing, maintaining and developing public passages and bridges;
5. Planting tress beside the passages and maintaining the same;
6. Cooperating other organizations engaged in implementing development %
programmes within the area; &

The Organs of Bangladesh Government and the System of Administrative 143
7. Aiding, cooperating and encouraging the Upazila and the Municipality as well;
8. Implementing development plans vested in the District Council by the government;
9. Executing other actions assigned to it by the government from time to time.
Voluntary Activities
The District Council as parts of its voluntary activities may undertake extended
programmes regarding education, culture, social welfare, economic development,
public health and public works. The council may provide monetary grants to
academic institutions, and take other initiatives to develop education, sports,
games, etc. for the common people; set up information centre, observe national
days including our National Day; extend civic education, establish benefactors for
indigent; make shelters, widow-house, orphanage and other institutes; gambling,
using the intoxicating substances, adolescent offences and other unsocial
practices; make arrangement for the settlement of disputes by arbitration
amicably, set up an ideal agricultural farming for economic development, and
make advanced agricultural system popular among the farmers.
The Municipality or Town Council
The Pouroshava (Municipality) is the name of local governance agency of the
town. There is a Municipality for each municipal or town area in Bangladesh.
Number of municipalities small or large, at present in Bangladesh is 317.
The Formation
A municipality consists of a Chairman and few members based on wards, to be
directly elected by the eligible voters. The members are known as Commissioners.
The number of each municipality members is not equal. The number may be more
or less following volume and population of the municipal area.
Functions
The Municipality has to perform diverse sorts of activities for solving different
problems in order to render development.
1. Functions Relating to Planning: The Municipality composes different
projects and implements them for overall development of town and other adjacent
areas within its territory. The Municipality may array roads and highways or
habitations of residential areas for beautification of the town.

co 2. Functions Relating to Mass Security: The Municipality provides

& arrangement for fire prevention and extinguishment. Besides, it provides

144 Bangladesh and Global Studies
life-support assistances for the victims during and post-disaster period, affected
by flood, devastative epidemic, famine, tornado, etc.

3. Functions Relating to Public Health: The | Group work: Prepare
Municipality provides arrangement for maintaining | a list of activities of a
public passages, latrine, dustbin, extraction of | Municipality.

sewerage dirt and refuses as well. Besides, it

superintendents different public health related services, such as, establishment of
clinics, child-house, mother-house, etc. preventing contagious diseases and
providing remedies for, forbidding sale or purchase of polluted and adulterated
victuals, supplying pure water, etc.

4. Functions Relating to Habitation: The Municipality is vested with authority
to regulate any construction or reconstruction works. It approves plans and
designs for constriction of houses.

5. Functions Relating to Education: : The Municipality's educational functions
include construction of academic institutes and hostels, providing training to the
teachers, awarding stipend/scholarship to poor and brilliant students, distributing
books free of cost, providing compulsory education and mass education, etc.

6. Functions Relating to Improvement of Public Passages: For the sake of
public passages, the Municipality constructs passages, names them and maintains
the same, keeps the passages neat and clean, provides lighting on the roads and
regulates trafficking of vehicles on roads and highways.

7. Functions Relating to Social Welfare: The Municipality sets up welfare
centres and orphanages for the orphans, destitutes and indigent persons and
manage them within its territory.

8. Functions Relating to Plantation: The Municipality is vested with functions
relating to maintenance and development of forests within municipal area, planta-
tion and maintenance of plants beside roads and at public places, maintenance of
park, garden and open spaces for recreation of the common people, and providing
playgrounds to play thereat.

9. Functions Relating to Arbitration: The Municipality may take initiatives to
settle or may settle different disputes and problems arising from awarding fine to
the people living within the Municipality, limitation of boundaries, family prob-
lems and quarrellings by way of arbitration amicably. In this extent of service, the
relevant ward commissioner and the Chairman where necessary, may act as arbi-
trator to serve the purpose. The Municipality is an important and effective gover-
nance system in the district and The upazila towns, serving the town-dwellers by .,
participating even in solving their problems they face. s

The Organs of Bangladesh Government and the System of Administrative 145
The City Corporation
The municipalities namely Dhaka, Rajshahi, Chittagong, Khulna, Sylhet, Barisal,
Rangpur, Comilla , Narayanganj and Mymansingh have been promoted to the
City Corporations. Dhaka City Corporation has been divided into two
corporations, namely the Dhaka North and the Dhaka South.
The number of members of the City Corporation depends on its volume and
activities. The City Corporation consists of a mayor and a deputy mayor who are
directly elected by the people.
The City Corporation has been formed in order to solve the widespread problems
of the city such as arrangement for supply of water and drinking water, drainage
system, removal of dirt, refuses, etc. and garbage management, increasing civic
privileges and rendering overall development in the territory.
Importance of the Local Administration
In modern times, importance of local autonomy in respect of administering the
state, undoubtedly plays a great role that has no limit de facto. At present, any
state consists ofa vast area and a large number of population, it is far impossible
for the central government to, staying in the capital, smoothly govern the whole
territory of the country, to superintends different matters in regular manner, to
expedite development activities and to
ensure well-balanced development Group work: Make a debate on the
without distinction ensure | importance of local administration
well- balanced development without
distinction as to region on the whole. The superiority of the local administration is
that it keeps unaffected from central dependency and bureaucratic intricacies that
facilitate taking immediate initiatives or steps to solve different problems and in
respect of local developments by the light of diversity and materiality at local
level corresponding to particular area where necessary. This system helps make
the foundation of democracy much steady by ensuring participation of the people
in the local governance and development activities, growing awareness.
Transparency, accountability in the administration are ensured. As a result the
base of democracy becomes strong. The state and Governance become more
advanced.
Reference Books

1. Bangladesh Politics, government and administrative development 1757-

2000 by Dr. Harun-or-Rashid

Forma- 19: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

146 Bangladesh and Global Studies
2. Civics, Open School, Bangladesh Open University, by Professor
Harun-or- Rashid and Professor Shawkat Ara Husain.
3. Modern State Philosophy and organization, by Abdul Qayum.
Exercise
Short Questions:
1. Write the names of three major organs of the Government.
2. How does the Parliament predominate the administrative department?
Explain.
3. Explain the importance of the local administration.
Descriptive Questions:
1. Narrate the powers and functions of the Prime Minister elaborately.
2. ‘Parliament virtually controls the administrative department’. Make this
quotation clear with grounds.
3. Explain how the judiciary establishes the rule of law.
Multiple Choice Questions:
1. Which one is the example for a state consisting of a single legislative house?
a. The United States of America
b. The United Kingdom
c. India
d. Bangladesh
Read the following passage and answer the question No. 2 and 3
Hridoy informed his friend living abroad that the Prime Minister of Bangladesh
discharges her duties and applies her power in different matters such as in
patronizing financial functions, leader of the political party and parliament related
authority.
2. Which one out of the information passed by Hridoy is correct in
respect of discharging functions by the Prime Minister —
i. Patronizing the ruling party
ii. Approval to annual budget
iii. Preserving the rights of the members of the Parliament. oo
Ss
aq

The Organs of Bangladesh Government and the System of Administrative 147
Which one in the following is correct?

a. i&ii

b. i &iii

c. i & iii

d. i, i& iii

3. For executing the above functions, the Prime Minister is called —
a. Chief of the Government
b. Chief Executive
c. Head of the Parliament
d. Leader of the party

Creative Questions:

1. The habitations in three villages under a district of the southern region of
Bangladesh were damaged by a cyclone. The Deputy Commissioner ‘Ka!
provided victims with cash money and treatment for the injured. He holds
reputation through smoothly discharging his functions maintaining law and
order within the relevant district, implementing government policies and
collecting revenues, etc, in exercise of the power.

a. What is the tenure of a Union Council?

b. What is impeachment? Explain.

c. What type of activities of 'Ka' does ‘taking steps for the victims of
cyclone’? Explain.

d. 'The Deputy Commissioner is a friend of the district’, evaluate this quotation
by the light of the section described, and the subject-matter perused.

2. Bellal Hossain is the representative duly elected by eligible voters of his area.
There are 12 more representatives in his office. He got 3 tube-wells installed,
supplied 5 rings for set up of toilets (latrines) and distributed fertilizer among
the farmers in his area.

a. What is the number of the Members of Parliament made limited by
the Constitution in accordance with 15" Amendment of the Constitution?
b. What do you understand by the Local Autonomy?
c. What organization is Bellal Hossain the Chief of? Explain.
% d. Is Bellal Hossain's work as mentioned in the section enough for
8 the said organization? Give arguments in favor of your answer.

Chapter-8
The Democracy of Bangladesh and the Election
Democracy is by far the most acceptable and challenging form of government in
the present world. It is extensively getting very popular in almost every country of
the world. Though there is no universally accepted definition of democracy, it
generally means a form of government in which the sovereign power resides in
the people as a whole, and is exercised by them, instead of a system of govern-
ment where power is occupied by a small number of individuals as in an oligar-
chy. The characteristics of Democracy are Governance through public representi-
tive, popular participation in public functions, preservation of freedom and
promotion of public welfare. The system of government in Bangladesh is also
democratic. The national election for parliament is held in Bangladesh too. For
this purpose, the government has established an Election Commission and formu-
lated codes of conduct with the provisions of awarding punishments for violating
the same. In this chapter, we will know about the democracy, the election and the
electoral code of conducts of Bangladesh.
® 4 ~
08 Ny ry) |
“y . \\
After reading the chapter, we will be able to —
e explain the concept of democracy; e explain the establishment and the
e explain democratic process of functions the Election Commission
Bangladesh; in Bangladesh;
* explain the concept of political parties; e describe the electoral code of conducts;
e explain the roles of the ruling party and : . oe
of the oppositions in the democratic ¢ explain the punishment for violating
system of Bangladesh; codes;
e explain the democracy and the election e be aware of the democracy, the
as well; political parties and the election, and
e explain the National Parliamentary we may be inclined to grow as citizens
Electoral Process of Bangladesh; possessing democratic values. S

The Democracy of Bangladesh and the Eletion 149
The Concept of Democracy
The former US President, Abraham Lincoln (1809-1865) defined democracy as
the "Government of the people, by the people, for the people". According to Pro-
fessor Getel, ‘Democracy is a form of government where people are entitled to
participate in exercise of the sovereign power on behalf of them’. Generally,
democracy is, in fact, a system of government formed and governed for the. sake
of the interest of majorities. It does not mean that democracy will deny views and
interests of the minorities, rather all are considered equal in 'the eyes of the laws
in democracy. So, the democracy, which has been established as the most effective
system to regulate public affairs so far, is undoubtedly a popular concept in the
20th century, That is why democracy is one of the subjects worth studying pertain-
ing to society and state.
Establishment of the democracy as a form of government is a consequence of
historical process. Democracy was first established in the city of Athens of ancient
Greece. The Athenians would understand such a political governing system by
democracy in which the whole people could directly participate. The Athenian
democracy could not continue on the move later. A considerable long duration in
the Middle ages got elapsed in the diarchy of religion and lord, the autocratic reign
and the feudal system of governance. After a long gap, democracy got the rebirth
in Europe in the 17th and 18th centuries. In the 19th and 20th centuries, democrat-
ic system was established in different countries of the world. England is marked
as the main source of democratic trend of thoughts of the 18th century. However,
democracy has become so much successful that the modern civilization has turned
into a democratic civilization.
Different Types of Democracy
Democracy is usually introduced in two basic forms: (1) The Direct Democracy
or Pure Democracy and (2) The Indirect Democracy or Representative
Democracy.
The Direct Democracy
The Direct democracy is a form of government in which the eligible and adult
citizens participate in the governance personally. Initially the direct democracy
was introduced in small city-states in ancient Greece. All the citizens of the state
directly took part in legislation, decision-making, imposing tax, justice and other
jurisdictions. But the concept of citizen’ was narrow then, and every one did not
enjoy the honour of a citizen.-A Modern state is big in size and has a large
% population as well. So there is no scope to exercise direct democracy over there,
% but in some regions of Switzerland, the system of direct democracy still exists.

150 Bangladesh and Global Studies
The Indirect or Representative Democracy

Indirect Democracy means rule by elected representative. In this system the
citizens do not directly take part in the state affairs. The elected representatives
enact laws and run the state as well. In the modern states, the indirect or represen-
tative democracy is prevailing.

The Merits and Demerits of Democracy

The good qualities of democracy are as follows:

In democracy, the rules of laws are established. It is a system of responsible
governance in which the government is elected directly by the people, and
remains accountable to the citizens. A democratic system of government is a
system which is governed by the public opinion. Any autocratic oppression,
repression or control are not at all desirable in this system. In democratic
governance, people's interest gets priority in making the state policy. People's
individual freedom and freedom of speech are ensured in this system. As a result,
a political sense grows among the people. In this system of governance, the. ruling
party or the government is treated as the people's government. When such
government loses the trust of the people, it can no longer survive. Under such
form of government, an individual may enjoy the privileges of self-development.
Moreover, a democratic-government is a benevolent government, and its main
goal is the welfare of the people.

In a democratic form of government, there are some limitations and shortcomings.
Ancient sages and philosophers like Plato and Aristotle termed 'democracy' as a
ruling system of the illiterate and incompetent people because many irrational,
incompetent and corrupted person may be elected in this system for it being a
tules of the majority. As a result, the objectives of the democracy are not achieved
in lack of knowledgeable politicians, and many problems arise in governance. As
a matter of fact, democracy turns into a governance by the majorities where the
minorities cannot send their representatives to the legislative body and for which
the government in power remains disinterested in their matter of complaints or
needs whatsoever. Many controversial opinions and views are noticed in
democracy for which difference of opinions and conflicts on political issues are
created, and destroy the national unity. Besides, when political parties fail to come
to a consensus, the nation becomes divided, and democracy becomes ineffective.
In undeveloped countries, the ruling party governs the state by keeping their own
party interest up. As a result, neutrality becomes futile, and agitation among the
mass people is inevitable. Moreover, democracy is largely an expensive ruling 2
system involving frequent electoral arrangements, forming public opinions, 8

The Democracy of Bangladesh and the Election 151
comprehensive propaganda, etc. for which the political parties as well as the
candidates have to spend a lot of money.
The Democracy of Bangladesh
The Parliamentary system of government was adopted in Pakistan after the British
Rules had been over in 1947. Bangladesh was a part of Pakistan having the name
of East Pakistan. It took long 9 years to form a constitution for the state in the
national assembly. In fact, during this period, the Governor General and the
bureaucrats governed the state in the name parliamentary rales. Either the Prime
Minister or the Governor General used to form the cabinet with a chosen few
without taking any opinion of the National Assembly. General Ayub Khan
declared the martial law in 1958 two and a half years after formulating the
constitution through which the transient democratic system of Pakistan came to an
end.
But subsequently, a demand to establish Parliamentary democracy had been raised
and the first National Assembly Election was held in Pakistan in 1970, and that
was the last election in the undivided Pakistan. The Awami League got the
absolute majority in the election under the leadership of Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman, but the Junta of Pakistan did not hand over the power to
Bangabandhu, rather they swooped over the unarmed Bengalis. Being elected
leader through majority votes Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman proclaimed
the independence of Bangladesh on 26 March, 1971. Ultimately Bangladesh got
her independence through a bloody war of 9 months in 1971.
Since the post-independence till today, three political parties came to power —
The Awami League, The BNP and The Jatiyo Party, and a considerable period was
under military regime. After the liberation, The Bangladesh Awami League first
formed the government under the leadership of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman. The Bengali nation achieved their independence under the leadership of
Bangabandhu, a manifest symbol of their long struggle against the Pakistani
oppression and repression. The Awami League government made an important
contribution to the reformation of a war-torn state, to the foundation of the
infrastructure and the restoration of different industries and the nationalization,
improvement of administrative system in due course. The Awami League
government initiated different steps to establish the democracy by introducing the
parliamentary form of government, drafting a democratic and progressive
so constitution within 10 months after theindependence (1972), achieving the
& recognition of 140 states as an independent country, getting memberships of the

152 Bangladesh and Global Studies
United Nations, the OIC, and other international organizations, and by holding the
General Election on 7 March 1973 for the first time in the country as per the newly
drafted constitution.

On 15 August 1975, the Father of the nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman, and all of his family members embraced martyrdom at the hands of a
group of aberrant army personnel backed by a local and foreign notorious circle.
In the same year the four National leaders tragically fell victim of assassins in the
Dhaka Central jail. Thus Bangladesh confronted a turning reversely which
continued until the mass revolt of 1990. The country was under the Martial law for
15 years after the Post-75 political turmoil when the people's voting right was
snatched away. The Pro-army supporting parties are formed by disintegrating
different political parties or alluring leaders thereof tactfully. The despot in power
took over the control of polling booths in the name of election andconstituencies
were shared out. The Election Commission became ineffective and helpless with
concern. Student led mass movement of 1990, the formation of the Caretaker
Government under leadership of the Justice Shahabuddin Ahmed, and holding the
National Parliament Election on 27 February 1991 introduced a mentionable
chapter focusing on political revolution and retrieval of democracy in Bangladesh.
The Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) won the election held in 1991 and
formed the government. Immediately after the election, the cabinet governance
system was reintroduced in the parliament on 6 August 1991 by the Constitution
(Twelfth Amendment) Act, 1991 upon mutual consent of all the parties in a body.
But such mutual understanding between the ruling party and the opposition could
not last long. A dissension among the parties grew regarding the hugerigging
by-election in the constituencies of Mirpur, Dhaka (1993) and Magura (1994) of
the National Parliament within a short time. It created a suspicion among the
parties in opposition at the National level that no election would be free and fair
under the government of the ruling party. However, different political parties
including the Awami League initiated a demand of holding the subsequent general
election under a neutral caretaker government. and at a stage 147 MPs of the
opposition resign from the Parliament. The Awami League, the Jatiya Party and
the Jamaat-e-Islami began movement demanding the formation of a Non-party
Caretaker Government, The BNP Government ignored their demand, and
doggedly held the General Election on 15 February 1993. The Awami League and
other political parties boycotted the election, and the so-called voter less election.
The election lost its legitimacy and importance due to boycott by the opposition
parties.In the 4-days session of the parliament a bill for establishing the system of x
Caretaker Government was passed and included in the Constitution as the BS

The Democracy of Bangladesh and the Eletion 153
Thirteenth Amendment in 1996. and a constitutional provision for general
election under a Non-party Caretaker Government was provided in the
constitution.

The 7th parliament election was held on 12 June 1996 under the Care taker
Government. The Awami League formed the government getting the majority in
the Seventh Parliamentary election held on 12 June 1996. The Awami League
government initiated different policies to strengthen the democracy in the state.
Among this forming different parliamentary committees, introducing Prime
Ministers Question-Answer Session, signing the Chittagong Hill Tracts peace
Treaty, and introducing the system for women to be elected in Union Councils and
other local government elections through direct voting are mentionable.
Following the eighth parliamentary election held on 1 October 2001, the
four-party alliance led by the BNP-Jamaat formed the government. This
government purposefully and for the sake of its party interest extended the age
limit of the retirement of the Justice in service for 2 years from 65 to 67, as part of
its blue print to choose their convenient and probable candidate for the next chief
advisor and made impartiality of the subsequent Chief Advisor of the caretaker
government and the Chief Election Commissioner controversial. A most critical
political situation was created in the country. At such a state in 2007, an indirect
army interference by the chief of the Army General Moin U Ahmed took place in
politics. The then army-backed government of the Chief Adviser Dr. Fakhruddin
Ahmed the then chief of the interior Govt. was in power for two years, and they
tried their best to survive through an unconstitutional way by arresting both the
party-chiefs of the major two political parties, establishing a special tribunal for
their trial, imposing the so-called reformation on the existing political, parties, and
issuing numerous ordinances. After two years this Caretaker Government was
compelled to declare time and schedule for the general election. The election of
the 9th parliament and the election was held on 29 December, 2008. The greater
alliance led by the Awami Leagueformed the government by achieving a landslide
victory and the 10th National Parliament election was held on 5 January, 2014. In
this election the Awami League again formed the Government after winning the
election in return for successful administration and comprehensive national
development.

The Political Parties

A political party is an important organization in the modern state governance. In
fact, nowadays, a representative government means a political government. No
existence of a democratic state is imagined without the political parties. The
public opinion, party manifesto, supporters and politically conscious citizen
Forma- 20: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

154 Bangladesh and Global Studies

groups are formed centralizing on the political parties.

The Definition of a Political Party

In general sense, a political party is defined as an organized group of people that

tries to assume power in a lawful manner by propagating their political manifesto

and forming public opinion.

According to Professor Getel, "a political party consists of a group of citizens

more of less organised, who act as a political unit, and who by use of their voting

power, aims to control the government and carry out their general policies."

Generally a political party may be formed under the creative leadership of an indi-

vidual or a group. So, it may be said from this point of view that a political party

is an organized group of people that tends to identify the problems of the citizens

by the political leaderships, and building the public opinion in a specific course of

actions solve the problems, and tries to form the government of their own in a

lawful manner. Such political parties, apart from ensuring the national interest and

progress, play roles in strengthening their party and preserving the interest of their

party members as well.

Maclver, a political scientist, defined a political party in this way, "we may define

a political party as an association organised in support of some principles or poli-

cies which by pro-constitutional means. It endeavours to make the determinant of

the government."

Therefore, it can be said that a political party is an organization of the people

whose members and supporters agree in opinions about such the problems and

seek to take over the power as the constitutional way and to implement the agenda

fixed by the party.

The Objectives of the Political Parties

The main objectives of the Political parties are —

1. To identify the problems of the country, and make programmes and policies

and implement them being united on principles;

2. To create public support by making the development policies and plans and

place before the public;

3. To achieve national progress and development of the country by implementing

party policies and programmes and to keep up the national interest above all;

4. To assume power through a systematic legal electoral process for the fixed

tenure, and to establish political dominance on others. s
Q

The Democracy of Bangladesh and the Eletion 155
The Roles of the political Parties in a Democratic System
The existence of a powerful and well-organized political party is one of the
leading provisions for the success in a democratic system of government.
Professor Finer says, "Modern democratic governance is the political party
government in practice’. Any form of government either democratic, or
autocratic, or socialist may exist in a state, but the importance of political parties
is well accepted. In fact a democratic system of government, the necessity and
importance of the political parties are the foremost. The roles of the political
parties in a modern democratic system are described below:
Every Political party after identifying different political, social, and economic
problems of the country adopt its policies and throw specific programmes. Such
policies and principles are usually mentioned in the party manifesto.
The political parties arrange meetings, | tdividual work: Describe why the
gatherings, holding talk-shows to make | political parties are essential in a
their party policies and plans public, | democratic system of government.
and try to have supports by expressing | Group work: Make a list showing the
their opinions through the newspapers. | key functions of the political parties.
The important functions of the political parties are to nominate candidates in the
national election of the country and convince the voters through canvassing. They
launch an all out campaign for their candidates to make them victorious.
The main function of the political parties is to form the government after winning
the election. Usually, the party that gets the majority in the election forms the
government. After assuming office, the party or the alliance rules the country on
their party-principles and the commitment declared earlier. The political parties
play a great role in mobilizing the citizens to participate in the politics and develop
a political consciousness.
The opposition has an important role in a democratic system of government. A
party or the parties that fail to get the majority in the election play the vital role of
the opposition. The opposition helps the parliament active by initiating debate,
criticising the policies of the government, raising pending proposals and
expressing opinions on different issues. The opposition keeps the government to
ensure rule of law by holding discussion, issuing statements and criticising it
outside the Parliament. Besides, the opposition represents alternative policies to
counter the policies of the government, and plays responsible role and criticise in
a constructive way.
co The members of the ruling political party stay with the people of their respective
& localities, and explain the policies and decisions of the government to the people.

156 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Again, the public in their turn express their opinions and place their demandsto the
government. Basically the political parties served as links between the
Government and the people through their members.

The political parties carry on their movements in order to realize the due rights of
the citizens in any independent state. The political parties provide leadership for
freedom from subjection and the achievement of independence. For example, the
Awami League led struggles and movements for the independence of Bangladesh.
The roles of the political parties to a democratic state are inevitable. They detect
the needs, demands and problems of the public, and undertake programmes for the
overall welfare of the people. Besides, the opposition represents a shadow
government in the parliamentary form of government, because, if the ruling party
loses the support and fails in a vote of confidence in the parliament, the opposition
avails of the opportunity of assuming power and form the government instead.
The Relationship between the Democracy and the Election

The fundamental aspect of democracy is the election. No democratic system can
be imagined without election. There is no other alternative to election in a
democratic form of government to run the state by the people's representatives.
The Election is held in order to elect public representatives at different levels of
the government.

In the modern democratic form of government, all powers of the country belong
to the people, and the people exercise their democratic rights by participating in
the election and casting their votes. In this process, the people may elect honest
and competent representative on the basis of their evaluation, and the government
is formed and run by those who are elected with the mandate of the people. So, the
legal electoral system has a relationship with the picking of lawful authority of
election and the formation-of a democratic government.

Through electoral process, the people may discard the previous government, i.e.
the previous ruling party. The people do not trust the government or the party that
ignore the interest or opinion of the people. The people give a stern reply through
the election. The sovereignty of the people is exercised through the election.

The System of Election in Bangladesh and the National Parliament

Direct democracy was customary in the city-states of Ancient Greece. That is, the
citizens would directly participate in the ruling system individually. But the
modem states are big in size with a large population. So, it is not possible for
every citizen to directly participate in the process of governing. That is why the =
people perform the duty indirectly by electing their representatives through 8

The Democracy of Bangladesh and the Eletion 157
enfranchisement.
The election is a process through which representatives may be elected from the
candidates of different parties in order to govern the country on behalf of the
people. In other words, the election is a system through which the adult and eligi-
ble citizens of the state elect their representatives by casting their votes as per their
own choice. In almost every country, the election is held by ballot. The citizens
who have legal rights to vote or enjoy the dignity to cast votes are called voters or
electors. All voters in a body are generally termed as the electoral body1. The
whole of the country is divided into some electoral constituencies. Each
constituency elects its representative, and the Parliament or the Legislative
Assembly is formed with the elected representatives. In Bangladesh, the
parliament election is held at national level. There are two kinds of electoral
systems in different countries of the world, such as, the direct election and the
indirect election. The electoral system through which the voters cast their votes
directly and elect their representatives is (QQ
called the Direct Election. In Bangladesh the {
direct election system is in practice. The
indirect election system is an electoral process PSE
in which the voters casting their votes directly | =f) 4) 5”
form a midterm electoral agency known as | ff! # is e | ob.
Electoral College.The Electoral College ee a
finally elects the representative or the =a
President. The total areas of Bangladesh have
been divided into 300 constituencies for the
electoral convenience. The Election Photo: 9.1: The National Parliament
Commission declares the time for holding building of Bangladesh
election and the ‘election schedule' at the same time. At the time of election, the
candidates are initially nominated by the political parties. In fact, the candidates
get the opportunity of fighting in the election having nomination from the political
parties. Besides there is a reservation of 50 representation of women in the
parliament, that are divided in proportion of elected constituency.
The Election process, i.e. the election related activities start immediately after the
declaration of the Election Schedule by the Election Commission. The
compilation of the voter list, determination of the constituencies, appointments of
the returning officers, distribution of the nomination papers, receiving and sorting
out of the nomination papers, distribution of the symbols among the candidates,
a) printing out the ballot papers, fixing the polling booths and making the necessary
S arrangements, appointing presiding, assistant presiding and polling officers,

158 Bangladesh and Global Studies
distributing ballot papers, holding election, computing votes, and declaring
formally the results are the usual activities of the Election Commission. That is,
all the election related activities are the parts of the election process.
The Formation of the Election Commission, Its Jurisdiction and Function
The Formation of the Election Commission
In Bangladesh it is the Election Commission which is responsible to conduct
elections. The Commission holds elections as a separate independent, unrestricted
and neutral institution. It is a constitutional body. The Election Commission
consists of a Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) and some other Election
Commissioners. The President appoints the Chief and other Election
Commissioners. The Chief Election Commissioner acts as the Chairman of the
commission. The tenure of the Commission is five years. The Commissioners
may submit resignation to the President. They shall be removed from their post for
insubordination and inability.
The Jurisdiction and Functions of the Election Commission
The Election Commission makes the voter list and all the necessary arrangements
for holding elections at the local government or the national levels. If any dispute
arises regarding the voter list, the commission will resolve it. The Commission
holds the elections of the Union Councils, the District Councils, the City
Corporation, the Municipality and the National Parliamentary. The administration
assists the Election Commission in the discharge of its functions.
The Election Commission fixes the boundary of the constituencies, and its
decision is final to resolve any dispute regarding the boundary. The Election
Commission appoints the required number of Returning and Polling officers for
holding the-election. The Commission makes the necessary arrangements to elect
the President by the members of the Parliament as per the constitution.
The responsibility to sort out the nomination papers vests with the election
Commission. If any dispute on the sorting out of the nomination papers arises, the
decision of the Commission is final. The Commission holds the by-election at the
National and Local levels. In case any dispute arises regarding the eligibility of
any member of the parliament, the Commission deduces the settlement for the
same. The Election Commission discharges its functions in accordance with the
constitution and the law.
35
3
N

The Democracy of Bangladesh and the Eletion 159
The Electoral Codes of Conduct
In order to hold elections, the necessary electoral codes of conduct are mentioned
below:
1.The Compliance with the Electoral Rules: All concerned shall comply with
the electoral rules and regulations accordingly.
2.The Interdiction of Payment of any Subscription, Grant, etc. to
any Organization: No candidate shall be entitled to donate, subscribe or to prom-
ise to do so directly or indirectly in his constituency from the date of announce-
ment of the schedule till the day on which votes will cast, and also no promise
shall be made to undertake any development project in the jurisdiction of his con-
stituency.
3.The Electoral Campaign:
3.1. Without distinction as to political parties and candidates, all concerned will
enjoy the equal rights in electoral campaign. No bar to any meeting, procession or
campaign shall be made against the counter part;
3.2. No mass meeting causing impediment to public passage on any road or
highway shall be called/held without the permission of the competent authority.
3.3. If someone impedes meeting or procession, complaint against that
person,the complain has to be made before the police agency. The candidate
or/and his supporters shall not be entitled to do anything of their own;
3.4. No political party or candidate shall be entitled to use any government leaf-
lets, vehicles, or to receive help from any public officer or employee or otherwise
any national opportunity;
3.5. No posters, leaflets, or handbills belonging to any candidate shall be
replaced by the same of any counter party any way;
3.6. No electoral camp can be set up on the passage or road any way;
3.7. No government Bungalow, circuit house, rest house and govt. offices shall be
used as a place of election activities for any party or candidate;
3.8. On the occasions of election, no loss or damage to any citizen's landed prop-
erty, house or any other movable and immovable assets shall be made any way, no
such work that disturbs peace shall be done;
3.9. All concerned shall abstain from wall writing in any form;

Ss

160 Bangladesh and Global Studies
3.10. No entry with motor cycle,, mechanical vehicles into the fixed limit around
the polling booth; And carrying any kinds of firearms and explosives is legally
punishable;
3.11. No influential individual or public officer shall exercise illegal interference
to the electoral functions;
3.12. No say striking religious feelings or causing fidgetiness shall be had any
way.
The Penalty for Electoral Crimes and Codes of Conduct
In accordance with the Representation of the People Order, 1972, Electoral
Offences and their penalties have been defined. Offences and their penalties are
mentioned hereunder:b. to receive any bribe;
a. to violate the rules relating to election expenses;
b. to receive any bribe;
c. tocast false vote or with pen-name;
d. to influence the election unfairly, to collect votes forcibly or to causes bar to
voting;
e. to exercise any false play concerning the personal character of a candidate or
any of his relations calculated to adversely affect the election of such candidate;
f. to make or publish a false statement relating to the symbol allocated to any
candidate;
g. to make or publish a false statement on the withdrawal of candidature by any
candidate;
h. to call upon or persuade any person to vote with the distinction as to a particular
religion, community, race, caste, sect or tribe, etc.;
i. to compelany votar to leave without casting his vote;
j. to treat unlawfully, and
k. Violation of prohibition imposed on the meeting and procession is an corruptcrime.
Besides spoiling a ballot paper or box, intentionally or Group work: Identify
removing the same elsewhere, forging ballot paper, the nature of violations
capturing or polling booths and causing any obstacles to of electoral code of
electoral etc., are election offences. conduct.
90
SI
N

The Democracy of Bangladesh and the Election 161
The Penalty for Offences
a person who s guilty of such corrup ‘ Group work: Narrate the nature of
practices is punishable with rigorous sity duc & didate
impri t for a term which may be pee ee
imprisonmen oo. electoral constituency who violated the
Suits may be instituted at the | aioctoral code of conduct,
competent court for such extended to
10 years and shall not be less than two years, and also with fine election related
offences, but no suit may be filed against the Electoral Officers-in-Charge and
employees without permission from the Election Commission in writing.
Exercise
Short Questions:
1. How will you define democracy? Describe.
2. What do you understand by the Electoral code of conduct?
3. What does the direct democracy mean?
Descriptive Questions:
1. What does a political party imply?
2. Narrate the Bangladesh National Parliament Election System.
3. Describe the types of conducts worth violation of the electoral code of
conduct.
Multiple Choice Questions:
1. Which amendment of the constitution reintroduced the Parliamentary
Governance System in Bangladesh?
a. the fourth amendment
b. the eighth amendment
c. the tenth amendment
d. the twelfth amendment
2. When a democratic system of government is applied —
i. Opportunities of self-development of the people are enhanced
ii the Government becomes accountable to execute its responsibility
iii Quelling conducts get increased in governance system
Forma- 21: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

162 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Which one is correct in the following —

a i

b. i&ii

c. i& iii

d. ii & iii

Creative Question:

1. Most of the members of Mitul's Club want to personally be the General
Secretary. No one abstains from longing for the same, all of the members
empowered some persons to select a Secretary. Subsequently the
empowered individuals selected one of them a General Secretary. Although
the newly appointed General Secretary gets a tried to obtain their
confidence, but he became controversial later due to the lack of prudence
and with the charge of keeping up the interest of his nearest ones, and the
process of selecting a Secretary stuck in question.

a. Write the definition of democracy as defined by the Political Scientist
Maclver.
b. What is the Election Commission?
c. Explain the process applied to select General Secretary to Mitul's Club
in the light of the subject-matter perused by you.
d. "The selection process will be best subject to removal of weakness in
selection process" Explain.
oo
S|

Chapter-9
The United Nations and Bangladesh
No man can be fully developed without human rights. Human Rights mean having
ownership of privileges and opportunities of a human being for his survival. Two
world wars took place in the last century in our world, namely the First World War
and the Second World War. Human rights had been infringed during these wars to
a great extent. Millions of people were put to death in these wars.
Widespread devastations that took place during the First World War in 1914 made
the human beings greatly afraid of such war and sincerely desirous for peace and
harmony. Consequently this time the leading countries of the world got united to
peace and thus they founded the League of Nations with a view to reestablishing
peace, but this organization utterly failed to serve the purpose, which rather
resulted in causing the Second World War in 1939. The consequence of the Second
World War was more stigmatized and panicky than that of the First World War in
the history of human civilization. At this time the leading nations of the world
formed the United Nations to establish World Peace. The united nations play an
important role in improving the condition of child and women including global
peace. The United Nations send peace keeping force to different countries for
defending human rights and maintain the world peace and security. We will know
about the United Nations and the roles of Bangladesh in the United Nations as
well.
\ 5 J { N Libre 65) 4\ | ‘al
After reading this chapter, we will be able to —
e describe the background of founding © evaluate the roles of the peace keeping
the United Nations; force of Bangladesh in the United Nations
e evaluate the roles of the UN in to establish global peace and security;
Bangladesh; e berespectful to the activities launched
e explain the roles of the United Nations by the UN in maintaining the world peace.
in dispelling all sorts of
discriminations towards women;
Background of Establishing the United Nations
War cannot lead to anyway to settle any crisis among the nations. It causes terrific
% devastation and immeasurable sufferings and anxiety for the mankind. In the
§ history of the twentieth century, two world wars took place. The First World War

164 Bangladesh and Global Studies
took place at the first quarter (1914-1919) and the Second World War during the
forties (1939-1945). Basically, the arbitrating peace-loving people were not silent
towards the devastations during the wars in respect of settling conflicts between
nations. Then a "League of Nations' was founded on January 10, 1920 in order to
maintain international peace and security after the First World War. But the onset
of the World War II showed that the "League of Nations' had failed to maintain the
world peace due to its organizing toothlessness and other vulnerability. Again, the
destructions of the Second World War in 1939 engulfed the whole world. Millions
of people died, got injured and crippled, and became homeless. Every country
losed their young generation capable of working. However, the awful fright
caused by the Second World War made the world conscience panicky, and gave
them a jolt. The world leadership of that time felt the necessity of a new
international organization to maintain peace and security under the circumstances.
Subsequently in 1943, conferences were held in Tehran and Moscow among four
major powers, and the representatives of the United Kingdom, the United States
of America, Russia and France jointly came to a conclusion to form the United
Nations. Then the UN formally came into being on 24 October, 1945. That
is why the United Nations Day is observed every
year on 24 October worldwide. All independent | background of establishing
states are the members of the United Nations. the United Nations.
The United Nations consists of five main organs including a secretariat. The five
organs are the General Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and Social
Council, the Trusteeship Council (which is currently inactive) and the
International Court of Justice. The General Assembly comprises of all the member
states of the United States. It is also called the 'Deliberative Assembly’. The
Security Council is the most important and effective organ. It is made up of 15
member states including 5 permanent member states-China, France, Russia, the
United Kingdom and the United States-and IO non~permanent states. The five
permanent members hold veto power, i. e. the right to block any proposal. The
functions of the Economic and Social Council (ECO SOC) assist the General
Assembly in promoting international economic and social cooperation and
development. The Trusteeship is formed with a view to looking after such regions
not independent so far. The function of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) is
to settle the international dispute. This office of the International Court of Justice
is situated in The Hague of Netherlands. The Secretariat is the Administrative
Division of the United Nations. The General Secretary is the chief executive of it.
The Headquarters of the United Nations is situated in New York City of America. .,,
S
aq

The United Nations and Bangladesh 165

Membership of the United Nations

Any peace-loving state of the world can be the member of the UN if it accepts the

obligations contained in the present Charter. At present, 193 states of the world are

the member states of the United Nations. Bangladesh was included therein in

1974 as the 136th Member state.

The objectives of the UN

The objectives of the United Nations are clearly depicted in the UN Charter in

order to maintain international peace and security, and develop friendly relations

among nations. The objectives are as follows:

1. to keep peace throughout the world in cooperation with the United Nations
by eliminating all types of threats, aggressive disposition and activities that
may cause to break the peace;

2. to develop friendly relations and cooperation among nations by showing
respect towards equal rights of all human beings;

3. to develop friendly relations among all nations in the fields of economy,
society and culture as well;

4. to encourage respect for each other's fundamental rights and freedoms for all
without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion;

5. to settle international disputes by international rules in peaceful manner;

6.  torecognize the rights of Self-discipline for every nation, and to keep up the
same; and-

7. to follow modus operandi of the United Nations in order to implement the
objective in cooperation with the United Nations.

The Roles or Functions of the United Nations in Bangladesh

All of the missions of the United Nations' organs are in Bangladesh. Bangladesh

being the 136th member state of the United Nations always attains special

attention from the UN. All the UN associate organizations, from its inception,
have been working in Bangladesh for changing the socio-economic condition of

Bangladesh in due course. By this time, four Secretary Generals, at different

times, visited Bangladesh. Although Bangladesh's contribution to the United

Nations is not much so far, but Bangladeshi troops play an effective role on

conducting peace keeping missions by laying down their lives instead. Besides,

after being a member state of the United Nations, Bangladesh has been playing
ce an important role towards this international organization. In 1979-1980, the
& election of Bangladesh as a transient member of the Security Council is a

166 Bangladesh and Global Studies

recognition of her role and a sign of trust of the UN as well. Since 1984, the use

of Bangla in modus operandi of the United Nations has been a glory for our

nation. In 1986, the then Foreign Minister of Bangladesh, Mr. Humayun Rashid

Chowdhury presided over the 41st session of the United Nations’ General

Assembly. His election as the president of the session reminded the international

community of the roles especially played by Bangladesh. The country has been

successful in resolving the disputes regarding the distribution of the water of the

Ganges and the issues of the hill tracts of Chittagong with India by following the

rules of the UN about the peaceful settlement of long term problems. The

associate organizations of the United Nations serving in Bangladesh are as

follows:

The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)

The UNDP embarked on its journey in Bangladesh on 31 July 1972. Since its

inception, the UNDP has been conducting various kinds of socio-economic

development activities in Bangladesh. The UNDP has fixed 8 projects under the

Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in Bangladesh by 2015. Currently, the

UNDP is working on 17 projects in achieving Sustainable Development Goal

(SDG) in Bangladesh.

The United Nations International Children's Education Funds (UNICEF)

The UNICEF has been working in Bangladesh to ensure the fundamental rights,

under privilege and specially girl children and for their rights of education and

medical care. The United Nation's Education, Science, Cultural Organization

(UNESCO), UNESCO has been working for development of the Education,

Science and Culture in Bangladesh.

The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)

The FAO of the United Nations has been working in Bangladesh in order to ensure

the food safty for the huge population of this country.

The World Health Organization (WHO)

The WHO has been conducting different programmes in Bangladesh such as

supplying medicine and conducting immunization programme for the children to

prevent polio. ;

The United Nations High Commissions for enn yore! Boe tes ene
become benifitted by the roles of the

Refugees (UNHCR) UN. Explain.

The UNHCR is mediating on the Rohinga

issue between Bangladesh and Myanmer. They contribute to the expenses of %

running the refugee camps. Besides, this office plays a vital role on different issues S

The United Nations and Bangladesh 167

including the housing for the stranded Biharis in Bangladesh.

The United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM)

It observes different kinds of programmes for the development of women in

Bangladesh. They involve them in realizing the demands of women and in the

financial activities of them. It also acts in different issues including safe labour

and immigrations for the women here. United Nation's Education, Science,

Cultural Organization (UNESCO) has been working for the development of

Education, Science and Culture by Bangladesh.

The United Nation's fund for Population Activities: This organization runs

many activities in order to improve the situation of the population of Bangladesh.

So, we notice that the United Nations' programmes are praiseworthy in overall

development of Bangladesh.

The Roles of the United Nations on the Elimination of all Forms

of Discrimination against Women:

The United Nations, from its inception, enacted different international charters

and rules for eliminating discrimination towards women and for preservation of

their rights such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) in 1948,

besides, the United Nations conduct a number of functions for women

development that are as follows:

. 1949- to confer approval of the United Nations for quelling human
trafficking and for ending of prostitution;

° 1951- to pay the same amount of wages for the same sorts of labour to either
a male or a female worker/labourer by The International Labour
Organization (ILO);

«  1952- to enhance women's political rights in order to cast votes and to
contest with the same;

< 1957- to introduce the right to preserve nationality or to change the same for
the married women;

° 1960- to draw up charters eliminating discrimination in women's
employment and their trading arena;

¢  1962- to draw up charters declaring minimum age for women's marriage and
registration thereof;

¢  1962- Equal rights in respect of education for women and girls;

° 1975- Declaration of Women's day;

x ¢ 1975- The First World Women Conference that was held in Mexico;
Re 1976-1985 -The Women's Decade declared;

168 Bangladesh and Global Studies

* — 1979- Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDA W). It was effected since 1981;

*  1980- The Second World Women Conference held in Copenhagen;

: 1985- The Third World Women Conference held in Nirobe;

* 1992- The recognition of the Women's rights on preservation and
management of the environment and development conference at Rio D
Genro;

*  1993- The recognition of the Women's right as human right at Vienna
Conference in Austria;

*  1995- The Fourth World Women Conference held in Beijing. The declaration
of the World Women's Conference was substantiated as 'see the world with
women's eyes’. A platform for action or Beijing Modus Operandi was adopt-
ed;

*  2000- Beijing Plus Five Conference;

°  2005- Beijing Plus Ten Conference held at New York.

Therefore, we observe that the United Nations has been playing leading roles by

holding different international protocols, seminars and modus operandi for

welfare of the women.

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against

Women (CEDAW, 1979)

Group work

The Charter on Elimination of all forms

of discrimination against women known | towards women and explain the roles of the

as the CEDAW Charter was adopted on UN. —

18 December in 1979 by the United

Nations General Assembly, and came into torads Wein UN

effect on September 3, 1981 with the es

support of 20 countries. 132 countries ee

including Bangladesh ratified this Charter so far. A special feature of this Charter

is that it is a complete charter on the rights of women, which comprises of

different issues adopted at different times in order to eliminate discrimination
against women.
%
R

The United Nations and Bangladesh 169
The Roles of the CEDAW Charter against the Discrimination towards Women
The Charter that was adopted by the CEDA Won the basis of equality without
discrimination of any kind as to race, sex etc. The issues on the equal rights of the
women were raised there too. Since these rights had been legally mandated,
ratifying countries are bound to comply with this Charter. In this Charter, it was
admitted that though legal rights for women were in force in different countries,
the discrimination existed over there, and it was done through foiling their access
into economic or social development. The Charter ensured the state's
responsibility towards its women contained 30 Articles, out of which the first 16
Articles describing all sorts of discriminations that existed against the women, and
the rest 14 Articles explains how to eliminate such discrimination against them.
On November 17 1999, the United Nations General Assembly, in order to resist
tortures on women, declared 25 November as 'The International Women Torture
Resistance Day'. Thus from 25 November-IO December is observed as 'Women
Torture Resistance Fortnight’ across the globe. The UN has declared 8 March as
'The World Women's Day’. Therefore, we observed that the United Nations, from
the very beginning, has been doing a lot for women's development and making
women's position much uplifted.

The Roles of the Bangladesh Peace Keeping troops in the United Nations
Bangladesh is a peace-loving country. Whereas =

the United Nations has been founded with a view 64.2 f Z

to maintain international peace and security. FO %) AN

That's why, the contribution of Bangladesh to the ed

United Nations Peace Keeping Mission is ""™" = k .
envious. More than 11,000 Bangladeshi soldiers ae | lah.
and police are presently deployed in 45 conflict Yi Af ;
zones in 11 countries of the World. 5 /\ \ b-]
Achievement of an unprecedented success by the rd f ——
Bangladesh troops in African countries has / = NY :
increased the acceptability of Bangladesh in the Photo: 9.1: Bangladesh Army
same countries i.e. across the globe. Bangladesh _in the UN Peace Keepin Mission
has obtained her acquaintance as a model for

establishing peace and a peace-loving nation across the world. When the troops of
other countries were not getting acceptability in diffeqrent African and Asian
countries due to political bias, Bangladeshi soldiers have not only got the
acceptability but also they have earned love and respect of the local community.
Our Bengali language has deserved the dignity of the 2nd State loanguage in
Sierra Leone. A very busy road in Ivory Costa has been named as ‘Bangladesh
road’. Not only bangladesh Army, but also the police, male and femal, are engaged
Forma- 22: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

170 Bangladesh and Global Studies
in peace keeping mission as well: Bangladesh
has achieved a widespread acquaintance in the Wg a Llane
United Nations or the World in consequence of = *
their tireless diligence. | ca |
The Peace Keeping Mission in the United AN z
Nations was not so easy. Bangladeshi troops vail ; ee
standing in between the armed militant guerilla | Oa |
tribes in Africa and Asian countries observed Vs af y wie,
the ceasefire and helped to establish peace and _ photo: 9.2: Bangladesh Police Force
harmony there very aptly. 88 soldiers have in the UN Peace Keeping Mission
attained martyrdom to establish world peace.
Many of them have been injured. | Individual Work: Identify the
Bangladesh soldiers have proved that they | fields of the Bangladesh peace
are ready to lay down their lives for peace. | keeping force in the UN.
Bangladesh is a poor country in consideration of its economy, but it has a magnan-
imous population. It’s trained up military and civil forces have boldly contributed
to maintain international peace and security through the United Nations. The
developed countries contribute to the United Nations in the form of subscription,
whereas Bangladeshi soldiers and the police, i. ¢. peace keeping troops have lost
their lives and uplifted the dignity and pride of the nation and thus making a con-
tribution set an example of keeping global peace.
Exercise
Short Questions:
1. Why has Bangladesh achieved the dignity of the Second State Language in
Sierra Leone?
2. What is Veto?
Descriptive Questions:
1. Describe the background of establishing the United Nations.
2. Evaluate the contribution of Bangladesh in keeping world peace.
Multiple Choice Questions:
1. In which year did Bangladesh obtain the United Nations' membership?
a. 1974 b. 1980 =
c. 1984 d. 1986 s

The United Nations and Bangladesh 171
Read the following passage and answer the question No. 2 & 3.
Mr. Tapos Roy, while staying at a Jungle in Africa, informed his wife that their
goals to ascribe ceasefire among the militant groups, have been fruitful over
there.
2. The programme Mr. Tapos Roy is taking part on his nation’s behalf is-
i. The United Nations Mission
ii. Peace Keeping Mission
iii, Bangladesh Mission
Which one of the following is correct ?
a. i&ii b. i & iii
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
3. What achievements have been made by Bangladesh abroad so far for the said
activities?
a. has been developed with the Military Strategic Achievement
b. has influenced foreign countries
c. has formed a disciplined soldiers
d. has maintained the World Peace

Creative Questions:

1. A housewife named Rita, despite her higher education, was not allowed by
her family to participate in any working sphere. She was able to get a job ina
private firm after showing a number of reasonable arguments and continuous
struggle. She was paid there lesser financial facility in comparison to that of
one of her male colleagues having the same position. Once she discussed the
matter before the authority in order to ensure her reasonable respect and due
facilities, and she became successful at last. Her brother Lablu, a member of
the Bangladesh police, working in Sierra Leone, came to know this news and
became very glad and he greeted his sister from there.

a. When was the League of Nations founded?
b. What does ‘Deliberative Assembly' mean?
c. Explain an associate organization of the United Nations that works with a
view to realizing the women's rights like Rita.
co d. Rita's brother, Lablu has been playing an important role for the nation—
s Give reasons in support of your answer.

Chapter-10
The National Resource and the Economic System

The prosperity of any country depends on the nature and amount of national
resource of that country. The prospect of development of that country rich in
national resource is obviously high. So, for knowing about the economy, it is
necessary to know first about its resources. Again, to know about the economic
system of a country, we should know first about its production and distribution
process and method. This production and distribution system is different under
various economic systems. The economic system includes the method, process
and rates under which the economy of any country is operated. In this chapter, we
shall know about the production and distribution of national resources and the
resource production method in various economic systems as well.
After reading this chapter, we shall be able to —
e explain the concept of national resource; explain the distribution status of
e narrate the way to preserve and way to the national income of Bangladesh;

check the wastage of National resource; e preserve and check the wastage of
e compare various economic systems; e resource;
e identify the present characteristics of the ¢ be interested to know about various

economic system of Bangladesh; economic systems.
The Concept of National Resource
Usually, resources mean land, house, various, types of necessary and durable
goods, gold-silver, etc. In the real sense of the term, if any material or goods can
be termed as resources, the said goods have to hold utility, insufficiency,
visibility and exchangeability. This concepts are explain below -
Utility: The ability of fulfilling the need of any commodity is called utility, for
example, human beings have the need or want of clothing, shirt, pant, sari, and all
these goods have the ability to fulfill the want of clothes. So these have utility. x

N

The National Resource and the Economic System 173
Insuffiency: When the supply of any goods or services is less than the demand,
the said goods or service appear as insufficient, for example, food. The supply of
food in every country all the time is less than the demand. So money has to pay for
getting food, i. e. it means the insufficiency of food. Again, man needs air for
respiration in every moment. Since, the supply of air is unlimited compared to the
need, man has to pay no price for air. It means there is no insufficiency of air. Only
utility and insufficiency don’t turn anything in to a resource, for example - Health
is insufficient and has utility, but because it lacks visibility and exchangeability, it
cannot be called a resource . However, when a healthy person can earn money by
utilizing his physical health then that particular health shall be considered as a
resource.
Types of Resource
Resource or asset can be divided into four classes - personal, collective, national
and international. Personally owned land, house, factory money, car, goods, etc.
are the personal asset. Own intellect, personal skills though nontransferable, but
an individual can create resource by utilizing those qualities. So these are included
as personal asset.
The resources which are enjoyed by all the people of the society collectively are
collective asset. All the citizens have equal rights on this asset and they have equal
obligations for those assets. Roads, Railway, Embankment, Park, Government
Hospital, School, and all natural resources under state ownership such as forest,
mineral resources, rivers, etc. are the collective resources.
All the personal resources of all citizens of the country and the collective
resources of the society are jointly called the national resources. Moreover, any
qualifying characteristics of the nation such as skills, creative power, technical
knowledge, etc. are included in the national resources.
There are some resources that do not belong to any state. So every nation can
enjoy those resources such as ocean, scientific invention, technology, etc. All
these are the international resources.
There are mainly two sources of national resources. The first is the gift of nature.
The land, inside and outside the geographical boundary of any country is the gift
of nature. Natural forest and trees -fruits, animals and birds, rivers and natural
water body and fishes, other aquatic animals and plants, water and all types of
mineral resources within soil are the nature given resources.
Source of National Resource

co The second source of national resource is created by human beings. The citizens

of any country use collect and withdraw natural resources by using their labour

174 Bangladesh and Global Studies
and capital and create asset by transforming or transferring those items. For
example, man cultivates land and produces crop, fruit, flower and trees. They
cultivate fish in water, lift mineral resources and make it suitable for use.
Moreover, man by their own initiative or under the finance and control of the
government constructs roads, factory, machinery, vehicle, embankment and
bridge and produces various types of industry. In this way, the citizens of country
are engaged in the creation of various types of goods and services, i.e. asset
throughout the year.
The Reservation of National Resource and Checking Wastage
Preservation means preservation and supervision specially. We know that the
personal asset of all the citizens and the collective asset of a country together form
national resource. Collective asset includes those assets that are collectively
owned by all the people and the state owned natural and produced resources are
included too. So, the preservation of national resource means both the personal
asset and the collective asset altogether.
i) The Preservation of Private Resources
Preservation is the special protection and supervision of any object, goods,
organization, and property with care. The individual generally keeps his own asset
such as money, land and property, gold and silver, furniture, ornaments, own
factory or industry, vehicle, etc. with special care for his own interest. Not only
that, they are much active to develop and to increase those. Moreover, everybody
supervises those items to check wastage of their own resources. The looking after
of asset, preventing the possibility of damaging any asset, replacing the asset
damaged, etc. are included in the preservation responsibilities. The individual do
not generally incur excess expenditure or misuse of his own asset. He remains
always aware for not spending excess of necessity.
ii) The Preservation of National Resources
Roads, bridges, hospitals, schools, the state owned vehicles (car, train, ship, aero
plane) and factory, organization or institution, office building, important
installation, natural resource, land and resources inside and on the land (such as
forest, river, water body, resource pisces mineral resource etc.) all these are
included as collective asset. The state and people are collectively own all such
resources. The people use and enjoy these. The state ensures all the development
and welfare of the people by using those resources in a planned way. So, all the
citizens should especially be careful to preserve all such collective resources. 2»
i~J
N

The National Resource and the Economic System 175
Moreover, organizations or institutions in charge of their collective resources
should perform their duties properly.

The Actions to Be Taken to Preserve and Check Wastage of National

Resources of Bangladesh

e Attention should be given so that the arrangement that is taken by the state to
preserve national resources is not hampered. We know that there are security
guards for the maintenance of bridges, important establishment, office
building, etc. If those are found not secured, then proper authority has to be
informed.

e Awareness should be enhanced so that none can harm those resources. If any
such misdeed is found, the proper person, authority has to be informed, for
example, cutting down trees illegally from preserved forest, hunting birds,
beasts, etc. would be considered as the damage of national resources.

¢ Trying to keep the development and increasing of these resources.

¢ Remaining aware and active to check the misuse and wastage of the
collective and the national resources such as water supplied by the state
seem ecient Group work: Identity some national resources,

a la . and write the steps should be taken to preserve it.
need and to be economical | Yndividual work: How would you separate
while enjoying. individual resources from the national resources.

¢ If every citizen is aware and active performing respective duty to reserve
those resources, it is not hard to preserve the national resource and wastage of
all those items.

¢ For the preservation and supervision of all such resources, the responsibility
and duties of authorized organizations are described clearly in the documents
of the organizations concerned. The officer employers of the organization
have to remain vigilant to perform all such duties property.

e To give necessary training to perform all such duties.

Various Economic Systems

The man has manifold needs such as he has need for food, clothes and shelter. He

also needs proper education and to have good health. Moreover, to live decently

« With recreation facility, disciplined and safe family social system also required.
S Need is created from the insufficiency to meet unlimited demand. Man tries to

176 Bangladesh and Global Studies
fulfill demand and produce. Production is the transformation of goods or resourc-
es from one condition to the other such as chair is made from wood. This transfor-
mation is production. Four factors are required for production: Land, Labour,
Capitals, organization. They are discussed below -

Land: Usually land means soil or plain field, but in economic land means all the
mineral resources such as the soil, the upper stratum of earth, and everything on
and inside land.

Labour: The physical and mental ability of man usable in production work is
called labour.

Capital: The produced factor of production is called the capital. Capital is such
type of asset which is not directly consumed, but more production is made by
utilizing it, such as machinery, factory, building used in the work of production,
money, etc.

Organization: Three factors of production such as land, labour and capital in
combination of all these the work of conducting production and execution is
called organization. The man who organizes is called the organizer or
entrepreneur. The risk or uncertainly which remains in production is shouldered
by the organizer.

Wood for chair is collected from land. For collecting wood, money and to
transform wood to chair, machinery and other factors are required. This money
and machinery is capital. Afterwards, labourer or technician is needed who
prepares chair from wood with the help of machinery and own labour, and the
organizer or entrepreneur accomplishes chair production process by integrating
land, capital and labourers.

In this way, man always initiates effort to fulfill his various needs by the help of
these four factors. The above-mentioned four factors are required to accomplish
production process. This money received from the produced asset is divided into
the said factors as rent, wage, interest and profit. There are the incomes of the
factors of production. Through this income the owner of land, labour, owner of
capital or capitalist and entrepreneur fulfills their various needs and wants. The
need Felt for any material or immaterial goods (service) is want. Want is the desire
or wish to get any goods or service. The process of distributing produced
resources among the said four factors of production is called distribution.

We can say from this discussion that the economic function that is performed by
man to fulfill his various has various stages. The stages are as follows:

Want — Effort Production > Distribution > Consumption

For production, the land owner is given rent for land. Similarly wages to the
labourers, interest to the capital owner, profit to the organizer are given. All the
rewards such as rent, wage, interest and profit are properly distributed, speed in
economic programmes comes and economic welfare is attained. If the distribution
system is faulty and discriminatory, economic problem persists, and instability ~
and disorder are created in the society. 8

The National Resource and the Economic System 177
The way how the money value of total produced asset is distributed among the
factors of production; it depends on the economic system of the country. The
system or structure under which the ownership of factors of production is
determined and the process of distribution and consumption of produced asset is
accomplished is called the economic system. This system forms in combination of
economic function of the people and economy related organization and legal
structure.

Four types of economic system are mainly effective in the present world: the
capitalist, the Socialist, the Mixed and the Islamic Economic Systems. In this-
chapter, we shall know how the work of production and distribution is
accomplished under the four economic work process and characteristics under the
said four systems.

1. The Characteristics of the Capitalistic Economic System

¢ Ownership of Components of Production: The components such as land,
labourer, capital and organization are under the individual ownership in the
capitalistic economic system. It means that the individual achieves the ownership
of land with the help of his assets or income. He can employ the labourers, and can
form the capital. The individual can consume and transfer freely his own asset. In
this case, the individual himself takes all the decisions.

¢ Freedom to Take Initiatives: The individual alone or collectively can take any
initiative for producing goods or services in the capitalist economic system and
can make necessary investment. In this case, there is no restriction. In this case,
almost all economic functions can run in personal initiative.

The capitalistic economy is called many times as free market economy. In this
economic system, production, distribution, consumption of goods is operated on
the basis of demand and supply. The main characteristics of capitalist system are
the independence to take decision by the individual in case of private ownership
and production and consumption of asset. It can be said that there is no
interference of government in this case.

¢ The Free Competition: Any individual can take initiative to produce any goods
or service. So these are many producers for

same goods and tree competition continues Group work: Give your opinion
among them.The price of goods is regarding distribution of income in
determined through competition between the capitalist economy.

the producer or seller and the buyers.

Forma- 23: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

178 Bangladesh and Global Studies
¢ Freedom of the Consumer: The process of using the utility of any goods to
meet the need of man is called consumption. Such as man meet hunger by food.
So man consumed food. But if food destroied for any reason it would not be con-
sumption. If used to meet want of men it would be consumptions. Which goods
and how much amount will be consumed by a consumer is decided by himself.
But his liking, earning and the market price of the commodity influences his deci-
sion

¢ Earning the Highest Profit: The production process is conducted in capitalistic
economic system for earning maximum profit. Money engaged in production is
investment. Addition of new capital (Money or machinary, equipments, raw
material for production) with existing capital goods is called investment. The
producers invest more money for such goods that have the possibility of making
more profit.

¢ Exploitation of labourer: Since it is the objective to earn maximum profit the
entrepreneurs or capitalists try to keep production expenses of goods less and to
get more prices. To keep production cost less the labourers are given fewer wages
than the just wage. This surplus wage is accumulated to the capitalists and
entrepreneurs as profit. In this way inequality and disparity is created in the
distribution of produced asset. The labourers get minimum wages compared to
dues, and the capitalists and entrepreneur earn more money than their dues since
the number of capitalists are less, most of the part of the asset of the society is
accumulated in the hand of a small group, and since the number of labourers are
huge in number, a vast population of the society enjoy facilities of the total asset.
2. The Characteristics of the Socialistic Economic System

In a socialist economic system, the ownership of the factory of production,
production process, and distribution of produced asset is different, compared to
capitalistic system. The main characteristics of the socialist economic system are
as follows:

¢ Ownership of the Factors of Production: All asset including factors of produc-
tion is under the state ownership in the socialist economic system. No private
ownership is vested on the asset. Socialism is the ‘economic organization of the
society’. The state integrates the four factors of production through this
organization and gives guidance to the production activity and conducts according
to an overall central planning. The aim of the socialist economic system is that the
members of society will have maximum welfare from this planned economic
activity. S

The National Resource and the Economic System 179
¢ The Government Instruction in Economic Activities: The government takes
basic decision in producing goods and imparting service to the citizens in a
socialistic economic system. Which goods would be produced in what amount
and when and in what process the goods would be sold to whom are decided by
the government. All these decisions are the part of the central planning. There is
no scope for personal initiatives or investment in this type of economy.
¢ Lack of Freedom of the Consumer: There is no freedom in making decision
regarding production by the producer in socialist economic system. Similarly, the
consumer has no privilege to consume goods according to their own wish. The
producers grow foods determined by the government, and the consumers purchase
and consume these according to the need. The consumers enjoy freedom to select
necessary goods and purchase socially.
¢ The Objective of Economic Activity: The main objective of production in the
socialist economic system is to earn maximum profit. In the socialistic economic
system, all economic activities are conducted to meet the basic needs of each
citizen and to attain highest welfare for the people. There is no scope here for
earning personal profit.
¢ Income Distribution: The capitalist and entrepreneur received the profit margin
in the capitalist system. But the owner of earned profit is state or government in
socialistic economic system. Similarly, the revenue of land and interest of capital
is deposited in the government treasury, because the government is the owner of
land and capital.
The state pays wage to the labourers and Grup wivks deny ie aes
incurs other expenses of production. As a diff b th itali
: . ifferences between the capitalist
result, there remains no scope to deprive and the socialist economic system.
the labourers by the capitalist like the
system of capitalism. The policy of paying wage to the labourers is that 'every
one will get work according to his qualification and remuneration according to
work'. There will have no unemployment in this system because the state arranges
works for all as per his ability and qualification. The income of all is not same, but
none is derived from his due income in production according to his contribution.
For all such characteristics in socialist economic system, the equal distribution of
asset is attained and the income equality is less compared to the capitalist
economic system. Production, distribution and consumption activities are
accomplished in the socialist economy according to the need of people. All
% economic activity is conducted by the state under a central planning. So the waste
&_ of asset is comparatively less. As a result, the Gross National Product gradually

180 Bangladesh and Global Studies
increases, and balanced distribution of asset is possible. No private ownership is
accepted in the socialist economic system, and the ownership belongs to the state.
On the other hand, the individual has no freedom to take initiative in production
and consumption. As a result, in case of production and investment the individual
initiative and eagerness may be reduced. As a result, optimum utilization of
resources, specially the highest productivity and the creativity of individual can
not be ensured.

3. The Characteristics of Mixed Economy

Another economic system is existent along with the capitalist and socialist
economic system in the present world. It is mixed economy. It is a system based
in the combination of some characteristics of the capitalist and socialist economy.
In this system, the private ownership is recognized in production, investment and
consumption, and at the same time, there is the arrangement for production and
investment by the government initiative. Some sectors or a part of some sectors of
the economy is controlled by the government. The main characteristics of mixed
economy are -

* Coexistence of Government and Private Sector: The government ownership,
initiative and either full or partial control remain effective in some sectors in the
mixed economy along with the private ownership and private initiative. The
supply of essential goods and services for the people such as communication
system, treatment, arrangement for education, etc. are run mainly under
government control. In such cases, partially personal or private initiatives are
seen.

More over basic and large industry, publicly important organization, big bank and
financial organization, main import and export goods, lifesaving drug, child food,
etc. usually remain under government control.

Again the essential commodity such as agricultural goods, clothes and garments,
processed foods, personal vehicles, restaurant, etc. are produced, established and
supplied mainly on private initiative.

¢ Competition: The individual or private sectors remain predominant in mixed
economy. So there is competition for production and in fixing up price of goods,
spontaneous activities and counter activities of supply and demand. The choice of
buyers and investments of the entrepreneur is fixed depending upon the price and
ability.

¢ Earning Profit: The personal ownership in property, individual freedom in
decision making, and predominance of private sector remain in the mixed 2%
economic system. So the main objectives of all economic activities of the 8

The National Resource and the Economic System 181
producers are to earn maximum profit. Even the state owned sectors are also
influenced with the motive of earning profit. But there is no aim of earning profit
from public welfare activities, specially in service oriented activities (such as
health, education related activities). Arrangement is also made to control profit in
some social welfare sectors such as telecommunication, transport, etc.
¢ The Freedom of Entrepreneur and Consumer: The individual can take
initiative to produce any commodity at any amount in capitalist economy. Even he
can do monopoly in business as the sole producer of any commodity. In the mixed
economy, the restriction is imposed on monopoly business of essential goods used
by the people. As a result, more than one producer sells the goods in the market in
competitive price.
In this economic system, the consumer can sale purchase and consume common
goods freely. Also if production hampers at special time and in disaster period
then government may impose control indirectly on the sale purchase of any
goods.
¢ Distribution of Income: The distribution is also affected by all the
characteristics of mixed economy. A big part of the economic activities such as the
big and heavy industries, the production and marketing of essential goods and the
import-export is controlled by the government along with the private ownership.
The part of private ownership of the economy is run fully by the individual for the
purpose of earning profit. In most of the cases, due wage of the labourer is given
less like the capitalist economic system and the surplus wage is included with the
profit. As a result, a balanced distribution of asset is not produced. The disparity
appears in the income of various factors of production. So, the overall welfare of
the people of society is not ensured.
It appears that the part in the mixed economy controlled by the government is not
for making profit but for the social welfare to the utmost. The labourers engaged
in the production get the right wages. So a balanced distribution has been
possible. In this way, it is seen that a balanced distribution of asset and wages is
ensured in the mixed economy though sometimes, it is noticed that the labourers
are exploited and deprived and income disparity is observed.
4. The Characteristics of the Islamic Economy
Islam is the complete code of life. There is the instruction of each activity of
human being in Islam. This religion is a code of life. So the policies, rules, legal
structures and guidance required to perform the political, social, economic and
so religious activities are included in Islam. All such rules and regulation are
§ inscribed in the Holy Quran and Hadith. The foundation of Islamic economic

182 Bangladesh and Global Studies
system is also the Holy Quran and Hadiths. To understand the issue of distribution
and production asset under Islamic economic system, we have to understand first
the main characteristics of Islamic economic system. The Islamic economic
system is the full discussion of human life. The Creator has created man, all types
of commodities, creatures, environment and materials. Man uses all these goods
and environment given by the Creator, has created asset and thus consumes. It is
the rules of Islam.

¢ Ownership of Asset: The personal ownership of asset is recognized in Islam.
Man can use and consume the asset according to his wish. He can transfer this
properly to his heirs.

¢ The Shariah Based Economic Functions: The economic and all functions are
run in Islamic economic system as per the provision of Sariah. The basic
principles of economic activities are determined according to the five basic pillars
of Islam, instructions of the Holy Quran and the provisions of Hadith of Rasul
(SM).

¢ Production System and Remuneration of the Factors of Production: Any
individual can invest either individually or collectively for producing goods
permitted by the Shariah in Islamic economic system. He himself can also
purchase and consume necessary goods. The objectives of production are to
confirm producing ‘Halal’ goods permitted by the Islam and ensure the social
welfare oriented and exploitation free production process. The large scale
production activity is customary in Islamic economy. But where there is no
existence of individual or private initiative, the government initiative can be
launched. If a fixed amount of money or asset remains under the possession of an
individual for a certain period, then a fixed portion of it has to be distributed
among the poor in the Islamic economic system. This system is called Zakat.
Zakat is compulsory for the rich person. The least amount of assets that makes
Zakat compulsory is called Nisab. One of the main factors of production in the
capitalist and socialist system is capital. Tauividual works it you are piven tie
There is the interest for the capital, but authority to introduce economic system
the transaction of interest is 'Haram' or | in your own country which economic
prohibited in the Islamic economic system would you introduce? Why?
system. In this economic system, the | Group work: Determine the economic
capitalists sustain the profit or loss at the | system of Bangladesh and write the
proportionate rate of the capital invested | problem of its distribution activities.

by them. There is interest free deposit and loan taking system in the Islamic &
Banking system. The producers and businessmen can take this loan and pay profit S

The National Resource and the Economic System 183
to the loan disbursing individual organization (Bank), and it is received as profit
from the business. There is the arrangement of paying just dues to the labourers in
time in this economic system. As a result, the proper distribution of produced
asset is possible.
¢ Income Distribution: Since the production system free of exploitation is
followed in the Islamic economic system, the paying of remuneration on the basis
of equity and justice is ensured.
The Prevailing Economic System in Bangladesh
The Feudal Economic System was mainly prevailing in Bangladesh during the
ancient Bengal, the Muslim and the British rule. This system was Landlord
centred. The owners of worth mentioning area of land would have called
Landlords. The economy was agriculture based. A Landlord was financially
self-sufficient. People of all vocation and profession such as farmer, black smith,
potter, weaver, fisherman, carpenter, gold smith, businessmen, teacher were under
his control. Even he would have the Lathials (the goons) for the security of his
asset or land property. These Landlords were called Zamindar in the British
period.
The Zamindar system was abolished in the Pakistan period, and was replaced by
the capitalist economic system. The influence of Zamindari system was in
existence along with the capitalist system. The capitalist system got predominance
at the end of the Pakistani period. The major portion of capital and asset were
under the possession of a few number of people.
Bangladesh achieved independence in 1971 through the armed struggle.
Initiatives were taken to establish a socialist economic system in the country on
the basis of the constitution drafted after the liberation. The large industries,
financial organizations, banks, insurance companies, transport, main industrial
organizations, the primary education, import and export, etc. were taken in the
state ownership and control. All these factories, business and financial
organizations were under the control of the non- Bangalees who left the country
after the independence and problem was created in managing these organizations.
On the other hand, the government had to employ almost the entire capacity to
solve the problems of the war-ridden economy of a newly independent country.
The human resources such as the skilled administrators, managers, entrepreneurs,
and intellectuals were the victims of killings and atrocities. As a result, it was not
possible to initiate proper management of those organizations. As a result, the
« nationalized industries and business organizations faced loss. So the action was
S taken to expand the private sector and individual initiative.

184 Bangladesh and Global Studies
This trend of expanding private sector and private initiative is still continuing after
the nineties, and denationalization of nationalized industries started during this
time. At present, the economy is run to establish a free market economy to keep
pace with the global economic condition. After the independence to present time,
various types of reforms and changes are going on in the economic system of
Bangladesh. At present some sectors of economy are brought under supenl
management based on Government and Non-government partnership. It can be
said that at present emphases capitalist and mixed economic system is existent
in the country. Main industries, business Individual work: Which change in
organizations, financial organizations are the existing economic system of
included in the nationalized sector. Also all Bangladesh would you think be able
the sectors of the economy are gradually
going under private control. Another remarkable characteristic of the economic
system is that market economy is getting established with the expansion of private
initiatives. The prices of goods are determined by the mutual action of demand
and supply and this price again influences the nature of production and amount of
consumption of the consumers.

The major portion of the capital that is required for the production inside the
country is collected from internal sources, but the foreign loans, aid, grants and
personal capital also play a very important role in this case.

It means that there is the coexistence of government and private sector in
production and the distribution process of the country. The private sector is
gradually expanding. As a result, the entrepreneur and consumer enjoy
independence. Any entrepreneur of producer can produce any amount of any
goods. The production work is also operated by the motive of earning more profit.
Distribution status of the National Income of Bangladesh

From the above discussion it is clear that mainly capitalist economy prevails in
Bangladesh. However, the government owns and controls some sector
particularly service sector.

We know that land, labour capital and organization are the key factors of
production. Rent comes from land, wage from labour, interest from capital and
profit from entrepreneur or organizer. The sum of rent, wage, interest and profit
called National Income.

The owner of capital or the capitalist and organizer is the same person in most
causes of production. Without capital entrepreneurship does not function. Few
people of Bangladesh are capitalists and entrepreneurs but/whereas most people S

The National Resource and the Economic System 185
are workers or day labourers. The exploitation of the workers by the capitalists is
one of the most important characteristics of the capitalist economy. Women are
not paid their due wage. A major portion of the workers wage is occupied as
interest or profit by the capitalists. As a result a lion's share of national income is
enjoyed by few people and little portion is disbursed among the major portion of
people.
In case of distribution of income, the lower rate of wages of the labourers and the
higher rate of profit of the entrepreneur are also observed in the capitalist
economic system. Interest and rent are paid at higher rate. Since there is control of
government in the government sector, the wages of the labourers are ensured, but
the commercial sectors are under private control, so inequity in wages in
Bangladesh is evident. As a result, the lower standard of living of the labourer
class is prevailing since long.
Bangladesh has almost all the characteristics of capitalist economy.
Exercise

Short Questions
1. Who is called the entrepreneur?
2. Give the example of personal property.
3. What is the national resource?
4. How would you define collective resources?
Narrative Questions:
1. Explain the responsibilities of the state to preserve the national resource of

Bangladesh.
2. Differentiate between the capitalist and the socialist economic system.
3. Identify the characteristics of economic system of Bangladesh.
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Which one below is the collective resource?

a. House

b. Ocean

c. Factory

d. Forest
Forma- 24: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

186 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Car Road Mineral Resources
House Park Government Hospital
Own Intellect School Technical Knowledge
i ii iii
2. Which circle above includes personal asset?
a i
b. ii
ce. i&ii
d. ii & iii
3. The characteristics of mixed economic system are —
i. Personal independence and predominance of the government sector in decision-making
ii. The predetermined government decision about the quantity of the production
iii. Introduction of the lone system as a lone producer
Which one is correct?
ai
b. i&ii
c. iti
d. i & iii
Read the paragraph below and answer the question no. 4 & 5.
Tanvir of Bakulpur village of Gazipur district observes that some people are
cutting the trees from the forest. Tanvir caught the people engaged in cutting trees
with the help of villagers and handed them over to the police.
4. What type of effort of Tanvir to preserve the national resource and prevent the
misuse is?
a. Personal
b. State
c. collective
d. International
=
Rg

The National Resource and the Economic System 187
5. Asa result of taking the said initiative —

i. National resource would be protected

ii. Financial development would occur

iii. Employment opportunity would occur
Which one is correct?

a. i

b. ii

c. i&ii

d. ii & iii

Creative Question:

1. Pertho is the citizen of a country named "A". The country where he has born
does not allow establishing industry by personal initiative. The factory in
which the father of Pertho used to work would give a portion of his due wage
only when needed. Recently Perth has got the citizenship of a country named
'Kha’. He has established an industry by spending $ I lakh. He has established
another industry with his earnings.

a. How many divisions can the asset are divided into?
b. What is the economic system? Explain.
c. Explain the nature of economic system of the 'A' country of Pertho from
the point of view of the subject matter you learnt.
d. Discuss with logic the difference between the economic systems of the
country of 'Kha' with the economic system of the country of 'Ka'.
20
S

Chapter-11
The Economic Indicators and the Nature of the Economy
of Bangladesh
To know the economic condition of a country, it is necessary to know the gross
national product, gross internal or domestic product and per capita income of the
people of that country. These are called economic indicators because these
indicators indicate economic condition. Whether the economy of a country is
advancing or falling back or remaining at the same position compared to the
previous condition can be understood by the standard of those indicators. Along
with these indicators, what the condition of production in agriculture, industry,
service and in other sectors is, how the money sent to the country by the people
working aboard is creating impact on national economy taking all these into
consideration, it is possible to know the condition and flow of the economy of the
country. In this chapter we shall be informed of various topics including all these
economic indicators i.e. gross domestic product, gross national product, per capita
income and the nature of the economy of Bangladesh and her worth mentioning
sectors.
ayo 7 SN wee |
RS i ee ty cy ie me pS ) nf
sy fz ee LY ME.
After reading this chapter, we shall be able to —
e explain the concept of Gross National economy of Bangladesh;
Product (GNP), Gross Domestic Product ¢ explain the significant obstacles to the
(GDP) and per capita income; progress of the economy of Bangladesh;
e find out the difference between GNP and © explain the steps to be taken to overcome
GDP; the obstacles to the development of the
e explain the contribution of the sectors of economy of Bangladesh;
economy to domestic product; ® explain the concept of developed,
© compare the GNP, GDP and per capita underdeveloped and developing economy;
income of some countries; e explain the economic relationship of
e find out GNP, GDP and per capita Bangladesh with the developed and
income in small proximity; developing countries; a
e explain the main characteristics of the e be aware in solving economic problems. s

The Economic Indicators and the Nature of the Economy of Bangladesh 189
Section 11.1: The Economic Indicators

The Gross National Product
It is necessary to know about the Gross National Product and per capita national
income of a country to know the economy and economic condition of that country.
The monetary value of the amount of material and immaterial goods and services
produced in a particular period-generally in one year by investing the labour and
capital of a country on the natural resources or land of that country is called gross
national product.
The Measurement of Gross National Product
The Gross National Product can be measured from three aspects.
1. Taking the Produced Goods and Services into Account
Various types of goods and services’ are produced in the economy of any country
on the basis of the need of the people. Because of the variety of the produced
goods, it is not possible to calculate the total amount of these goods and services.
So, the amount of total production of each commodity and each service is to be
multiplied with their market price to calculate the amount of gross national
product. The summation of the financial value of each commodity and service
obtained in this way is called gross national product. For calculating gross
national product in this method only the ultimate commodities have to be counted.
Many goods are purchased and sold more than once as primary and secondary
goods before arrive the market at the final phase. These purchase and sale occur
between the producers and the businessmen. At the final phase of the production
of the commodity consumers purchase and consume!’ it. After the purchase by the
consumer it is no more purchased or sold. If the commodity is counted at each
phase to calculate the gross national product, the amount of gross national product
will not be correct. So, in calculating gross national product the only commodity
of the final phase has to be calculated.
Let us try to understand the topic through an example. Suppose there is produced
yam from cotton, fabric from yam and shirt from fabric. Here, cotton is the
primary commodity, yam and fabric are the secondary goods and shirt is the
ultimate commodity. If the price of the commodity is calculated at all these four
phases, cotton, yam, fabric and shirt, it will be a wrong calculation. Because, the
prices of cotton, yam and fabric are included in the price of the shirt. So to
calculate or measure gross national product in the method of production only the
ultimate commodity which is directly consumed is calculated.

5

190 Bangladesh and Global Studies
2. Taking the Earned Income of the Factors of Production into Account

To calculate gross national product in this method the summation of the total
income of the factors of production is found out. The income of the four factors of
production - land, labour, capital and organization is rent, wages, interest and
profit respectively. The national income of any country in a year is the summation
of the total of the revenue, the wages/salary, the interest and the profit earned by
the factors of production in that year.

3. Taking the Total Expenditure of the Society into Account

Gross national product can also be calculated on the basis of the total expenditure
of the society. According to this method, the financial value of gross national
product is found by totaling all types of expenditures of the country in a specific
period of time. The total income of any country is spent in two ways, such as (i)
to buy utility goods and service and (ii) to invest.

Spenders can be classified into three: the | Jagividual work: Explain with
government of the country, various example the difference between
government non-government organizations | Gross National Product (GNP) and
and the people. Gross National Income (GNI).

The summation of government, organizational and private consumption expenses
and investment expenses of a country in a specified period of time, usually in one
year is the gross national product of that country in that year.

Gross National Product is many times called Gross National Income. In any
simple economy Gross National Product (GNP) and Gross National Income
(GNI) may be the same. We know, the summation of the financial values of the
total produced goods and services in any specified period of time in any country
is called Gross National Product. But it may not be equalized with the total
income or the total expense of the society. Because, to continue production
process some portion is separated from the financial value of gross national
product to make up the damages of capital items such as machinery,
equipment,etc. This portion is not included in the income of the factors of
production. So, the financial value of Gross National Product (GNP) and the
income of the factors of production (rent, wages, interest, and profit) or national
income are not the same. But, for the sake of the advantage of discussion gross
national product and gross national income are many times used as having the
same meaning.

Gross Domestic Product: To understand Gross Domestic Product the idea of S
Gross National Product or GNP has to be remembered. Gross National Product is “%

The Economic Indicators and the Nature of the Economy of Bangladesh 191
the ‘smumation wf the finaneial Individual work: The financial value of total
values of the amount of the ultimate goods and services produced inside any
goods and services produced by the country written any specified period is Tk.
people of any country ina specified | 21,000 crore. Out of which the value of goods
period, generally in one year. and services produced by the foreigners in that
oo. . country is Tk. 2,000 crore. Financial value of
The production/income of foreign | total production of the citizens of that country
individuals or organizations | residing aboard in various countries in the
residing and working inside the | same year is Tk. 4,500 crore. Determine Gross
country should not be included in National Product (GNP) and Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) of the Country.
the national production. But, the production/income of native citizens,
organizations and institutions residing and working aboard will be included.
On the other hand, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is the summation of the
financial values of the goods and services produced at the final phase in a specific
time period, generally in one year by all the people residing inside any country or
within its geographical boundary. In this case the value of the goods and services
produced at the final phase by all the citizens and foreign individuals,
organizations and institutions within the said boundary will be included. But, the
income of the citizens/organizations/institutions residing and working aboard will
not be included in it.
If we mean the income of the native people residing aboard by X and the income
of foreigners residing in the country by M, the Gross National Product (GNP) =
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) +(X-M).
From the above discussion it is clear that Gross National Product takes only the
production of the citizens of the country into account. Wherever those citizens
reside- in home or abroad- in this case the issue of nationality or citizenship is
important.
Again, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) counts only the total production within the
boundary of the country, whoever- the citizens or the foreign nationals produce it.
In this case only the point of geographical boundary of the country is important.
Gross National Product (GNP) may be more or less than Gross Domestic Product
(GDP), and even may be equal. However, GNP is usually found more or less than
GDP, not equal.
The Per Capita Income: The Per capita income is the average income of the
« citizens of any country in any specific period of time. Per capita income is
S determined by two separate standards: (1) Gross National Income and (2) Total

192 Bangladesh and Global Studies
population.Per capita national income or per capita income is got by dividing the
Gross National Income (GNI) of any country in any specified period by the total
population of that country. Per capita income is expressed as follows:
Per capita income - Gross National Income
Total Population
If we express per capita income with the help of sign, we get
y-% Individual work: In 2013 the total
Pp population of Bangladesh is expected
to be 15 crore, and, if in this period the
_ oo gross national product is 8000 crore
Where, Y = Per capita income US dollars, calculate the per capita
Y = Gross National Income income of the people of the country.
P = Total Population
Suppose, in the middle of 2011 the population of Bangladesh is 14 crore, and at
that time the Gross National Income is 7000 crore US dollars.
So, the per capita income in that period = 7000 crore US dollars
14 core
= 500 US dollars
Per capita income determines the standard of living of an individual. High per
capita income ensures high standard of living. But, along with high per capita
income, the issue of price of goods has also to be taken into consideration to
determine the standard of life. If the per capita income of the people of a country
in a year becomes double and at the same time the level of prices of goods also
becomes double, the real standard of living will remain the same. Because, the
individual will be able to buy similar amount of goods and services with that
double income. So, his real income has not increased though his financial income
has got double. Because, financial income and the prices of goods have increased
at the same rate. But, if per capita income increases while the price level remains
unchanged, the standard of living will increase, and if per capita income
decreases, the standard of living will decline. Again, if there is no balanced
distribution of national income, the standard of living of most people remains low
though per capita income increases. Because, per capita income is an average
standard. The per capita income of a small portion of population may be much
higher, yet, despite the income of the majority of the people being much less, the
average standard of per capita income of both the section of people may be such
that the standard of living of the people appears to have been higher. But, if there S

The Economic Indicators and the Nature of the Economy of Bangladesh 193
is such an unequal distribution of gross national income, the per capita income of
most of the people will be less than the per capita national income. As a result, the
standard of living of most of the people will not be developed. However, if the per
capita income rises and the price level remains unchanged or increases at a lower
rate compared to income rise, the standard of living will rise in those countries
where there is balanced distribution of national income. In the fiscal year 2015-16
the per capita national income in Bangladesh in current price is around Tk.
1,14,547/- and in US dollar 1466 dollars. (Bangladesh Economic Survey, 2016,
Ministry of Finance). In accordance with Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics report
(May, 2017) the current per capita income in Bangladesh is 1,602 US dollars.
The Sectors of National Economy and its Share in or Contribution to
Gross Domestic Product
The Sectors of economy refers to various parts, divisions or sections of economy.
The economy of any country of the world is divided into main three sectors:
agriculture, industry and Service sectors. Land and everything produced from
land- crop, fruits, vegetables, forest resource, animal and fish resources are
included in agriculture sector. Large scale and small scale industries, all types of
construction, all activities regarding mineral matters are included in industry
sector. The rest of all activities such as education-health-recreation,
bank-insurance, hotel-restaurant, postal-telephone, communication and
transport- all these are included in service sector. However, in many countries, for
the advantage of budget allocation and running works each of these three main
sectors is divided into some other sectors.
The economy of any country is divided into several sectors.
The economy of Bangladesh is divided into a total of 15 main sectors. These 15
sectors are (1) agriculture and forest (2) fishery (3) mineral and excavation (4)
industry (5) electricity, gas and water resource ( 6) construction (7) whole sale and
retail trade (8) hotel and restaurant (9) transport, preservation and communication
(10) service of financial organization (11) real estate, rent and other business (12)
public administration and defense (13) education (14) health and social service
(15) community, social and personal service. However, these 15 sectors can be
integrated into total 5 wider sectors. They are, for example- agriculture, industry,
service, business and social service.
¢ Inthe sector of ‘agriculture’ there are the sectors of ‘agriculture and forest’. In
a broader sense 'the resource of fishery’ is also included in agriculture sector.
¢ In the ‘industrial sector,’ there are small, medium and large industries.
However, in a broader sense the sectors of the ‘mineral and excavation’,
‘electricity, gas and water resources’ and ‘construction' are also included in
industry sector.
Forma- 25: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

194 Bangladesh and Global Studies
* Services such as hotel and restaurant, transport, preservation and
communication, service of financial organization (bank and insurance), etc.
are included in service sector.
¢ The ‘Public administration and defense’, ‘education’, ‘health and social
service’, 'com-munity, social and personal service'-all these are included in
the 'social service’ sector.
« The ‘Wholesale and retail trade’ and ‘real estate, rent and other business'-
these two sectors fall under the domain of ‘business’ sector.
So, though the entire economy of the country is divided into 15 sectors, we can
integrate those sectors into 3 main sectors.
Among the said three integrated sectors, industrial and business sector tops the list
of the sector wise share in or contribution to gross domestic product in fiscal year
2015-16. Its contribution is 53.94%. Its contribution is 33.72 %. Agricultural
sector is placed in the third. Its share in gross domestic production is 15.33 %. The
share/contribution of 15 various sectors of economy in gross domestic product is
presented below in a tabular form.
Table-1
Share of the sectors of economy in gross domestic product (2011-12)
1 No. product (in percentage)
and forest resources
mineral resources)
| 04 | Industry (Small, medium and large industry) | 18.28
| 06 | Construction 9
[08 [Hotel andrestaurant ———SSSSSOSCSC~—~—SSCSYSSC‘i THK
| eee, | |
road, water and air, service preservation of associate
transport, communication through post and telephone)
others)
Ss
Reference: Bangladesh Economic Survey, 2016, Ministry of Finance “

The Economic Indicators and the Nature of the Economy of Bangladesh 195
Comparison among the GNP, GDP and Per Capita Income of Some Countries
We know that the main indicator of economic development of any country is the
per capita income of the people ere Sn 7 ;
ivi rk: alculat mtribution
of that country. But, for | MCvGua’ wo erases Wye pec al
determining whether a country agricultural sector to gross domestic product.
is devel 8 ‘4 under developed Group work: In the above table the total 15 sectors of
1S developed under Ceveloped | the economy of Bangladesh and their contributions to
OF developing some other gross domestic production (2011-12) is shown in
issues need to be considered in | percentage. Present the 15 sectors in a table on the
addition to per capita national | basis of the share of each of the 15 sectors as
income or per capita income. | individual sector in gross domestic product.
For example the nature of the economy i. e. whether the economy is agriculture
oriented or it has undergone industrialization, rate of literacy or education,
availability of health service to the people, whether the economic infrastructure
has undergone upward development or not i. e. whether transport and
communication facility and the rate of capital formation and investment are in
upward trend- all these are also need to be considered. However, World Bank has
divided the countries of the world into three main divisions on the basis of per
capita gross national income. Those are: High Income Countries, Middle Income
Table-2
Income wise classification of the countries of the world and
Classification of some countries on the basis of per capita gross national income
(GNI Percapita) (2010)
National (Million) Gross
Income (GND National
@illion Income
dollar S Dollar
“0 anne
C) | High Income country USA. 14600.8 310 47140
(12276 dollars and above)
[ Sweden | 469.0 TT 49930 |
@) | Middle (a) Upper
Income Middle | tran [| 330.40 | 74 4530
Country TBcome
CLOG: 12295) | 37612275
sollers) collers) [ Thailand_|—_286.7___[_ 68 | __ 4210 _|
(b) Lower
Middle
Income [Egypt [197.9 BA 2840
(1006-3975
dollars)
(1005 Dollar or below)
| Nepal | 145 | 30 490
| Uganda [166 [34 490
a
= Source: The World Bank Report, 2012

196 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Look at table-2 above. In this table a number of countries are shown that in differ-
ent segmants on the basis of per capita income. These are high, middle and low
income countries. The middle income countries are further segmanted into high
middle income and low middle income countries. World bank has produced this
information in their report in 2012.
The High income countries are recognized as developed countries. These
countries have achieved this developed state because of reaching the top stage of
development process. Per capita income of these countries are such that after
meeting all basic needs of the people huge amount of money remains as
surplus- which is spent in forming savings and capital. These countries run further
development activities with the surplus money and assist in the development
programmes of the developing and the under developed countries. In the above
table-2 it is shown that USA, Canada, UK and other European countries, Japan
among the Asian countries, Singapore are classified as 'High Income Countries’.
The per capita national income of these countries in 2010 ranged from 3 8540
dollars to 85380 dollars.
"Middle Income Countries’ are generally developing countries. However, the
position of the ‘Upper Middle Income Countries’ is developed between the two
classes of middle income.
The basic needs of the people of these countries have almost been fulfilled. The
countries are being industrialized rapidly,
and social infrastructures like education | Individual work: Classify the
and health care are undergoing upward countries of the world on the basis
development rapidly. However, these | of per capita gross national income.
countries have to cross a long way to
to reach the similar stage of the developed countries. Per capita income of the
people of 'Upper Middle Income Countries’ included in the table above ranges
from 4210 dollars to 9500 dollars. These countries include China and Iran,
Malaysia, Turkey, Thailand. 'Lower middle income countries’ lies below the class
of 'Middle Income Countries’. These are also developing countries. Five Asian
and African Countries namely India, Pakistan, Sri-lanka, Egypt and Nigeria are
included in the table as "Lower Middle Income Countries'. The per capita income
of the people of these countries ranges from 1050 dollars to 2340 dollars. At the
bottom of the per capita national income based classification list there are the
‘Lower Income Countries’. Though these countries are sometimes termed as
developing countries, these are basically underdeveloped countries. However, in
most of these countries the trend of development has started since a pretty much
time back. Through planned activities these countries have achieved some ,,
S
N

The Economic Indicators and the Nature of the Economy of Bangladesh 197
development too. So, in many cases, these countries are termed as least developed
countries instead of underdeveloped countries. Nepal, Bangladesh, Cambodia
among Asian Countries, and Kenya and Uganda among African countries are
included in this class in the table. The per capita income of the people of these
countries is very low. The per capita income of the ‘Lower Income Countries'
included in the table ranges between 490 dollars to 780 dollars. Worth mentioning
hear that according to the World Bank Report 2016 the per capita income in Ban-
gladesh was 1190 USD and Bangladesh Economic Survey in 2016 shows that in
the 2015-16 fiscal year the income was 1466 USD.
The Characteristics of the Economy of Bangladesh
The characteristics of the economy of a country depend mainly on the nature of
economy of that country. The nature of economy is again dependent on all these
factors such as the geographic nature, natural resources, education and level of
skills of the people, their endeavour and mentality to take initiative etc. The econ-
omy of Bangladesh has been known as agriculture based economy since very
ancient time. In this lesson we shall know about the main characteristics of the
economy of Bangladesh.
1. The Agriculture Based Economy: Since the very ancient time to the present
time, the economy of Bangladesh has been counted as agriculture based economy
though the importance of industry sector in the economy of the country is
gradually increasing in the recent years. In the fiscal year 2015-16, the
contribution of agriculture sector including fishery to the gross domestic product
was around 16 percent. Total 45.10% percent of the manpower of Bangladesh is
engaged in agriculture sector. Agriculture sector has also remarkable contribution
to the export income of the country. Food grain is one of the main produced goods
of the agriculture sector. Food production in Bangladesh has been on gradual rise
for more than one decade back, and the country is gradually getting self-sufficient
in food though the growth of population is high. Moreover, the raw materials of
many industries of our industry sector are supplied by our agriculture sector. They
are, for example, jute industry, tea, and leather industry, etc. For all these reasons,
agriculture sector has been considered the most important sector of the country till
date.
The amount of food grain production in Bangladesh in the period from 1990-91 to
2015-16 is shown next page in the table. It is noticeable that this production is

= gradually increasing.

N

198 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Table-3
Food Grain Production Situation in Bangladesh (in lakh Metric ton)
1990-91 188.60
1995-96 190.00
2000-01 269.06
2005-06 277.87
2009-10 341.13
2010-11 370.42
2011-12 348.85
2012-13 360.65
2013-14 381.74
2014-15 384.19
2015-16 389.97
Source: Bangladesh Economic Survey, Ministry of Finance, 1996, 2003, 2011, 2016
2. The Nature of Agriculture Sector: Agriculture sector is a main and important
sector in the economy of Bangladesh. It is like the foundation of the economy of
Bangladesh. Though so much important,
the process of agricultural production has Group works ee hae eo
: behind terming the economy of
not yet become fully modem. In the major Ganpladedh soul paged
portion of land under cultivation traditional BD Ecce es BetICUIENS “Unye
method of cultivation is still going on. As a_ |_S°OROMY till date.
result the productivity of agricultural land is also low. Moreover, the agriculture of
this country is dependent on nature. The time of rain and its volume cast wide
impact on agricultural production. If necessary amount of rain does not occur in
time, or if it rains excessively, production falls by huge amount.
Another major shortcoming of the agriculture sector is that it is not always
possible to give the right wages to farmers or agricultural labourers. Moreover,
because of the inadequacy of transport facility or the shortcoming in marketing
system, the real producers don't get just prices for their produced goods in many
cases. It casts an adverse effect on the entire agriculture sector of the country.
3. The Increasing Importance and Contribution of the Industrial Sector: The
importance and contribution of industrial sector in the economy of Bangladesh is
gradually increasing. In the fiscal year 1980-81 the contribution of industry sector
in GDP in fixed price was 17.31 percent. The contribution of this sector in the
fiscal year 2011-12 is 30.33% (estimated). The industrial sector is formed in
combination of small and medium industry, large industry, mineral and
excavation, electricity, gas and water supply and construction. 4.The Nature of
8

The Economic Indicators and the Nature of the Economy of Bangladesh 199
Industrial Sector: Though the contribution of industrial sector in the gross
domestic product in increasing gradually, there is rarely any existence of basic and
heavy industries in our industry sector. Fertilizer factory, sugar and food industry,
textile industry,jute industry, leather industry, readymade garments industries are
included in the major industries of the country. But the rapid industrialization is
required to accelerate economic development. For this purpose heavy or basic
industry such as iron and steel industry, generation of electricity for infrastructure,
fuel industries etc. are essential. There are heavy vehicle assembling, electrical
equipment and water vehicle building and repair industries in the country, but
those are very insufficient compared to the need.
5. The Excess of Population and Low Rate of Education: One of the main
characteristics of the economy of Bangladesh is its over population. The total
population of this country is around 16 crore. The density of the population is very
high- 1063 people per square kilometer (Bangladesh Economic Survey, 2016).
Though Bangladesh is a country of over population, the rate of the growth of
population is gradually falling. In 1991 and 2001, the growth rate of population
was 2.17% and 1 .48% respectively. This rate has decreased by 1.37 percent in
2011 (Population Census Report, 2011).
However, in Bangladesh, both the density | Individual work: ‘There is over
of population and the growth rate of | population in Bangladesh’. Evaluate
population are much higher than those of | the statement.
her neighboring countries. According to
the world development report (World Bank, 2012), in 2009 the density of
population per square kilo meter in India Pakistan Sri-lanka Myanmar Malaysia
were 389, 220, 324, 77 and 84 people respectively. In 2000-10 the yearly average
growth rate of population in these countries was 1 .4%, 2.3%, 0.9%, 0.8% and
1.8% respectively. Population is considered the asset of the country. But the
population of Bangladesh is a problem till date. The reason behind this is the rate
of literacy in Bangladesh (7 years+) only 61.5 (UNESCO Report, 2016). It means
that 38.5 percent of the population is illiterate. To make the illiterate population
literate, to give them necessary education and training, to ensure their good health,
to make them endeavoring at work, to supply them with capital, to arrange
employment for them etc. have created a big pressure for the state.
6. The Widespread Unemployment: Over population and lack of rapid portion
of the labour force of the country is unemployed. Since the rate of wages is low in
this country, most of the day labourers can be counted as half unemployed.
7. The Poor Per Capita Income and Low Standard of Living: The average
income of the people i.e. per capita income is low because of low rate of wages,
« Widespread unemployment, and semi unemployment. At present (2015-16) per
$  industrialization have given birth to unemployment in the country. A remarkable

200 Bangladesh and Global Studies
capita national income is 1466 US dollars. This income is lower than that of the
neighboring countries. Per capita income in Sri-lanka, India is 3926.2, 1598.3
dollars respectively (World Development Report, World Bank, 2016). Because of
low per capita income, the standard of living is also low. The position of 24.8
percent i.e. one fourth of the population is below the poverty level (On the basis
of high poverty level). (Bangladesh Economic Summary 2016)

8. The Low Rate of Savings, Capital Formation and Investment: The rate of
savings (30.08% of GDP) of the people is low because of the low per capita
income. So the rate of capital formation and investment for production is also low
(29.38% of GDP) (Bangladesh Economic Survey-2016). Again, because of the
low rate of investment, the pace of new installation of industries is slow. As a
result, the rate of new employment generation is low. Bangladesh is entangled
within such a circle of poverty. But, the government has undertaken planned
development programme to come out of this circle.

9. The Weakness of Infrastructure: Infrastructure can be divided mainly into
two parts: social and economic infrastructures. Education, health, recreation etc.
are included in social infrastructure. Communication system (such as postal and
telecommunication, electronic communication), transport, (land, water and air)
financial organization such as bank, insurance and other agencies disbursing loan
for industry, electricity, water and fuel supply, embankment and irrigation system,
etc. are included in economic infrastructure. This socio economic infrastructure is
like the foundation of economic development. Development activities cannot be
started unless infrastructure is developed. In Bangladesh this infrastructure is
underdeveloped and insufficient.

10. The Dependence on Foreign Aid: Bangladesh was too much dependent on
foreign loan and grant for her socio economic development. But, for about the last
one decade, the amount of loan from the internal sources has gradually been
increasing in Bangladesh. And because of various changes in the world scenario,
the amount of receiving loan and grant from foreign sources is gradually
decreasing.

11.The Foreign Trade: In case of foreign trade Bangladesh exports mainly low
value agricultural goods tea, raw jute, readymade garments and knitwear leather,
jute among the industrial goods, ceramic goods tea, raw jute and laboureres. But
the import goods of Bangladesh include high value capital goods such as
machinery, equipment fuel, petroleum, food and luxury items (colour television,
automobile, cosmetic goods etc.). As a result, in the field of international trade,
adverse condition is prevailing in Bangladesh. Export income has been less than 3

The Economic Indicators and the Nature of the Economy of Bangaldesh 201
import expenditure for a long time. As a result, deficit has been continuing for
long period in the foreign transaction of Bangladesh.

12. The Imperfect Use of Natural and Human Resources: Among the natural
resources of Bangladesh, the worth-mentioning resources are her very fertile
agricultural land, rivers, natural water bodies and underground mineral resources.
Among the mineral resources the worth mentioning mineral resources are coal,
natural gas, limestone, silica, sand, while soil, china soil, hard rock.

A population can tum into human resource mainly through ensuring proper
education and training, technical knowledge and skill and good health. A major
portion of the population of Bangladesh is still deprived of education and health
facilities. Because of widespread unemployment and poverty a greater part of the
population is the victim of non-availability of food and malnutrition. In the same
way scientific knowledge, technical and technological education have not
flourished. Because of all these reasons, it has not yet been possible to transform
the greater portion of the population of Bangladesh into human resource. As a
result, to know the full quantity of the natural and mineral resources and the full
use of those have not yet been possible.

The Significant Obstacles to the Economic Advancement of Bangladesh

From the above discussion, we have learnt about the nature and characteristics of
the economy of Bangladesh. We have seen that agriculture is an important sector
in the economy of Bangladesh, but the industrial sector is gradually widening. The
social and economic structure of the country is insufficient and underdeveloped.
Over population, the low rate of education and unemployment are the special
main problems of the economy of Bangladesh. We have further learnt that a vast
portion of the population of the country is poor, and therefore the standard of
living is low. From these very situations and characteristics, in this lesson, we
shall detect the obstacles to the progress of economy. The main reason of the
backwardness of the economy of Bangladesh lies in our history. From the analysis
of our history it appears that Bangladesh that is so backward in economy and
problem ridden has a wide background of two centuries, which was formed for
around two hundred years of British colonial rule and in 24 years of Pakistani
tule.

1. The Background of the Economic Backwardness of Bangladesh: The main
cause for the economic backwardness of Bangladesh is around two hundred years
of colonial rule and exploitation. The pre-liberation history of the economy of
Bangladesh can be divided into 4 phases - the ancient Bengal, the Muslim rule, the
British rule and the Pakistani rule. There were affluence and diversity in the
Forma- 26: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

202 Bangladesh and Global Studies
agricultural production in ancient Bangla. In the field of industry metal industry,
wood industry, textile industry had undergone special expansion. The period of
Muslim rule was the The industrial goods of Bangladesh, specially golden
age of Bengal. In this period Bangladesh reached the peak of prosperity in all
fields such as agriculture, industrial and international trade.the clothes were

very warmly received in various countries of the group work: How will you
world. But the rule of the English was | relate the present state of the
established in Bengal after the war of Palashey | economy of Bangladesh to
in 1757. The English rulers continued | the period 1757-1971?
uninterrupted exploitation and plunder in this country. Because of the
introduction of Zamindar system through permanent settlement system and
mandatory indigo cultivation, the agriculture and farmer society were copiously
ruined. During the Muslim rules, Bangladesh had trade with many countries of the
world. Bangladesh had extended export trade even in the European countries
including the neighbouring countries. Along with the agricultural goods,
Bangladesh was regarded as a big industrial goods exporting country. The English
grabbed all business and trade as their own. Because of the advent of industrial
revolution in England at that time the mechanical age started. The clothes
produced in the textile industry of England in less expense captured the market of
Bangladesh, and so the world famous textile industry and other industries of
Bangladesh were damaged. In this way Bangladesh turned into a market of
industrial products of England. During this time of this colonial rule Bangladesh
merely became a raw material exporting country instead of exporting agricultural
and industrial goods. In the field of international trade, there arose continuous
deficit in Bangladesh in the balance of trade. As a result, into the process of
savings and capital formation were hindered.

As a result of the partition of India in 194 7, two countries emerged named India
and Pakistan. The Pakistani regime started afterwards. There were two parts of
Pakistan - East Pakistan and West Pakistan. The Present Bangladesh was then the
East Pakistan. During the period of 194 7- 71, West Pakistan exploited East
Pakistan in the same way. The people of East Pakistan had been victims of the
extreme deprivation in all cases such as of service, distribution of resources,
budget allocation, and appointment in armed forces and share of foreign aid. West
Pakistan had the supremacy in all fields of administration. In this way, the
economic foundation of Bangladesh was destroyed because of more than two
hundred years (1757-1971) of the colonial rule and exploitation. An advanced _
country like Bangladesh in the fields of agriculture, industry and trade became S

The Economic Indicators and the Nature of the Economy of Bangladesh 203
economically dependent on others. Bangladesh inherited this dependent economy
after being independent through the armed struggle in 1971. As a result much of
our time was spent in preparing the foundation for starting economic development
activities. We are mostly engaged in preparing the foundation till now. In addition,
various autocratic regimes after 1975 are also responsible for our economic
hinderance.
2. The Obstacles in Agriculture: In our agriculture based economy, the area of
agricultural land is gradually decreasing. In agriculture, high yielding seed,
fertilizer, irrigation facilities and modem cultivation method are being applied.
But, the facilities have not yet reached to a major portion of people concerned
with agriculture.
Easy availability of agricultural loan is a big factor for agricultural development.
The amount agricultural loan disbursement is increasing every year. But because
of insufficiency of institutional facilities, the agricultural credit is still not easily
available to many real farmers.
The biggest obstacle to agricultural development is infrastructural weakness.
Productivity falls low because of insufficiency of irrigation facility, insufficiency
of seed and fertilizer and uncertainty to get those in time, lack of electricity, higher
transport expense in marketing produced goods and lack of facility to preserve
and store goods. Moreover, because of the domination of brokers and middlemen
in all stages- from production to marketing, the real producers are deprived of the
right prices. As a result they lose the interest to produce and do not become
interested to take new initiative. However, at present this obstacles are gradually
reducing at a large scale.
Bangladesh is called a country of natural calamities. Natural calamity is a major
hindrance to the development of agriculture. Every year various areas of this
country are affected by flood, drought, storm, cyclone, water upsurge, and excess
rain. All such calamities are the cause of widespread loss in agriculture.
3. The Obstacles in Industry: Industrial sector is gradually expanding in the
economy of Bangladesh. But, as there are not basic industries even in this sector,
industrial sector is not being able to advance towards development much rapidly.
Heavy industries such as iron and steel industry, heavy vehicle industry, electricity
oriented industry, etc. are very insufficient compared to the need.
Weakness in the financial infrastructure is also a big obstacle to progress in the
industry sector. Lack of necessary number of land, river and airports, higher price

20

Sof fuel and gas, insufficiency in the production and supply of those, insufficiency

204 Bangladesh and Global Studies
of roads and bridges and their underdeveloped state are big obstacles to
establishing new industry and enhancing production.

The Bank loan facility is essential for the development of industrial sector. In
Bangladesh, credit facility is inadequate compared to demand. Endeavour to
provide loan facility to encourage new entrepreneurs is little. Moreover loan
management is also not proper.

The socio-political situation, i.e. the political instability of the country is not
favourable for the development of the industrial sector. The political programmes
such as hartal, agitation, blockade, etc. cast remarkable negative impact on the
productivity of industrial sector. The income of the labourers reduces. Production
process is hampered and prices of produced goods increase. As a result demand
for goods in the market reduces and income of the industry owners reduces.
Consequently, new initiative and interest to invest decrease.

4. Socio-Economic Obstacles: The weak and inadequate infrastructure can be
mentioned first as socio-economic obstacles. Let us first speak about the transport
system. Telecommunication is developed much among the postal, tele and
electronic communication. However mass people are out of the service of
electronic communication.

Transport and goods production and marketing are not expectedly increasing due
to insufficient transport means through air, land and water ways. In case of fuel
and energy, the generation and supply of gas and electricity are faulty and
insufficient. As a result production in agriculture, industry and service sector is
slowed down. Loan facilities for enterpreneurer and investors in providing capital
are regarded as a basic factor of economic infrastructure. Bank and other loan
providing institutions are not enough to cater the total demands of loan. Besides,
political turmoil has made investment adverse.

Then comes the issue of social infrastructure. Among the social infrastructural
problem the biggest one is the illiteracy of mass people. The educated or literate
people are not also being able to make expected contribution to the development
of the country. The reason of this is that education is mostly bookish and
knowledge based. Students do not attain enough skills for applying the earned
knowledge. However, at present necessary steps have been taken to make the
primary and secondary education based on knowledge and skills. Because of
thisweakness of the education system, low rate of literacy of the people and
because of lack of technical skills and knowledge, the productivity of the ordinary
workers is low. In addition to these, malnutrition and lack of good health further «
reduce productivity. Eagerness and ability to take initiative is also less among the &

The Economic Indicators and the Nature of the Economy of Bangladesh 205
labourers and people. All these factors have kept the progress of all the sectors of
economy, specially the progress of industrial sector almost hampered. although
the government has initiated many steps for the empowerment of women
compared to men, they are still backward. Half of the population of the country is
women. Because of this backwardness, women are lagging behind in the job
sector too. In different fields of the society, even in decision making in family, the
role of women is very little. As a result, there are widely occurring incidents of
early marriage, family violence, giving birth to more children, which is
intensifying the population problem.
The main obstacles among the socio-economic | Individual work: Prepare a list
obstacles are over population and other | Of the socio-economic obstacles
problems caused by it. Because of over fo the ese ahve acai la ty
. angladesh.
population, the government has to face
additional pressure in all sectors of the country
like education, health and communication.
Another big problem originated from population problem is unemployment. A big
portion of the manpower of the country is unemployed and semi-employed. As a
result, the per capita income gets low. The rate of savings and investment is also
low. So, the rate of establishing new industry is poor.
Unemployment give birth too many social problems too. The unemployed
adolescents and young people get involved in social criminal activities. As a
result, the social life gets troubled, and law and order situation becomes weak.
5. The Lack of Good Governance, and Corruption: Since after independence
the democracy has not yet been able to be firmly rooted in the administration
system of the country for various reasons. For a long time of forty years after
independence military rule had continued in this country. There is the lack of
accountability and transparency in administration. It has not been possible to
arrange education, training and employment keeping pace with population
growth. As a result there are widespread unemployment, dissatisfaction and
restlessness among the youths. A great influential portion of the officials working
in government and private sectors being corrupt, corruption has spread across all
the levels of the society. Because of such corruption, social instability and lack of
good governance, no expected progress has taken place in the industry and service
sectors of the country.
6. Nature Made Obstacles: The Natural calamity is a common incident in
Bangladesh. It is said that Bangladesh is a natural disaster prone country. The
main natural calamities include flood, draught, water upsurge, cyclone, tornado,
& river erosion, etc. These calamities spoil mainly the agriculture sector. Moreover,
“houses, roads and trees undergo widespread damage. Especially, every year,

206 Bangladesh and Global Studies
because of flood and river erosion, a huge area of land of this country with limited
agricultural land is dissolved. Besides, the loss of human lives, cattle, fishery and
bird resources also undergo widespread damage. With this loss, the production has
to be started again every year.

Steps to Overcome the Obstacles to the Economic Development of

Bangladesh

The steps taken by the government and private organizations to eliminate the main

obstacles to the development of the economy of Bangladesh are mentioned

below.

1. To Prepare Policy Based Foundation for Development: A policy based

foundation is required for any national development programme. Formulating or

amending a national policy for different sectors of economy, the government has
undertaken a project for preparing a structure for development. Planning and
project are required to implement the policy.

The present government has undertaken initiatives for a planned development to

attain overall economic development of the country. Under this said initiative a

document of plan titled "Bangladesh Perspective Planning 2010- 2021" has been

prepared in the light of "Rupkalpa-2021" declared by the government.

Based on the said perspective, a 7° five-year-plan (2016-21) has been prepared as

a midterm plan. This plan will include the objective of overall economic

development and the strategies, method and description of assets and directions to

attain that objective. Bangladesh has implemented six ‘five year plans' earlier.

2. Steps Taken in Agriculture: Among the big obstacles to agricultural

development there are: decrease in agricultural land, insufficiency of agricultural

loan, insufficiency of agricultural materials such as seed, fertilizer and insecticide,
weakness in infrastructure such as lack of irrigation facility and electricity, lack of
facility to sell produced goods and natural calamity.

The government is facing all these obstacles through formulating and

implementing various policies. These policies include the ‘National Agriculture

Extension Policy’, ‘National seed policy’, ‘Integrated Fertilizer Distribution Policy'

and ‘Integrated Pest Management’. Moreover, the activities for agricultural

development are going on according to the ‘National Agriculture Policy 1999".

The steps initiated under such policies are described below:

e Expansion of the area of agricultural land through eradicating water logging
from different regions of the country and through planned water extraction
from marshy land;

sy
« To increase subsidy in the agricultural materials, to make agricultural materials S

The Economic Indicators and the Nature of the Economy of Bangladesh 207
easily available at fair price and to ensure the supply of those to the farmers;

e Expansion of irrigation facility by using the surface water in various areas of
the country and raising the availability of making irrigation instruments for the
farmers;

e Making more investment in the production of high quality and high yielding
seed, etc.;

e Making sufficient arrangement for the preservation of crops, controlling
quality of agricultural goods, and ensuring fair value of agricultural goods;

e Taking initiative to increase the agricultural
production by producing bio-fertilizer, green | Individual work: Which
fertilizer and bacteria fertilizer round the | one is more effective from
homesteads of 97 lac families in the country ~ point of ew ee

iui ; io-fertilizer: steps undertaken for
giving more importance on bio-fertilizer; acioilinal development?

e Making balanced use of fertilizer and continuing | Explain two steps.
to give subsidy on the import cost of fertilizer
for increasing production;

e Continuing agricultural and rural loan disbursement activities through banks
and financial institutions;

e Recent formulation of loan policy and programme to include agricultural loan
programme in all scheduled banks working in Bangladesh including private
and foreign banks.

3. Steps Taken in Industrial Sector: The importance of industrial sector in the

economy of Bangladesh is increasing. The contribution of industrial sector to

gross domestic product is gradually increasing. Expansion of the industrial sector,
setting up of heavy or basic industry and overall development of this sector is
urgent for the general economic development of the country. Among the existing
main problems in the industrial sector of Bangladesh, there are lack of large/heavy
or basic industry, weak infrastructure, insufficiency of capital and industrial loan,
lack of mentality to take initiative and political instability. To solve all these
obstacles and problems the government has declared ‘National Industrial Policy

2010'.

The important intrinsic objectives of this policy are: to create productive

employment, to bring the women in the mainstream industrialization process and

(© eradicate poverty, to establish labour oriented, export oriented and
S import- substitute industry, to ensure public- private partnership in the

208 Bangladesh and Global Studies
development of the country and to build a prosperous and modem industrial
sector. This national policy is under implementation at present.
To ensure rapid industrialization of the country, the government has taken
initiatives to establish and expand large/ basic industries side by side with small
and medium industries. The first and main requirement for industrialization is
capital. The sources of capital are banks and financial organizations. So, action
has been taken through banks and financial organizations to increase industrial
loan and to provide other helps. The amount of industrial loan disbursement in the
country was tk. 38098.55 crore in 2005-06 whereas it was tk. 124026.28 crore i.e.
around 3.25 times more in 2015-16 (Source: Bangladesh Economic
Survey-2016).
4. Steps Taken to Eliminate the Social Obstacles: Weakness in the
socio-economic infrastructure is a great obstacle or challenge in the economic
development of the country. Inadequate generation and supply of gas and
electricity are the weak point of economic infrastructure. The power generation
has little bit increased by raising the effectiveness of existing production system
for last few years. During the fascal year 2015-16 the electricity generation was
8177 MW. According to the power system, master plan 2010 adopted by the
government, the power demand of 2015 and 2021-2030 will be 10,000 MW,
19000 MW and 34000 MW respectively. Projects for generation, distribution and
line circulation of electricity under short, mid and long term plan by the
government are now in different stages of implementation in order to meet the
demand of power. It is expected that approximately 12900 MW will be added to
the national grid within 2017 according to the current plan.
The project to generate 2800 million Quebec feet gas per day at the end of 2015
under the mid and long term plans is ongoing considering the demand for power
in our country. Besides, different steps have been taken to import gas by 2013.
The government is going on repair activities and implementation of different
projects within various terms in order to develop and expand road, rail and water
transports.
It is also mentionable for commutation that about half of the total population has
now at least one mobile set of their own. The government has taken and
implemented various initiatives to make the country advanced by information
technology. The government gives priority to information and communication
technology as a driving force of socio-economic development and is working to
make the country a middle income one through, 'The Vision 2021 '. %
S
AQ

The Economic Indicators and the Nature of the Economy of Bangladesh 209
The weakness in the social infrastructure includes mainly the illiteracy of the vast
population, the absence of arrangement for the students’ earning various types of
skills in the curriculum, lack of technical and technological knowledge, and skill
among the labourers, over population and unemployment caused by it,
backwardness of the women society in education and in all other social fields and
the lack of their empowerment, insufficiency of healthcare service for the people,

etc. A policy based foundation has been built up to eliminate all these obstacles. A

multipurpose action has been taken under the 'National Education Policy 2010’,

‘Health, Nutrition and Population Sector Policy’, and the second and third phases

of the 'Primary Education Development Policy'. These actions include:

e Raising the rate of enrolment of students into primary and secondary
education and their attendance at schools, and to take special action to check
drop outs;

¢ Ensuring the political, social, administrative and economic empowerment of
women;

e Providing stipend for the girl students at the secondary and the higher
secondary levels and exempting tuition fees with a view to expanding female
education;

e Putting a special importance on enhancing school enrolment, pre-primary
education and stipend with a view to ensuring the eradication of illiteracy;

e Raising the number of beneficiaries of stipend for the primary education from
48 lakh to 78 lakh;

e Establishing schools in villages where there is no school;

e Free-distribution of new text books among students;

e Providing training for the teachers engaged in the secondary and the higher
education under various projects, and introducing information technology
education in schools and arranging its expansion;

e Including vocational course in the schools of secondary and higher secondary
level with Madrasha with a view to expanding technical and vocational
education;

e Incorporating various skills including practical skills in the curriculum for
making the secondary education life and work oriented;

e Arranging health, family welfare and nutrition service in the community
clinics to reach health service to the rural population;

¢ Introducing tri-stage based ( community, union and upazila) upazila health
service and at the same time introducing district health service.

Forma- 27: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

210 Bangladesh and Global Studies
5. Steps Taken to Eradicate Nature Made Obstacles: Disaster management has
been formed in the country to face natural calamity. Various organisations like
Disaster Management and relief division of the government, under it the
directorates of disaster management and weather, water development board etc.
give forecast of various natural calamities. Many NGOs are working to face
natural disasters. The directorates relief and rehabilitation, food, public health
engineering, local government engineering and water resources planning
organization are concerned with disaster management.
The disaster management and relief ji
division is implementing the 2nd phase Hadlividiuall works Wil you taouinaad

: : . any step other than the taken ones to
of the project titled ‘Comprehensive | gliminate the social obstacles to
Disaster Management Programme | development? If you do, what is the
(CDMP)' in the term of 2010-14. | recommendation? Explain.
Under this project steps such as
advance warning about disaster, preparation for the disaster, reduction of risk,
raising people's ability to face the disaster etc. steps are being taken and
implemented. Corruption free administration and good governance must be
ensured to implement these steps.
Developed, Under Developed and Developing Countries and the
Economy of these Countries
To know whether a country is developed, under developed or developing we
have to know what is called economic development.
The Concept of Economic Development
Development is the blooming of intrinsic power. Development means prosperity.
By development, we also mean overall improvement. Making and development of
overall socio economic prosperity by utilizing the assets and potentials of the
country can be called economic development. Asset means both the natural and
the human resources of the country. In this process of achieving development the
assistance and support of other countries of the world are also required.
Economic Growth and Economic Development
In order to get the right idea about economic development, the matter of economic
growth has also to be understood. The two terms ‘economic development’ and
‘economic growth' are many times used as having the same meaning. But these
two are not the same, there is some difference. The rate of annual growth of
national income of a country is called the rate of growth. Growth rate is the rate of =
the change of national income. But economic development takes population and s

The Economic Indicators and the Nature of the Economy of Bangladesh 211
price level into consideration along with the rate of growth, and considers the
issue of increase in real per capita income.
If the growth rate of a country is 2% and the population of that country also
increases at the rate of 2%, it cannot be said that there is taking place economic
development because, if the rate of economic growth and the rate of population
growth are the same, per capita income will remain the same. If the rate of growth
is more than the rate of population growth, only then per capita income will
increase and it can be said that economic development is taking place. But, the
issue of change in price level has also to be taken into consideration.
Let us assume that per capita income of the people of a country has increased by
5% in a particular year. In the same period, the price level of goods has also
increased by 5%. In such a case, the people will not be able to purchase more
goods and services than the past inspite of increase in per capita income. It means
that their real income has not increased though their financial income has
increased. In such circumstances, it cannot be said that the economic development
has been attained. If per capita income increases while the price level of goods
remains unchanged, or if the rate of increase in price level of goods is less than the
increase in per capita income, only then real per capita income will increase.
However, if the real per capita income continues to increase for a long time, only
then it can be said that economic development has taken place.
Under the change of economic infrastructure, the loan disbursement programme
of banks and other financial organizations is extended, and the transport and
communication system is developed. Development takes place in the marketing
system of goods and services. At the same times, the developed technology and
strategy are used in production. As a result, the productivity of the labourers
increases which results in the increase in the volume of production. Disparity or
inequality in the distribution of the produced asset or national income keeps
decreasing. As a result, the factors of production, specially the labourers get their
fair wages. So, the overall welfare of the people goes up.
The objective of economic development is the maximum welfare of all the people
of the country. The increase of per capita income. Equitable distribution of income
ensures this welfare.
Moreover, changes take place in social infrastructure too. Thus good governance,
the scope of education and the facility of healthcare reach to all the people. As a
result, the standard of living of the people develops. The people feel the benefit of
high standard of living, and the rate of population growth falls.
The natural change means the turn of economy [| Ynqividual work: ‘Growth and
oo from the state of being agriculture based into development are not the same.’
S_ being industry based. As a result, the country is | Explain with example.

212 Bangladesh and Global Studies
transformed Explain with example. from rural economy to town based economy
and social system. Income of the people increases. The rate of savings and capital
formation and investment also increases. As a result, employment generation
increases, unemployment decreases and production further increases.There
continues gradual development in the standard of living. This overall developed
state is called economic development. From the above discussion, we can say that
the economic development is a deeper, wider and multi-dimensional issue
compared to the rate of growth.

If the per capita real income of the people of a country continues to increase for
long time because of the gradual development of socio-economic infrastructure
and natural change of economy of a country, and if equitable distribution of
income is ensured, this state is called economic development.

On the basis of the degree of development, the countries of the world are divided
into three groups: the developed country, the under developed country, and the
developing country.

The Developed Country

The type of country where economic development has taken place and
development has been continuing for long term is called developed country. The
per capita income of the people of the developed countries is very high. The rate
of growth of per capita income is also high there, and as a result the standard of
living is also much developed. Socio-economic infrastructure of these countries
are developed, the industrial sector is expanded, transport and communication
system is developed and international trade is in favour of the economy. Housing,
education facility and health service of the people of those countries are ensured.
Because of the expansion of education, knowledge and science is also expanded
rapidly and new technologies are invented. USA and Canada of America,
European countries such as England, France, Germany, Switzerland, Netherlands,
Sweden, Norway, among Asian countries Japan etc. are the developed countries in
the world. Some common characteristics of these countries are shown below:

1. The High Standard of Living: The main feature of the developed countries is
that the per capita income of the people of these countries is very high and their
standard of living is also much higher. In 2010, the per capita annual income of
some main developed countries of the world ranged from 40,000 US dollars to
85,000 US dollars.

2. The Industrialized Economy: The economy of the developed countries is
dependent on industry. Those countries have attained development because of
rapid industrialization. These countries have turned into industry based country
from agriculture based economy. Basic and large scale industries have gradually &
developed in those countries from small and medium industries. N

The Economic Indicators and the Nature of the Economy of Bangladesh 213
3. The High rate of savings, capital formation and investment: Because of
high per capita income, even after spending for consumption, people have surplus
income which is deposited as saving. Because of high rate of saving, the rate of
capital formation and investment is also high. As a result the volume of production
increases gradually.
4. Developed Method of Production and Distribution Process: The more the
developed countries advance towards development, the more their method of
production and management get developed. A big reason of developed production
is the development of technical devices or technology. Because of setting up big
industries, developed process is innovated and production increases manifold by
its application.
Moreover, the distribution system of national income in developed countries is
also developed. The factors of production, especially the labourers get their due
wages. As a result, inequality in income distribution decreases. For this reason the
overall welfare of the people rises.
5. Developed socio- economic condition: One main characteristic of the
developed countries is that the socio-economic infrastructures of these countries
are much developed. It includes-
e Developed banking system and loan disbursement
management; _. Individual work: What
e¢ Developed transport and communication system; | indicators would you use to
e Low rate of population growth and unemployment; | identify developed country?
e Sufficiency of electricity, water and fuel;
e High rate of education, assurance of education facility and health service for all
e Social Security system for all.
6. The Developed and Modern Agricultural System: Agriculture is a minor
sector in the developed countries. But, the agricultural production and marketing
system are very developed. Both the volume of production and the quality of
agricultural goods are very developed.
7. Controlled Population and Developed Human Resource: The population of
the developed countries is controlled. Since the rate of population growth is lower
than the rate of economic growth, the per capita income increases incessantly.
Moreover, because of high rate of education, proper training and developed health
service, the population turns into human resource. This human resource
contributes a lot to the production and development of the country.
8. The Favourable Foreign Trade: Since the volume and quality of both
e« 2gticultural and industrial goods are high, these countries can build up favourable
S trade relations with other countries in the field of international trade. This

214 Bangladesh and Global Studies
relationship is also helpful for economic development.
9. The Widespread Urbanization: Because of the gradual industrialization from
agriculture based state and because of the development of roads, communication
and electricity system, rural economy holds an urban shape. As a result, rural
people keep coming to towns, and villages also tum into towns.
10. The Political Stability: There is political stability in the developed countries.
Here, administration system works with transparency. The volume of corruption
is also very small. The political and social organizations are also stable and
developed. As a result, an environment favourable to economic development is
formed and it sustains.
The Under Developed Country
The level of economic development of a country is determined mainly from the
point of view of per capita real income. The countries of which per capita real
income is lower than that of the per capita real income of the developed countries
like the USA, Canada, Australia and West European countries are called under
developed countries. But, it is not right to term a country under developed on the
basis of per capita real income only. The type of country which is not able to use
the resources fully is also meant as underdeveloped country. According to many
economists, the countries where there is co-existence of huge unused manpower
and natural resources are underdeveloped countries. Professor Ragnar Narks says,
"Underdeveloped countries are those where capital is much less compared to
population and natural resources."
Dominance of primary profession, shortage of capital and widespread
unemployment exist in these countries. Some common features of these countries
are discussed below:
1. The Low Per Capita Income and Low Standard of Living: The main
characteristic of the underdeveloped countries is very low per capita income and
standard of living of the people compared to the developed countries. The major
portion of the population has no ability to fulfill the basic needs such as food,
cloth, shelter, education and treatment facilities etc.
Among the underdeveloped countries, there are even countries with less than 200
dollars per capita income whereas the per capita income of the prominent
developed countries ranges from 40000 dollars to 56000 US dollars (World
Development Report 2016).
2. The Excessive Dependence on Agriculture: Majority of the population of the
underdeveloped countries are dependent on agriculture to meet food, livelihood
and other needs. Agriculture is the single biggest sector in the national production. 2
S
aq

The Economic Indicators and the Nature of the Economy of Bangladesh 215
3. The Undeveloped Agricultural Production and Marketing System: Though
majority of population of these countries are dependent directly or indirectly on
agriculture, the agricultural production and marketing system are not developed.
Agriculture is much undeveloped because of all these reasons such as traditional
method of cultivation, defective ownership, less investment, lack of agricultural
materials and necessary infrastructure for agriculture such as fertilizer, seed and
irrigation facility and marketing facility, dependence of agriculture on nature etc.
4. Small and Undeveloped Industrial Sector: Industrial Sector is very small in
the underdeveloped countries because of the lack of capital and the skilled
Manpower. There is no basic or heavy industry in these countries. Predominance
of small, medium and cottage industries is noticed here. Generally, the
contribution of industrial sector to Gross National Product is only 8 to 10 percent.
5. Low Rate of Capital Formation and Investment and Widespread
Unemployment: Since per capita income is small, the entire income of the people
has to be spent for purchasing daily necessities. As a result the rate of savings of
the people is very small. So, shortage of capital is seen, and the rate of investment
is also very low. Since investment is very small, the rate of establishing new
production or industry is very small. As a result, no new employment is created.
Unemployment increases. Per capita income continues to fall. In this way the
country rotates within the circle of poverty.
6. The Incomplete Use of Natural Resources and Manpower: Capital and
skilled manpower are required for the perfect use of natural resources. There is so
much want of capital and technically skilled Manpower in the underdeveloped
countries that it is not possible for long period to determine what mineral resourc-
es at what amount are available in the country. As a result, all these countries
remain poor despite having resources.
7. High Rate of Population Growth and Unskilled Manpower: Because of
illiteracy, superstition and lack of proper control, the rate of population growth in
the underdeveloped countries is high. The volume of the population is bigger than
the supporting powers of the country. The arrangement to tum this population into
skilled manpower through providing general education, technical education
training and health facilities is also trifling.
8. The Weak Socio-economic Infrastructure: One of the main characteristics of
the underdeveloped countries is the weakness both in economic and in social
infrastructures. Organizations disbursing loan in agriculture and industry are
insufficient, and their management is weak. Transport and communication system
is also undeveloped and insufficient. Major portion of population is deprived of
« education and health service. Electricity and fuel supplies are also much
S insufficient.

216 Bangladesh and Global Studies
9, The Unfavourable Foreign Trade: Underdeveloped countries are dependent
on import for meeting the basic needs of people- even for meeting the demands
for food, clothing and treatment. These countries export mainly agricultural
goods and raw materials for industry and import industrial goods. Export
income is always less than import expenses.
As a result there is always deficit in the underdeveloped condition of the
balance of the international transactions of | under developed countries always
these countries. lengthen? Explain.

10. The Dependence on foreign aid: Because of lower capital compared to need,
the underdeveloped countries depend too much on foreign aid to collect capital for
investment. These countries depend too much on foreign aid not only for the
supply of capital but for the necessary money and other goods needed during
disaster and emergency periods.

11. Lack of Mentality to Take Initiative and Risk: In the underdeveloped
countries, the lack of the Manpower to lead in the economic development is
noticed among people. The progress of economic activities is dependent on
capital, just as the same way skilled entrepreneurs are also required for it. There is
lack of capital in these countries. Moreover, the capitalists do not show interest to
invest because of weak infrastructure and political instability. Investment starts in
the traditional trend. There is lack of mentality to take initiative and risk to invest
in the field of new production. As a result, there is no new dimension in economy,
and underdevelopment is lengthened.

The Developing Country

In the middle stage of the developed and the underdeveloped countries there is
another type of countries in the world- which are called developing countries. The
real per capita income in these countries is much less compared to that of the
developed countries. Most of the characteristics of underdeveloped economy exist
in the developing countries. Among those there are predominance of agricultural
sector, backwardness in industrial sector, widespread unemployment,
insufficiency of transport, communication and electricity, low rate of education,
low rate of capital formation and investment, low per capita income and poverty,
high rate of population growth etc. But, the difference of these countries from the
underdeveloped countries is that through planned development programme these
countries have arranged to increase gross national product so to say per capita real
income by utilizing the natural resources and population of the country. Asa ,,
result, a tendency has been created to raise per capita income foralong time. S$

The Economic Indicators and the Nature of the Economy of Bangladesh 217
Under planned development programme these countries undertake efforts to
develop socio-economic infrastructure and rapid industrialization in the country.
As a result, the tendency to raise the rate of capital formation and investment is
seen. Spread of education is ensured to tum the population into human resource,
and initiatives are taken to provide all the people with health services. As a result
of all these initiatives and efforts, there is created a situation of dispelling the
anti-development obstacles existing in economy. Some common characteristics of
developing countries are discussed below:

1. Awareness about the Economic Condition and Initiative for Planned
Development: Developing countries are those that being aware about the
condition of their own economic development, take effective steps for changing
that. This step starts through the process of taking overall development plan.
Though there are many obstacles to the implementation of this development
programme in the developing countries, because of over population and shortage
of resources, it is not possible to attain development without planned programme.
2. The Availability of Natural Resources and Possibility of Development: As
there are natural resources such as land, mineral resources, water resources in
these countries, the volume of population is also big similarly. Endeavors are
taken to enhance production by utilizing these natural resources and population.
3. The Reduction of Dependence on Agriculture and Rapid Industrialization:
The trend to be industry oriented country gradually from agriculture based state is
a feature of developing country. For this purpose, through planned programmes
steps are taken to establish basic industry and to invest in industry.

4, The Gradual Development of Agriculture: Agriculture is modernized in the
developing countries. Arrangements for cultivation in scientific method,
development of infrastructure of agriculture, supply of high quality seed, fertilizer
and irrigation facility etc. are taken. As a result, productivity of agriculture
increases, and gradual development of agriculture starts.

5. Development of Infrastructure: Since initiative is taken to spread agriculture
and industry, it becomes essential to develop socio-economic infrastructure in the
developing countries. So, action is taken in these countries to develop and extend
economic infrastructure such as transport and communication system, formation
and supply of capital and social infrastructure such as education and health service
etc. at the starting level of development. In course of this trend of attaining
development, development of social environment also takes place gradually.
Forma- 28: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

218 Bangladesh and Global Studies
6. Decrease in the Rate of Population Growth and Human Resource
Development:
There is excess in population in the developing countries. National Programme is
taken to control population. As a result, though slow, the rate of population growth
gradually continues to fall.Steps for taking literacy project, extension of education
and training programme and for the introduction of technology and technical
education are taken to tum the population of the country in to manpower or human
resource. Moreover, health facility and service undergo expansion. For all these
reasons the trend of the transformation of population into human resource is
created. Their skills and productivity also increase.
7. The Decrease in Unemployment and Elimination of Poverty: Widespread
unemployment exists also in the developing countries. But, efforts are taken to
reduce the rate of unemployment through application of modem methods in
agriculture, rapid industrialization and through creation of new employment
opportunities. Generally, arrangements are made to reduce unemployment and
eradicate poverty through various types of projects under development plans.
8. The Reduction in the Dependence on Foreign Aid: In the developing
countries huge amount of money and capital are required to implement
development plans and programmes. Since it is not possible to collect sufficient
fund from internal sources, these countries become too much dependent on
foreign loan, aid and grant. This dependence usually continues for long period.
But, at some stage of achieving development this dependence reduces.
9. Ensuring Financial Welfare of the People: The main objective of economic
development is to ensure maximum financial and social wellbeing of all the
people. If it is possible to ensure balanced distribution of income together with
economic development, financial and social welfare are ensured.
But, though socio-economic development is initiated in the developing countries,
the shortcoming in distribution system remains for long. As a result, disparity in
the distribution of income prevails for long period.
10. Increase in the Rate of Urbanization: A | {ndividual work: Wh
trend of gradual development is created | will you consider t
through planned economic and_ social | country ‘developing’? at factors
programmes in the developing countries. This u ea s
trend is much rapid in some countries, but not so much in other countries. But,
because of these development activities, modernization of rural economy
gradually takes place, infrastructure develops and people moves from villages to
cities in search of work because of industrialization. Urbanization takes place in
the country because of all these. FS
ES

The Economic Indicators and the Nature of the Economy of Bangladesh 219
11. Development in Social Environment: Though slow, in the developing
countries education, health service, recreation system, roads and bridges,
transport and communication system, financial organization such as bank and
insurance facility, international communication etc. are developed and expanded.
All these results in elimination of superstition and bigotry. For being introduced
with high standard of living, people become interested in attaining development.
12. Increase in Per Capita Income and Standard of Living: The economy of
developing country is run mainly on the basis of planning. Though there is the
existence of bottleneck in implementing plans, a tendency to development is
created as a result of implementing the plans. As a result, the per capita income of
the people of these countries continues to increase gradually, and development
starts in the standard of living.
Economic Relationship of Bangladesh with Developed and Developing Countries
We have learnt that the countries of the world are divided into developed,
developing and underdeveloped or least developed countries according to the
degree or level of economic development. According to this division, Bangladesh
belongs to the last class i.e. least developed countries. But, because of incessant
development efforts and activities and the higher standard of some indicators
(such as gender equality in education, reduced rate of child and maternal death,
worth mentioning progress in the rate of enrolment in primary education),
Bangladesh may also be considered to be in the class of developing countries.
We have learnt in the meantime about some developed, developing and under
developed countries. We know that USA, Canada, and most of the countries of
Europe are included in the class of developed countries. South Asia and
sub-Saharan African countries are mainly the low income countries. Moreover,
countries of East and Middle Asia, Latin America, Middle East and North African
countries are mainly middle income countries, which include both 'middle
income’ and ‘higher middle income’ countries.
No country in the world is self-sufficient. Every country has to establish, maintain
and develop relationship with other neighboring countries also because of
economic, social and political reasons. In this lesson we shall discuss the issue of
economic relationship of Bangladesh with developed and developing countries.
We can discuss the topic of economic relationship under two main heads:
1. Relationship concerning foreign trade 2. Relationship concerning loan
assistance and the giving and taking of grant.
1. Relationship Concerning Foreign Trade
There are two aspects of trade-export and import. Export is the source of income
= of a country, and import is the head of expenditure. The export income of
‘Bangladesh is less than the import expenses for a long period. At present income

220 Bangladesh and Global Studies
frame export and grants has reduced deficit. So, Bangladesh is always a country
of deficit in the field international transaction.

The main export goods of Bangladesh include readymade garments and knitwear,
raw jute, goods made of jute, frozen food, tea, leather, agricultural goods, ceramic
goods, etc. From the review of country based export trade it appears that USA has
been the biggest market of the export goods of Bangladesh for the last one decade.
Next to it there are countries like Germany, UK, France, Belgium etc. Moreover,
our goods are also exported to countries such as Italy, Netherlands and Canada. It
means that the export trade of Bangladesh is spread mainly in the developed
countries.

One important aspect of our export is that we are a Manpower exporting country.
We export unskilled and semi- skilled labourers to various countries of the world.
There is arrangement of various types of employment in their countries. Among
the countries where employment has been made for the Bangladeshi labourers, the
main countries are Singapore, Malaysia, Middle Eastern countries such as Saudi
Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Oman, Bahrain and Kuwait. Moreover,
diplomatic process to export manpower from Bangladesh to the African, East
European and Latin American countries has been started.

There is the trade relationship of Bangladesh with the SAARC (South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation) countries in addition to the developed
industries.

The amount of export of Bangladesh within the SAARC countries is the highest
in India. In the fiscal year 2010-11 the amount of export of Bangladeshi goods to
India is 78 percent of the total export to the SAARC countries. It is worth
mentioning that the amount of income in the first 9 months of 2010-11 fiscal years
from the SAARC countries is only 3% of the total export income of Bangladesh
in the same period. (Bangladesh Economic survey 2011-12)

In addition to India our goods are also [Tpdividual work: Initiate a debate
exported to other SAARC countries | regarding the dependence of economic
such as Afghanistan, Bhutan, Maldives, |elationship of Bangladesh with
Nepal, Pakistan and Sri-lanka. developed and developing countries.
Our main import goods include capital machinery, raw materials of industry, food
grains, petroleum and petroleum based goods, cotton, oil, fertilizer and yam, etc.
From the review of the country wise import goods it appears that China tops the
list in the country's import during July-December of the current fiscal year
(2015-16). During this period 23.9 percent of the total import of the country has
come from China. In the second, third and fourth positions there are India
(13.6%), Singapore (5.4%) and Japan (3.9%) respectively. (Bangladesh &
Economic Survey 2015-16) The analysis of the statistics of the last decade shows “

The Economic Indicators and the Nature of the Economy of Bangladesh 221
that India and China are on the top among the countries from where Bangladesh
has been importing goods. The other countries export goods to Bangladesh are
Singapore, Japan, Hong Kong, Taiwan, South Korea, Malaysia and the USA.
2. Foreign Loan- assistance and Grant
Bangladesh is a developing country. This country undertakes planned
development programmes to attain economic development. Huge amount of
money is required to implement this programme. It is not possible to supply the
entire amount of this money from internal sources. Bangladesh receives loan
assistance and grant from other countries of the world to collect development
fund. Bangladesh also receives loan and grant from international organizations
providing loan assistance and grant in development programmes such as World
Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF), Asian Development Bank (ADB),
European Union, Organizations of United Nations, IDA (International
Development Agency), etc.
The countries from which Bangladesh gets foreign assistance are USA, Canada,
UK, Germany, France, Netherlands, Sweden, Norway, Denmark and Australia.
Japan is worth mentioning as the aid giving agency among the Asian countries.
Some amount of aid is also received from India.
Exercise
Short Questions
1. How is the total income of the factors of production determined? Explain.
2. Explain the code formula to determine the Gross National Product.
3. Why is agricultural sector considered the most important sector in
Bangladesh? Explain.
Descriptive Questions
1. How does the per capita income determine the standard of living? Analyse.
2. How do the sectors of economy contribute to the Gross Domestic Product?
Explain.
3. Make comparative analysis of GDP, GNP and per capita income in case of
low income country.
eS
=

222 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Multiple Choice Questions:
1. What percentage of the total Manpower of Bangladesh is engaged in the
agricultural sector?
a. 17.31
b. 24.73
c. 28.40
d. 43.60
2. The price of which commodity of a garments factory is considered in case of
measuring the Gross National Income?
a. Cotton
b. Yarn
c. Fabric
d. Shirt
Read the passage below and answer question no. 3 and 4.
In 2010, the Gross National Income of 2010 of X country was 9600 crore US dollar
and population was 16 crore.
3. How much US dollar was the per capita of X country in 2010?
a. 400
b. 500
c. 600
d. 700
4. The above index indicates 'X' country’s people’s —
i, Standard of living
ii. Rate of saving
iti. Rate of education
Which one below is correct?
ai
b. ii
c. i&ii 2
d. ii & iii =

The Economic Indicators and the Nature of the Economy of Bangladesh 223
Creative Questions:
1.
Low rate of population growth
a. What is called the Gross National Product?
b. How is Bangladesh entangled in vicious circle of poverty?
c. Explain the idea which the (?) marked place of the table indicate.
d. Among the steps mentioned in the table explain the relationship of first
with the last.
2, Onima was going to visit Kuakata by microbus with the members of her
family. At the time of going, they crossed two Ferris without any hazard.
But while going to cross the ferry of Mohipur, she found that because of
water upsurge, three fourth portion of the pontoon adjacent to the ferry was
submerged under water. They had to wait there for four hours. Talking to
the officer in charge of that place, Onima's father learnt that the
government had taken a special project to solve such type of situation.
a. What is the foundation of economic development?
b. What is meant by foreign trade?
c. What type of economic obstacle of the country Onima and her family
faced on the way to Kuakata? Explain.
d. Will the project known to Onima’s father be helpful in the economic
development of Bangladesh? Give argument in favour of your answer.
20
S

Chapter-12
The Financial and Banking systems of the Government
of Bangladesh
The government of Bangladesh has an important role in providing security for the
life and property of the people of Bangladesh, the defense of the country, the
running of administration, the economic development activities and in public
welfare works. The government spends a huge amount of money to play this role.
Sometimes, either putting up the rate or imposing tax on new sectors, the
government arranges extra income to meet these expenses. In the post-liberation
period, the government of Bangladesh has formed many sectors based on
managements including administration, finance, health, education and bank. The
financial and the banking system are the two biggest managing sectors of the
government of Bangladesh. With the change of time the functions of these two
systems have increased manifold comparing to those in the past. People keep their
income or surplus money in banks for safety. With the change of time the
government of Bangladesh has formed some particular financial institutions
including the central and commercial banks. In this chapter, we shall be informed
of the sources of income of the government of Bangladesh, the heads of
expenditure and the bank management.
= a im, Bey
ey |p ff mf fl Pity! !
its < : - WN a : BE «ae
After reading this chapter, we shall be able to —
® explain the concept of government financial e describe the functions of Bangladesh
system; Bank,
e explain the sources of income of the ¢ describe the functions of commercial
government of Bangladesh; bank;
e explain the heads of expenditure of the © describe the role of various banks in
government of Bangladesh; poverty alleviation and self
e explain the concept, type of the bank employment of Bangladesh,
management of Bangladesh; e be aware of the economic functions %&
of Bangladesh. §

The Financial and Banking systems of the Government of Bangladesh 225
The Concept of the Public Finance Management
The public finance is one of the important branches of economy. Generally the
public finance means the policies and methods regarding the income and
expenditure of the state. In this connection Professor Dalton says, "Public finance
is concerned with the income and expenditure of the government and with the
adjustment of the one to other." In this branch of economy all types of in-
come-expenditure of the state, loan and investment-related problems and the
issues of their solutions are included.
The Source of income of Bangladesh Government
The government of Bangladesh spends a huge amount of money to accomplish
public welfare, in running the administration and for socio-economic
development. The government has to earn a lot of money to meet these expenses.
The sources of income of Bangladesh government can be divided into two parts.
Such as (a) Tax Revenue (b) Extra tax revenue. The sources of income of
Bangladesh government are described below:
(a) Tax revenue: The income which is received from the taxes imposed on people
and on various business firms and industries by the government is called tax reve-
nue. The sources of tax revenue income of the government of Bangladesh are as
follows:
1. The Customs: The main source of income of the government
of Bangladesh is the customs. The tax which is imposed on the
exported and imported goods of the country is called the customs.
2. Excise duty: The tax which is imposed on the goods produced
and used inside the country is called excise duty. In addition to
revenue collection, excise duty is also imposed on the purpose
of reducing the consumption of various harmful goods. In Ban
gladesh, excise duty is imposed mainly on tea, cigarette, sugar,
tobacco, kerosene, medicine, spirit, match, wine, ganja, opium,
ete.
3. Income tax: An important source of income of the government
of Bangladesh is -the income tax. The tax which is imposed on
the personal income of the people is called income tax. In Ban
gladesh, income tax is realized at a progressive rate from those
whose income is over a sealing.
4. Value added tax (VAT): The value added tax is usually known
as VAT in the tax system of Bangladesh. At present, in our country
VAT has been imposed on imported and locally produced goods and
on some fixed service sectors.
Forma- 29: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

226 Bangladesh and Global Studies

5. Supplementary duty: The duty which is imposed on some goods in
addition to the custom or excise duty or VAT is called the supplemen
tary duty. It is one of the main sources of income of the government
of Bangladesh.

6. Land revenue: The tax paid to the government for the possession and
use of land is known as land revenue. The income of the government
in this sector has decreased to some extent as a result of the govern
ment's exemption of land tax up to 25 bighas.

7. Non-judicial stamp: The government earns a huge amount of money
from the stamps used for various documents and applications regard
ing judiciary, passport and exchange bills, etc.

8. Registration: The registration fee is paid for deed registration, and
the court fee is paid for lawsuit. The government earns enough money
from this source.

9. Vehicle tax: The tax paid for the registration of vehicles is called the
vehicle tax.

10. Wine Duty: The government earns some money by imposing duty on
wine, ganja, opium etc. drugs.

11. —_ Electricity duty: The government has income from the electricity
duty too.

12. Other taxes and duties: Besides Tndiyidual work? entity the eoufoes of
the above mentioned taxes and. :

: income of the government of Bangladesh.
duties, the government earns more
Teareation iar, Proper ay, Oe
petrol and gas, duty of foreign tour, es
tax on irrigation and its machinery
etc.

b) Extra tax revenue: The government of Bangladesh collects revenue from
many other sources besides tax and duty. The revenue earned from these
sources is called extra tax revenue. These sources are discussed below.

1. Dividend and profit: The government gets dividend and profit from

various financial organizations such as bank, insurance company and various

non-banking financial organizations, park, zoo, etc. at the end of the year.

2. Interest: The government gives loan to various financial and autonomous

organizations. Some income comes from the duties received in this regard. 2
S
AQ

The Financial and Banking systems of the Government of Bangladesh 227
3. The Economic service: The government also earns through giving
some economic facilities to the people. Among these, tourism, banking,
travel and service are notable. They are registration scheme received under
export import act, the earning received under insurance act, audit scheme
of cooperative societies, registration of cooperative society and renewal
scheme, etc.

4. The General administration: The government of Bangladesh earns
various types of fees for providing administrative services.

5. The Railway: Though railway is a source of government income, there
is often deficit in this sector.

6. The Postal department: Since the postal department of the country is
run by the government, it is also a source of government income.

7. The Telegraph and Telephone: Since the telegraph and telephone
system is run by the government, it is another source of government
income.

8. The Forestry: The government also earns a lot of money from the
forest areas of Bangladesh through selling forest-born assets like wood,
bamboo, fuel, honey, wax, etc.

9. Toll and levy: The government earns worth mentioning amount of
money in the toll and levy head. Toll is a kind of revenue which is unlike
the taxes imposed on income. Government earns | Individual work: Mention
this revenue in exchange of providing various | the way to expand the sources
services to people, for example: government of government income.
earns by collecting money at bridges, culvarts, ports, hats and bazaars.
Levy is the tax imposed on an collected from people at a particuler time on
a particuler purpose , for example: the tax levied on the purpose of Padma
Bridge.

10. Rent and lease: The government also earns through renting and leas-
ing government property.

11. Fine, penalty and forfeiture: The government of Bangladesh earns
an amount every year through fine, penalty and forfeiture.

The government of Bangladesh cams a lot of money from the sources
mentioned above.

The Heads of Expenditure of the Government of Bangladesh

The government of Bangladesh spends a huge amount of money on the

2 socio-economic development, the construction of infrastructure, the human
& resource development and on the poverty alleviation. Moreover, the government

228 Bangladesh and Global Studies
has to spend money on the administrative, social, public welfare and other
service-oriented activities. One of the important things in the government
expenditure management is to increase expenditure in productive sector and to
reduce expenditure in non-productive sector. The government allocates money for
revenue as well as development expenditures in the annual budget.
The main heads of expenditure of the government of Bangladesh are discussed
below:

1. Defense: This is one of the main heads of expenditure of Bangladesh

government. The government of Bangladesh spends a huge amount of money

regarding the expenses of giving the salary, allowance and other facilities to

the officers and employees of the defense forces, as well as regard weapons

of war, equipment, etc.

2. The Civil administration: The government spends a worth-mentioning

amount for the operation, development, salary, allowance, etc. of the

employees of various ministries and divisions run under their control.

3. The Education: An important sector a : ;

of expenditure of Bangladesh govern- | dividual work: Identify the

F : heads of expenditure of the
ment is education. The government has to
; government of Bangladesh.

pay a huge amount of money in the recent aa : :

s Individual work: Identify the
times to free the country from the curse of ted ¢ th
illiteracy through expansion of ae t Faced " :

Ageteal an :
education. The expenditure has much sa ealaial a

increased for the grants of government educational institutions, non-govern-
ment schools, colleges and madrasahs, stipend, free distribution of books,
imparting training to teachers and in new activities for the expansion of
education. Besides government allots a great deal of money for non-formal
education.

4. Health and family welfare: The government spends a huge amount of

money on heads like setting up hospitals and medical colleges, preventing

various infectious diseases, population control, child welfare programme,

maternity programme, etc.

5. Payment of loan and interest: The government has to take huge amount

of loan from home and abroad for developmental works of the country. The

government has to spend a huge amount of money to pay off the capital

money and interest every year.

6. The Agriculture, Fishery and Livestock: The government of

Bangladesh spends a notable amount of money on these heads every year. %
S
N

The Financial and Banking systems of the Government of Bangladesh 229

7. The Police, Ansar and Bangladesh Border Guard: The Police and Ansar
forces are essential for maintaining law and order situation and keeping
peace inside the country. Again the Border Guard has been formed in
Bangladesh to protect the border and to check smuggling. The government
of Bangladesh spends a huge amount of money on these three big heads.

g. The Judiciary and Jail Division: A huge amount of money is spent on the
salary and allowance of the officer-employees of the Judiciary and Jail
division and on the management of these two divisions.

9, Public work: The government spends a huge amount of money on public
work programmes every year. Construction of roads, bridges, culverts, etc.
are included in this sector.

10. Revenue divisions: The government of Bangladesh spends a big portion of
the revenue to meet the expenses of income tax, customs, excise, land reve-
nue division etc.

11. The Foreign affairs: The government has to spend a huge amount of
money every year to establish relationship and operate embassy abroad to
protect the interest of the country outside.

12. Retirement allowance and other facilities: The government has to spend a
huge amount of money every year to give retirement allowance and other
benefits to the retired officers and employees.

13. The Social welfare programe: The government has to allocate a huge
amount of money every year for the social welfare activities.

14. Unexpected expenditure: Every year the government of Bangladesh has to
spend enough money to solve emergency situations created by natural
disasters like flood, cyclone, drought, water upsurge etc.

15, Other heads: In addition to the above mentioned heads, the other heads
where the government spends money are the secretariat, the accounts, fuel
and energy, mine, production and construction etc.

Bangladesh is a developing country. The government of Bangladesh has to spend

a huge amount of money every year on the heads mentioned above. The number

of many new heads and the amount of expenditure are gradually increasing every

year. However, the rate of increase in government expenditure should be
controlled for the sake of overall development of the country.

The Conception of Bank

Bank is an organization to keep deposit of money of the people and to disburse

«) Various-term loans to the borrowers. The role of bank in economic development is
S important. People keep their income or surplus money in bank for safety. People

230 Bangladesh and Global Studies
also get interest from some deposits. Bank gives this money deposited by the
people to entrepreneurs, producers, businessmen and debtors as loan and collects
interest on this type of loan. The interest which is given on the deposited money
by the bank is less than the interest it collects from the borrowers. The difference
of interest rate is the profit of bank. Bank survives mainly on the basis of this
profit. As a result, bank is called the trader of loans.
The Classification of bank
Banks are classified into three types mainly on the basis of objectives and
functions. Observe the format below:
The Central Bank: The
central bank is the highest
financial organization of a
country. This bank supervises
and controls the money
market, monetary system and
other banks of the country. The The Specialized

tee It canis the axel The Central Commercial Financial
banking system of the Soa

: : Bank Bank Organization

country, its name is the
central bank.
The Central bank is the only organization authorized to introduce paper currency.
The name of the central bank of Bangladesh is Bangladesh Bank. This bank
works also as the representative of the government and as the financial adviser.
The Commercial Bank: The Commercial bank gives short term loan for the
purpose of commercial profit. There are many commercial banks in Bangladesh
such as the Sonali Bank, the Janata Bank, the Agrani Bank, the Rupali Bank, the
Uttara bank, the Pubali, the National, the City Bank, the Islami Bank etc.
The Specialized Financial Organization: Some banks have been established in
our country for attaining special objectives. These banks are called specialized
financial organizations such as the Shilpa Bank for the development of industry,
the Krishi Bank for the development of agriculture, the House Building Finance
Corporation for sanctioning house building loans, the Cooperative Bank for
sanctioning loans in cooperative activity and developing cooperative attitude in
people, the Grameen Bank for providing micro credit to the poor people, etc.
The Functions of the Commercial Bank
The role of commercial bank is important in the economy. The life of business and
trade is these commercial banks. These types of banks assist in economic x
development by conducting various types of programmes. 8

The Financial and Banking systems of the Government of Bangladesh 231
One of the main objectives of commercial bank is to receive deposit from the
people. Bank deposit is generally of three types - current, savings and fixed
deposits.
Deposited money of current deposit can be withdrawn any time. The bank does
not give any interest to the depositor for the deposit. ThiiidualwnrkelNaee
Money can be drawn once or twice a week from the a list of the functions of
savings deposit. For this, the bank gives small commercial bank.
interest to the depositors. And the deposit which can be withdrawn after the expiry
of a specified period of time is called fixed deposit. The depositor is given interest
at a high rate for fixed deposit.
Loan disbursement is another important function of the commercial bank.
Keeping a fixed part of the money collected from the people, it gives the rest of
the money to businessmen and industrialists as loan. In case of loan disbursement
the bank generally operates this programme by keeping valuable assets as the
mortgage. Commercial Banks mainly sanction short term loans. But due to gradu-
al increase of demand they provide midterm and in some special case long term
loans.
One of the duties of commercial bank is to create the medium of exchange.
Though the authority of introducing paper notes is possessed only by the central
bank, the commercial banks create media of exchange like cheque, bank draft,
hundi, travelers cheque etc. In the developed countries most of the transactions are
accomplished with the help of such exchange.
Another important function of the commercial bank is to cash bill of exchange on
settling discount. If money is needed before the bill expiry, the owner of bill of
exchange can get cash money by exchanging the bill of exchange from the
commercial banks. The bank earns a huge amount of profit in this work. The
Commercial Bank helps in settling the dues of buyers and sellers in case of
internal and foreign trades. Most of the activities of international trades are done
via commercial banks.
Commercial bank transfers money safely and rapidly. These banks help people to
transfer money easily from one place to another through the bank cheque, bank
draft, an order, travelers cheque, telegraphic transfer (TT), etc.
Besides, doing the works mentioned above, the commercial banks accomplish
more functions for the convenience of their clients as their representatives. For
example, they buy and sell bonds, stocks, share and debentures. Moreover, they
assist their customers in paying house rent, income tax, premium of insurance,
x telephone and electricity bill etc. They Keep valuable ornament, documents etc.
& securely.

232 Bangladesh and Global Studies
The Functions of central bank

Introducing paper currency and keeping the monetary system of the country stable
are the important functions of the central bank. The currency introduced by the
central bank is the ‘identified currency' of the country. The responsibility of
keeping the internal and external value of currency stable is vested on the central
bank. The central bank is mainly the bank of the government. As the
representative of the government, it collects dues of the government from various
sources and pays the liabilities of the government in various sectors without cost.
The central bank calculates the internal and | Group work: Compare the
external loans of the government and performs the | functions of the central and
responsibility of management. This bank keeps | the commercial bank.

the deposit of the government money without interest, and in case of necessity, it
gives loan to the government and gives advice regarding financial affairs.

The central bank is the bank of other banks. Other banks have to deposit a
specified portion of their capital in the central bank. By reducing or increasing the
amount of this deposit, the central bank can control the loan giving ability of
commercial banks to a great extent.

One of the main functions of the central bank is to control loan. Loans given by
the commercial banks are included in the total supply of currency of the country.
If the total amount of money increases due to the formation of additional loan,
inflation may appear in the country. The central bank tries to maintain stability by
making equality between the demand and the supply of the total currency of the
country. This bank undertakes various steps to control loan to avoid square
currency and inflation.

When the commercial banks face financial crisis and fail to get loan from any
other source, they are compelled to seek protection to the central bank. In such
circumstances, the central bank saves the commercial banks from financial crisis
by giving loan. For this reason, the central bank is called the borrower of the last
phase.

The central bank performs duty as the clearing house of the mutual dues among
various banks. As a result of the transaction of cheque regarding daily trade, dues
and liabilities are created among the commercial banks. Central bank settles
interbank dues and liabilities among various banks through cheque.

The central bank maintains the specific exchange rate of the currency of the
country with the currency of other countries. For this purpose central bank .
purchases and sells foreign currency. The central bank works in various affairs s

The Financial and Banking systems of the Government of Bangladesh 233
such as conducting research for the economic development of the country,
collecting necessary information, assisting in formulating the budget, etc.

Except the above mentioned functions, the central bank performs some other
functions. For example, the central bank of every country works as the
representative of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank in
their respective countries. The central bank preserves gold, silver, etc. valuable
metals and the earned foreign currency.

The Role of Various Banks in Poverty Alleviation and Self-Employment
Self-employment means being engaged independently in the field of production
or in income generating process through self-initiative with a view to being free
from the curse of unemployment by an active person willing to do work. Every
year around 20 to 25 lakh of new eligible people enter the labour market of
Bangladesh. Various banks are playing important role in creating employment of
those people and in poverty alleviation. The role of these banks is given below:
Bangladesh Krishi Bank: After the achievement of liberation, Bangladesh
Krishi Bank was formed taking all the assets and liabilities of the former
Agricultural Development Bank situated in Bangladesh. This bank has important
role in poverty alleviation and employment creation. Bangladesh Krishi Bank
gives short, medium and long term loans to the farmers for enhancing agricultural
production. Krishi Bank gives loans for various purposes like purchasing cattle,
seeds, fertilizer and agricultural instruments, installation of power-driven pumps,
deep and shallow pumps for irrigation, etc. At present, besides agricultural works,
this bank also gives loan for poultry and livestock growing, fishery, sericulture,
fruit cultivation, flower cultivation and for cottage industry.

In addition to Bangladesh Krishi Bank, the Sonali Bank, the Agrani Bank, the
Janata Bank, Rajshahi Krishi Unnayan Bank and the Rupali Bank have included
micro credit programmes with proper importance in their respective agriculture
and rural loan programme to eradicate poverty through self-employment and
income generating activities. Minimum 25% of the annual loan disbursement
target in agriculture and rural development heads of those banks and financial
organizations are reserved for poverty alleviation. This loan is supplied through
various organizations including private organization, and these banks have their
own programmes too.

The Grameen Bank: The Grameen bank has emerged in Bangladesh as an
exceptional bank. It is a specialized financial organization for giving loan to the
landless rural men and women. This bank is also known as the micro-credit
facilitating bank.

Forma- 30: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

234 Bangladesh and Global Studies
The Grameen Bank gives banking facility to the poor men and women of
Bangladesh without security. The advancement of the bank started with a vow to
protect the poor people from the exploitation of rural money lenders. This bank is
playing an extended role to create scope for self-employment for the vast
unemployed rural population.
Exercise
Short Questions:
1. What is the government financial system?
2. What tax is the additional money paid on purchased sweet included in?
3. What is the reason of calling the tax imposed on sugar Excise?
4, Which bank performs the duty as clearing house? Explain.
5. Why do the commercial banks have to keep a portion of their capital in central
bank as reserve?
Descriptive Questions:
1. Analyse the way to expand the source of government income.
2. Evaluate the role of Bangladesh Krishi Bank in poverty alleviation and in
creating employment.
3. One of the main functions of the central bank is to keep monetary system
stable— Explain.
Multiple Choice Qustions:
1. Which one is extra tax revenue?
a. Land revenue
b. Income tax
c. Forest
d. Vehicle tax
2. Which one is the main head of the expenditure of the government of Bangladesh?
a. Defense
b. Education
c. Non government administration
d. Foreign affairs
=
Rg

The Financial and Banking systems of the Government of Bangladesh 235
3. Which one below is the function of the Sonali Bank?
a. To give money to import vehicles from abroad
b. To keep accounts of foreign loan
c. To give money for installing tube-wells in lands for irrigation
d. To give banking facility without security
4. The function of Bangladesh Bank is—
i. Giving loan to the government
ii. Giving loan to the commercial bank in time of crisis
iii. Giving loan for doing business
Which one below is correct?
ai
b. i&ii
c. ii & iii
d. i, ii & iii
Read the paragraph below and answer to the question nos. 4 & 5.
Landless Nurjahan Begum of Sundarpur village received training on poultry
rearing from a local organization. The organization lent Nurjahan Begum ten
thousand taka. Nurjahan Begum is now solvent by rearing poultry.
4. What organization Nurjahan Begum has taken loan from?
a. The Central Bank
b. The Commercial Bank
c. The Krishi Bank
d. The Grameen bank
5. The role of the organization giving loan to Nurjahan Begum is —
i. To assist in the compilation of the national budget
ii. To give loan to women without security
iii. To protect the poor people from the exploitation of the rural money lenders
Which one below is correct?
b. i&iil
c. i&iti
d. i, ii & iii
2
R

236 Bangladesh and Global Studies

Creative Questions :

1. Two friends of Shafipur village, Mamun and Nafiz live in the village after
obtaining the B.A. degree. Mamun has taken loan amounting to taka 5 lakh
from a financial organization to install a deep tube-well to cultivate his
paternal property. The farmers of the village are able to produce more crops
through cultivation by using the water of Mamun's tube-well. Nafiz has
taken taka twenty lakh from a bank by mortgaging his house and has started
a garments factory. 100 labourers of the village at Nafiz's factory. The
garments produced in Nafiz's factory are being exported abroad. The young
people of the village are playing a vital role in poverty alleviation by
working at Nafiz's factory.

a. How many classes are the banks mainly divided into?

b. What is ‘identified currency’? Explain.

c. Explain the functions in poverty alleviation of the bank from which
Mamun has got loan.

d. The role of the bank from which Nafiz has taken loan is important in
economics- Explain.

2.  Prapti and Dipto are the students of class VIII. Prapti's father is an importer
of foreign car. This year Prapti' s father has got the prize of the highest tax
payer. Dipto's father is working in a bank as G.M. Every year Dipto's father
also pays tax to the government.

a. What is the minimum rate of target of annual loan disbursement of the
bank and financial organizations for agriculture and rural development?
b. Explain the important sector of expenditure of Bangladesh government.
c. What type of tax does Dipto’s father give to the government? Explain.
d. The tax that Prapti’s father gives to the government is the source of
income of the government. Explain.
ES
ES

Chapter-13
The Family Structure of Bangladesh and Socialization
Family is the primary institution of a society. Society originates from family.
Family is one of the important social institutions that are formed in a society. The
genuine and intimate bond of human being is developed through this institution.
From the initial stage of family life, every person has to cross the first step of
family life. The structure of our family life stands on the filial bondage and
activities of father-mother, brother-sister or father-mother, brother-sister,
uncle-aunt, grandfather-grandmother and such other relationship. This sort of
relationship in accordance of family type with which people grow up is noticeable
in the family structure of Bangladesh. Gradually people get associated with
different social institutions and adapted with the social environment. This
adaptation process is called socialization, which centres round of a person's whole
life. Socialization is important for social life. Human being achieves perfection
and becomes a responsible member of the society through socialization. In this
chapter, we shall get acquainted with the family structure of Bangladesh and the
process of socialization.
| > ee as es CNM eee DY
After reading this chapter, we will be able to —
e explain the concept of family; socialization needed to create social
° exempi the nee of different types of Bedok of the people of
° eitiha the common functions of a family; ° explain ite a sa neat of votalzation
e analyse the types and roles of family system in the modem Bangladesh;
of Bangladesh (rural and urban), the e explain the similarity and differences
problems created by the change of the types between the rural and urban society
and roles of family; of Bangladesh regarding the process
e explain the roles and attitudes of a family of socialization;
towards a child with special need; analyse the roles and influences of
e aware of our own roles as the members of different institutions in the process
family; of socialization, == ;
«© interpret the concept of socialization; ° make ‘nthe bros ve
S © ~- interpret the social environment of ality and building values. 6
“ Bangladeshi people, different components of Person:

238 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Section 13.1 : The Family Structure of Bangladesh
Every human child is born in a family and grows up there. Man's birth, the whole
active life and the ending of life are accomplished through family bonds. No
human society will be found where there is no family. Family is the smallest unit
of social organization where .the father, mother and their children live together.
All the social qualities including love-affection, control-regulation of father,
mother, brother, sister and others, children grow and advance in a family.
The Concept of family
Family is the fundamental organization of social structure. It is the first step of an
organized life. It is basically a permanent organization or an institution of a couple
where they may or may not have children.
Marriage is the important precondition for the formation of a family. A male
person creates a family by marrying a female person in a socially accepted
manner. The family also existed in the primitive societies. In that society, a family
was formed without marriage, but it is impossible in our society. So, it can be said
that family can be formed by marriage.
The family is the universal institution of people leading an associated life. The
existence of a family remains in every society and in every sectors of social devel-
opment. It is the emotional foundation of our united life. Giving birth to children,
rearing them up, the bondage of love and affection, the formation of values, creat-
ing awareness of the rights etc. happen in a family. As an institution, a family has
some special rules and regulations, ideals, values and active organizational base,
and its collective form is known as the family structure.
From the primitive society to the present, many changes have been taken place in
the formation of a family, its function and its structure. But, despite these changes,
the necessity and importance of family are immense to human society comparing
to other-institutions, because the family is the safe haven in a man's life from the
beginning till end. Men's relation with the family, from their birth to death, is very
deep and regulatory. The social, economic, psychological and cultural security is
being ensured through a family.
The Classification of Family
Families are of different varieties depending on society or country. Families can
be divided into different types based on.different yardsticks. Families can be
classified into numerous varieties based on the numbers of husband -wife,
authority, size of family, family status, living place and the process of selecting the .
bride and the groom. s

The Family Structure of Bangladesh and Socialization 239
1. Family based on the numbers of husband and wife: Based on this families
of this kind can be of three types— the monogamous, polygyny and polyandry
family. A single or monogamous family can be formed by the matrimonial relation
between a man and a woman. A single wife family is seen as the most common
type of family in the world. This type of family is regarded as an ideal family. In
this family structure, friendly rapport is seen to be the core between a husband and
a wife. Again, the family that is formed through the marriage between one man
with many women is known as polygyny family or family having many wives at
a time. In this type of family, a single man can keep more than one wife living at
a time. Commonly this sort of polygamous family is seen in the agro-based local
Muslim family.' Such custom is also seen in the Eskimo andin the Negro in Africa.
A family of one wife having many husbands at a time is known as polyandry
family. 'This sort of family is not seen very common in the modern civilized soci-
ety. But, in Tibet, there was a time when it was a custom of a wife having many
husbands. Besides, the family of this category was also found among the Toda
inhabitants of Malagarh region in south India.
2. Family based on the authority. Based on this family of this kind can be of
two types: . Based on this families of this kind can be of two types: Patriarchal
and Matriarchal. In a patriarchal family, the overall power and authority of the
family rest on the male members of the family like father, husband or the other
elderly people. In these types of family, family name and identification is
determined through the male members of the family. This type is more common
in the society of Bangladesh. Again, the family whose overall authority and power
is exercised by mother is known as matriarchal family. In Bangladesh, the family
among the different ethnic communities specially the family of Khasia and Garo
is matriarchal.
3. Family based on the size: Based on this families of this kind can be of three
types: single or nuclear family, joint family and extended family. The family
where husband, wife and their unmarried children live together is known as single
or nuclear family. This family is confined within two generations.These two
generations mean father and his young children. Most of the families in urban
areas of our country are nuclear families. This tendency of keeping single family
is also obvious in rural areas, but in Group work: Make a list of family
the civilized countries of the world, structure that is found in Bangladesh.
such type offamily system was] Individual work: Make a table identifying
prevalent. In the joint family,} different family types based on religion

~ married son and his children live | living in your locality.

& together in the same family under the authority of his parents. Like a single family,

240 Bangladesh and Global Studies
the bonds of a joint family develop through the blood relation among family
members. In the rural areas of our country, most of the families are joint ones.
Now, the number of thes type of joint family decreasing for various reasons. The
family where father-mother, their children, their wives and children and other
relatives live together is regarded as extended family. In an extended family
members from sides of the parents may remain included. This type of family can
still be seen in our rural societies. Such family system is also seen in China too.
4. Family Based on the Status and Inheritance of Properties: Based on this
families of this kind can be of two types — Patrilineal and Matrilineal family. In
patrilineal family, children are entitled to the family status and inheritance of
properties of father. This type of family is present in our social system. In
matrilineal family, children get family status and property inheritance through
mother. The maternal family system still exists in Khashia and Garo communities.
5. Family Based on Dwelling Place of Husband and Wife after Marriage:
Based on this families of this kind can be of three types- patrilocal, matrilocal and
neo-local. The family where the newly married couple live in the husband's
father's house is called patrilocal family. It is commonly seen in our social
system. Matrilocal family is the type of family where the newly married couple
live in the wife's father's house. This family is found among the Garos. The
married couple does not live either with the husband's or with the wife's paternal
house; rather they live in a new place is known as neolocal family. This type of
family is found within the service holders of urban areas.

6. Family Based on the Selection of Bride and Groom: Though muslim society
does not practise indulge in caste marriage, the Hindu society bears testimony to
it. In the Hindu society marriage two types of marriage — Exogamous family and
Endogamous family are extant. When a person marries outside of his own caste is
Exogamous family. This family is of two types. When a bridegroom of superior
caste marries to a bride of lower caste, is called morganatic orAnulome marriage
system. When a bridegroom of lower caste marries a bride of upper caste it is
called morganatic or Protilome marriage. The root cause of this type of marriage
is to prevent incest from the society. Again, if a person marries within the same
caste of his own is called as Endogamous family. This type of Endogamous
marriage is more common in Hindu society. To protect the so-called blood bond
and to keep its purity intact are the only reasons behind this type of marriage.
Now-a-days, many changes have taken in to forming such type of family. Most of
the Hindu families consider this caste system as superstitioes.

The Common Function of a Family x
The scope of the role of family in human society is immense and its functions are %

The Family Structure of Bangladesh and Socialization 241
multi-dimensional. Family plays a significant role in giving birth to children,
rearing them up, nourishing and developing rightly. This role is seen worldwide in
all the family structures. The role of family is also undergoing a change due to
social transformation. However, there are some basic functions of the familywhich
all societies around the world perform. Some common functions of a family are
discussed below:

Meeting biological needs:

People form family in order to fulfil the biological demand in a socially
acceptable manner. Family fulfils the biological demand of male and female
through marriage. The main objective of framing a family is giving birth to
children, and rearing them up. Proper rearing up of the children is a work related
to the production of children. This function remains as a responsibility of the
family until the child becomes self-dependent. In this case, proper rearing up of
children depends on the income of the family.

Maintenance of Children:

In addition to child's rearing, socialization of a child is the key responsibility of
parents and other members of the family. A child learns to see himself through the
eyes of others from his age. They also learn the family values, can express their
liking and disliking, can be introduced with outsiders, and develop the skills of
adaptation with others. Since childhood, a child learns from the family about the
social norms — manners, customs, behaviour, rules and regulations, practices,
etc. The desired behaviour of a child is shaped through the congenial environment
of the family. Apart from paying attention to his physical needs, a family fulfils
the demands of a child's mental security, safety of love and affection. Lack of
mental security, frustration, inferiority complex and tension can be created in a
child's mind. We shall be more informed about this in the next section.
Economic Activities:

Once, family was the main centre of all economic activities. In that time,, all
necessary things of the family at home were produced in home. Once all these
financial activities were performed by the joint families in rural area, but with the
passage of time, these financial activities of a family are being performed by
institutions like factory, shop, market and bank. Now the family members work
outside home to earn money. For this reason, the family is treated as a unit of
earning. Besides, the rural agro-based families of our country are the main driving
force of agro-economy of Bangladesh. Not only this, cottage industry, which is an
important factor in the economy of our country, has been formed on the basis of
Forma- 31: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

242 Bangladesh and Global Studies
family.

Education:

Family is one of the mentionable centres of tutoring of a child. After birth, a child
gets his primary education from home. Mother is the best teacher of a child.
Though nowadays, all the responsibilities of teaching has taken over by the educa-
tional institutions, but still a child gets lessons from the family on manners-be-
havior, punctuality, morality, religious values and conducts.

Family plays a vast role in matters related to health and hygiene. Once providing
the health related service and its regulation were confined within the family. In
modern times, such service is given by the hospitals and clinics.

Recreation:

In the past, leisure and recreational amusements for the family members were
done within the family. Although at present, various technology and tools have
been applied in recreational activities, still for mental peace, a family is consid-
ered the highest recreation centre. Family chatting is a natural recreation system,
which plays an important role in keeping unity among the family members.
Preservation of family inheritance: Group work: Make a list of the roles
Inheritance of family property exists in | of a family in building a person’s
almost all types of social systems. Starting | economic, social and moral life.

from property, land, whether movable or immovable, all are transfered
throughinheritance, from one generation to another. And since family is at the root
of producing new generation, the role of the family is immense in preserving
property and deciding inheritance. Therefore, a child acquires the qualities and
duties of a future parent along with the capability to justify the right and wrong
through his family. Our nice social system is developed for our families. :
The Role of the Families in Rural and Urban Areas of Bangladesh

In Bangladesh, the rural and the urban families differ in terms of there types and
roles. There was a time when in our rural society, the number of joint families was
many.But at present, the joint family system is gradually splitting up due to vari-
ous reasons including industrialization, urbanization, increase of population, pov-
erty and self-indulgence. Of late, micro credit given by various government and
non-government organizations to these families played another important role for
such change. Nowadays, the number of nuclear family is more either in villages
or in cities. Extended family can be found in the villages but its number is few in
the cities. In both the places, patriarchal and patrilocal based families canbe found ,
in abundance. But, maximum number of family system in cities is neolocal. S

The Family Structure of Bangladesh and Socialization 243
The role of the family has been changed due to the change of its types in our rural
and urban societies. For example, in our urban areas in the process of
industrialization, the general male and Once in this country, the number of
polyandry families was in plenty among the rural Muslim society. Now this type
of families has decreased. Monogamy | Individual work: Make a list of the
or single wife family is seen in abun- | causes of change in the roles of families
dance in both the villages and in the | and problems arisen from such changes
cities. The role of the family has been teas wae caine ee
: roup work: Indentify the impact o

cane bus 20 Ciel QUAKER a " S types the Sait in the role of families in
in our rural and urban societies. For : g ce

: : terms of education, marriage, medication
example, in our urban areas in the and the rights of the family members.
process of industrialization, the general male and female from the rural area
leaving their agricultural work, start joining as industrial workers in the cities. As
the active member of the family goes to the cities, other members of the family are
suffering from many problems including financial insecurity. Once, in an
agro-based country like ours, rural children grow up either in joint or extended
family. Then those children were engaged in family occupation since their
childhood. In this case, a family played a role in selecting the profession of a child.
This role of the family has changed. Both in the village and city, parents are now
becoming more -conscious of developing a decent life and having rights for their
children. Many parents are now aware that child labour is prohibited.
Family is an important centre for learning a child's formal and moral educations.
Parents have to be more aware of providing moral education to their children. The
seeds of morality grow from the family and blossoms in a child's behaviors
through family. Again, a child enters into the world of education through their
parents, but this role of educating children through the family has been replaced
by the pre-primary kindergarten and nursery schools at present. This facility is
comparatively well in cities.
The parents living in the cities are more conscious of childbirth than those living
in the villages. The parents living in the cities do not want to take more than two
children. In case of giving birth to a child, pregnant mothers prefer going to
hospital and clinic instead of going to an unskilled midwife. The role of a family
in this respect is almost same in the villages and in the cities. Once, the families of
the villages depended more onAyurvedik practioners or Homeopathy treatment.
Now these families are receiving treatment either from government hospitals or
from clinics. We all know about the facilities in the cities regarding medical

= treatment.
ES

244 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Once, the family was the main centre for religious education. Parents,
grandparents and other members of the family make a child understand and about
religious values and morality in various ways. Once, in our country, there was a
tradition of settled or arranged marriage. The decision of theparents got
preference in settling marriage. Nowadays, there is a change in this tradition.
Lots of changes have been seen in the ee, LALLY
activities of marriage ceremonies. As the H
role offamilies has been changed, thereisa  §f iT Sat a fe ®
difference between village and city based [e—>' at
marriage in this respect. Knowing that picture 13.1 : Children of special needs
early-marriage and dowry acceptance as at schools and amusement centre
heinous, these tradition is still very common both in villages and in cities. But,
nowadays, the conscious families of the villages and cities start thinking
this tradition wholeheartedly as detestable; they also become conscious of the
laws related to it. Besides, the male members become aware of the rights of
female members of both the family structures in the rural and urban areas because
different mass awareness activities have been undertaken by various gov-
ernment and non-government organizations. Women now become more con-
sciousabout their rights. At present, both in the cities and villages, self-centred
tendency isnoticeable to some extent, due to the increasing number of neo-local
families. In many cases, elderly parents of these families are suffering from a feel-
ing of insecurity.
Once in our countries children born with specialneeds either in villages or in cities
were thought to be burden of the society; for example, children short of intelli-
gence, hearing, and sight, and autistic children were treated as burden of the
family. Now this attitude of the family has been changed a lot. Look at the picture
beside: schools and amusement centers are being made for these children so that
they can be able to study, play, sing and dance. Again, a few of such children can
acquire expertise in the vocational training.. For this reason, now the autistic chil-
dren of our country are able to show their mental and physical .ability by partici-
pating in children Olympic competition. Nowadays, the member of the families is
more aware of the rights of these children. We shall also change and develop our
school, family and social environment on the demand of the children with special
needs. We shall make arrangements for those special children so that they can
independently and safely achieve chances to perform their work by themselves, as
far as possible.

po

Rg

The Family Structure of Bangladesh and Socialization 245
Section 13.2: The Process of Socialization
After its birth a baby first comes in contact with the mother and then with other
members of the family. The conduct and behavior of other family members
influence the conduct of the child. In this way, the child gets associated with the
outer environment; for example, they get experiences from their playmates,
neighbours, school, religious institution, etc. The society in which a child grows
up, influence the character of the child. He leans to adapt with the society and
tries to gain experience from social custom, values, norms, conduct etc. So, the
process through which a child gradually becomes a social being is labelled as
socialization.
The Concept of Socialization
Socialization is a lifelong process. The process of socialization involves the whole
thing; from the very birth of a child till death, his getting experience through
various media, and method of adaptation in the society. In the every stage of its
life, when a person needs to enter from one phase into another, he has to get
acquainted and adapted with new environment and situation. Through this process
of adaptation, a change takes place in its behaviour. Adaptation with the new rules
and regulations, norms, culture situation and environment is named as the process
of socialization.
The Components of Socialization
Basically, the behaviour of one of your classmates influences the behaviour of
others and you are also influenced by the conduct ;
of others. The reaction of the mutual influences See ee He
: : : : . _. | cultural elements of a social
of behaviours is called interaction. Interaction is] . vironment and make a chart
the key issue of any social life. That means, the of its impacts on human life.
socialization of a person takes place through the} tpgividual work: Identify the
actions and responses of the social environment, | influences of the elements of
social life and social values. So, the influence of | socialization on human life.
these three components is evident in the formation and development of human
personality.
Social Environment: : The particular social system where a man lives is his
social environment. Man blooms through his social environment. Social
environment also influences on a person's economic, psychological and moral
life. Social environment includes social manners, conventions, customs,
S institution, rules and regulations, all types of tendency, problems and so on.
“ Social environment comprises of the economic, cultural, psychological and

246 Bangladesh and Global Studies
technological environment. Economic environment is a part of social
environment. In the kingdom of nature, human being is producing different
economic articles and goods. The root cause of this is his own happiness and
comfort. Market, land, garden, domestic animals, machinery etc are the various
components of economic environment. Besides, numerous institutions including
the family and other religious institutions are formed in the social environment.
Culture developed through these institutions influences the behaviour of a person
in many ways, which is also a part of cultural environment.

The cultural environment is formed through the man made components of the
society. Everything, including dwelling house, roads, behaviours, science and
knowledge, encompass the cultural environment. In the process of socialization,
the influence of cultural environment on people is also deep. Man's human quality
develops and his mental faculty broadens in a developed cultural environment.
Human being is recognized as social creature because of their united living. There
is a psychological reason behind such united living. The growth and development
of mechanical civilization in all the surroundings is called technological
environment. This environment also influences on our social environment.
Technological invention, for example, computer, television, internet etc. also
influence man's behaviour and conduct. Besides, natural factors also influence in
many ways on the lives of people's Social life.

The Social Life: The Social life is an important component of socialization. The
social life of human being is mainly regulated through several behavioural factors
and conduct. The social life is a set of conduct, behaviour and life style of a human
being that he acquires from living in a society. People participate in various
activities and ceremonies of the society. People try to adapt with those activities
and ceremonies through their actions, reactions and behaviours. In this respect,
people try to perform their work by imitating the behaviours of other people. It
means, through this tendency of imitation, people acquires various things like
language, pronunciation, mode of speaking, etc. Many things of the society and its
culture are transmitted through the language to the people. Ceremonies like
birthday, marriage ceremony, Eid day, Puja festival, Christmas day, birth
anniversary of Buddha, marriage anniversary etc. occur in our social life. These
ceremonies of social life influence the process of socialization

The Social Values: The values are specific features ..of our social life. The
standard of people's life style can be measured through these values, because, by
exercising these values, a man's conduct becomes obvious regarding social rules,
and regulations, norms, -customs, respect for social laws, etc. The social values at s

The Family Structure of Bangladesh and Socialization 247

our common cultural ideals. The views, needs, good and bad aspect of people in

the society can be assessed through these ideals.

As people grow up, they learn all the social values. Everyone gets equal

importance and facilities in the society. Showing respect to the elderly person,

offering love and affection to the younger "one, exercising truthfulness and justice

are the social values present almost in every society. People acquire these values

from the society. The values of the united social life can be expressed through

their life style; for example, the social values of a Bangladeshi or an Indian are

different from that of a Chinese people. The Bangladeshi and the Indian people .

stress much importance on their lifestyle about the spiritual development,

sacrificing own interest for the sake of others etc. On the contrary, the

fundamental characteristic of the life of a Chinese people is the development of

prosperity or wealth. The social values influence the personality of a human being

that can be evident from his thinking, behaviour and conduct.

The Role of Various Institutions of the process of Socialization

Socialization is an important factor

in human life. Through socializa- - -

tion, a child acquires perfection

in social matters and becomes a Institution

responsible member of the society.

We, in our social life, are always related to

influenced by the persons in entertainment Society

authority like father, mother, elder

brother and sister and teacher.

Again, we are also influenced by

the friends, classmates and playmates of same age. In this respect, we can see that

our relationship with the elderly persons is of loyalty, and that with the friends is

that of mutual cooperation. We get lessons from both of these relations.

From the chart presented above, we get associated with family, neighbours,

educational institution, religious institutions, local society, local groups, mass

media and institutions providing entertainment. These institutions influence the

process of our socialization.

The Role of the family and the family members:

Family is the most important medium of socialization. The space for

socialization becomes ready within the family prior to the birth of a child. Various
= types of families exist in the family structure of Bangladesh. We have learnt
g

248 Bangladesh and Global Studies
about this in the previous chapter. Whatever Individual work: Deepa is a git
a ee ey Se e dt erent living in the city. Identify the mutual

. am. x impacts of various components of
and bad aspects of our family life influence | ip. society in the process of her
our behaviours. The social morals and civic | socialization.
sense are introduced within our family. We | Group work: Chandona grows up
acquire qualities like cooperation, tolerance, | in the rural environment. She is the
fellow feeling, brotherhood, sacrifice, love, | only child of her parents. Identify
etc. through family. In the process of|the mutual impacts of various
socialization of a child, the relationship | CO™Ponents of the society in the
between father and mother plays the most ppucees Ch lier socialization:
important role among all family affairs. Good relation among the parents is very
essential for the proper development of children's personality. The conflict
between the parents begets conflict among the children. The dear and near persons
to a child are his mother and father. The social morals and civic sense are
introduced within our family. We acquire qualities like cooperation,
tolerance, fellow feeling, brotherhood, sacrifice, love, etc. through family. In the
process of socialization of a child, the relationship between father and mother
plays the most important role among all family affairs. Good relation among the
parents is very essential for the proper development of children's personality. The
conflict between the parents begets conflict among the children. The dear and near
persons to a child are his mother and father. Of these two, 'mother' is the
are
socialization begins from the forming the group of neighbours all around the
mother. Mother is the first | urban society.
institution of making a | Group work: “The influence of neighbours and
children's food habit and | group of neighbours is the most on the socialization
language learning. In its very | ofa child”-give reasons.
childhood, mother creates attraction for whatever types of food that influences the
behavior of the child in his advanced life. We apply in our own family of our
learning and experience from what our ..mother did with us in matters like singing
lullaby, techniques of learning alphabets, process of memorizing rhymes and
many more.
In some families of our society, only father earns. And in some cases, both parents
earn. They need to apply many rules and regulations for the smooth direction of
their family life. The behavior and values of individual parents influences on the
socialization of the children. A child's attitude of self determination is the resultof
its parents self reliant personality. Likewise the conduct of also the other members &

The Family Structure of Bangladesh and Socialization 249
of the family including close relatives also influence the behavioural pattern of a
child's life These matters promote a childs mental growth and personality
formation.

The Relatives and the Neighbours: The persons with whom we have blood
relations, excluding our own family members, are our relatives. those who live
around our home, are our neighbours. People grow up in association with their
relatives and neighbours from childhood. The position of relatives and neighbors
is just next to the family. For proper development of a child's life, the role of
relatives and neighbors are important. A group relation is developed among the
children of the same ages in our neighborhood. A child acquires qualities like
cooperation, fellow-feeling, unity, leadership, etc. from the group relation of the
neighbourhood. Children participates and enjoys different ceremonies of the
neighbours, like marriage, birthday, Bid, Puja, Christmas etc. and through such
participation, children acquires qualities like tolerance, adaptation, fellow feeling,
etc. All the family members participate in any ceremonies of the neighbours; for
example, birthday, marriage, marriage anniversary, etc. Again, if anybody gets
sick, neighbours play a more vital role than the close relatives. Neighbours are the
first partners of all happiness and sorrows.

The relationship of neighbours differs on the basis of village and city. In rural
society, the relationship of neighbours is to be very intimate. There is no
artificiality in this relation. But the relation among the urban neighbours is not
very intimate. But, they become close by participating in different joyous festivals
in the society. Neighbours; give us lesson on socially accepted behaviours directly
or indirectly. For this, good neighbours are essential.

The School and schoolmates: In the process of socialization, school and
schoolmates play an important role to a child after the family. School is the formal
medium of socialization. Besides, acquiring knowledge, a child also learns some
social ideals from the school. These ideals include discipline, punctuality,
reverence, cooperation, mutual love. etc. Participating in different activities in the
school, a child comes in contact with the teachers, classmates, workers, school
environment, and institutional values. All these elements influence the behaviour
of a child.Such qualities as leadership, respect for others, opinion, unity,
patriotism, fellow feeling, tolerance, friendship etc. are roused in its mind. The
school makes a child able to cope with the lessons of the next stage or in his
workplace. A child also learns the behaviour, conduct, courtesy, etc. of any of the
greater societies from the school/The topic of the textbooks also influences in
many ways the conduct of the student. The quality like truthfulness, justice,
consideration of good and evil, is learnt from the school by a student. So the role
Forma- 32: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

250 Bangladesh and Global Studies
of school in the process of socialization of a child is immense. The environment
of the school, the conduct and the values of the teachers play the most important
role for the proper socialization of a child.
A child's play-mates and class mates play a significant role for the proper
socialization of a child. Through them, a child's qualities like cooperation,
tolerance, fellow feelings, leadership etc. develop. There can be at times dispute
or conflict between the playmates and classmates, children learn the technique to
solve the problemand resolve the conflict through them A child can get to hear
both praise and criticism of his good and bad qualities respectively from his
playmates and class mates. This sort of criticism helps a child to learn the desired
behaviour in a society. The conduct of the playmates and classmates of the same
ages is. almost of the same nature. This group has special values, discipline, rules
and customs. For this reason, this group is called peer group. The influence of
mutual conduct in childhood and adolescence state of life is important. A child
can accept good social values under the influence of this group. It can also accept
social evil values. In this respect, however, the members of the family, teachers
and other concerned people have got to be aware.
The Local society: Local society or
community is another important of your intimate friends on your life.
medium of socialization. In this local | Individual work : Identify the role of
society, a child grows up gradually. A the school for proper socialization of
society grows in a specified area the students.
locally. This society processes special values which comprise all local values. The
human group of this society, its social environment and institutions. influence a
child’s conduct Besides, these local social values influence a person private life.
The dialect of a particular is found to be reflected in a person conduct. A feeling
of unity finds expression in this social group.
The Local community : The local community is the collection of many people
having special relation with each other. In an organized structure, all connected
human groups are called the social group. Assessing from this perspective, a
political party, trade union, cultural club, literature club etc. also become the part
of this group. Children of this group participate in different activities starting first
from family to neighbour and then to school and finally to this local group. This
locally formed group or association influences in the process of socialization
of a person. Groups locally play role in the field of sports, literature, culture,
science and etc. Since childhood, children gets involved in this local group for
amusement, sports and cultural activities that influence further to their proper
ES

The Family Structure of Bangladesh and Socialization 251
socialization. Children become Group work: “We acquire the lesson of
cultural minded, literature lovers,| fellow feeling by participating in the
sports devotees and scientific minded. | universal religious festivals of all nations’

2 pug’ religious caste,” present your argument.
The Religious I nstitutions: The individual a Tdentify ie
influence of religious institutions is) o¢ your own religious ceremonies for your
important for the socialization of] socialization,
children. A child watches his/her| Individual work: Identify the influences
parents and other relations to perform | of any local groups for your socialization.
religious functions and rituals at mosque, temple, church and pagoda. Children
observe, and hear how the members of the family perform religions activities; for
example, they watch and listen reciting the Holy Quran, the Vogobot Geeta, the
Bible and the Tripitak. These influence children's future attitude towards religious
institutions and life. Eid-ul-Fitr and Eid-ul-Azha are the two biggest religious
festivals of the Muslims. Various activities of these festivals teach us about unity,
solidarity and amity besides spreading the feelings for religion in children's mind.
It- reduces the difference between people. By performing these religious
ceremonies, social values and personality are developed among them. It also
helps getting inspiration to devote themselves in the social services.
There are different religious institutions for the Hindu, Buddha and Christian
religion. The children participate in different activities of this religious institution.
Religious festivals of these institutions influence the mind of the child. It limits
their external conduct and develops moral values. These religious institutions
awaken the conscience and spirit. It strengthens the mutual bondage, enriches
good relation and enhances amity. It further helps developing the mental strength
of the children. Mental narrowness is eradicated by the lessons of fellow feeling.

The Mass Media: Mass media is a | Jpdividual work: Identify the impacts of
system of transmitting news, history | any program telecast in the television for
of the country, culture, heritage, | example — Agricultural programme.
special concepts and views, Individual work: Write down the
entertainment to a larger community. impacts of the news broadcast for the

socialization of the children.

includes newspaper, radio, cinema, television etc. Newspaper publishes news on
country's history, heritage, culture, economy and other various topics. By reading

this news, the children fill their food of minds. They learn to adapt with their
society and culture. They scientifically get inspiration about life and the universe.

The cultures of the modern era develop basing on mass media. Mass media Radio

x offers us education and .entertainment. We get information on weather, sports,
& educational discussion, drama, talk-show, news and music from the radio. So, the

252 Bangladesh and Global Studies
radio influences in many ways the personal and social life of a person. Different
beneficial programmes telecast by the television influence our personal lives too.
It increases the level of consciousness, makes people science- minded and
develop the mental health of a person. Social and life oriented cinemas impacts
deeply on the personality of persons. The characters from the constructive social
movie influence the behavior of a person. It teaches us to be respectful to the
people of various classes and occupations. It makes us aware of different aspects
of the society.

The Process of Socialization in the Villages and in the cities of Bangladesh

The greater social structure of Bangladesh is made up with both the villages and
cities. As it's a village oriented country, most of the people live in villages. The
socialization of most of Bangladeshi people takes place in rural environment.
There are some differences between the children of rural and urban area in the
process of socialization.

The special features of the rural social structure of Bangladesh are single and joint
family structure, agro-based economy, intimacy among the members of the
family, simple living style, influence of social customs and rituals etc. Besides,
good feeling for the neighbors, sincere attention to all religious activities are
noticeable in the social structure of this country. Poverty, illiteracy and conserva-
tive attitude are also the unique characteristics of this social structure. Rural
children grow-up with these environment, interact with various components of the
social life, which influences on the process of their socialization.

The features of urban social structure of Bangladesh are nuclear family structure,
industry, based economy, complex social ;life, urban culture, arid wide gap
between people in terms of social relations etc; A marl acts pr interacts with
different components "of this environment that, again influences the process of
his/her socialization.

Similarities and Dissimilarities in the process of Socialization of person in the
Rural and Urban Societies

There are some similar elements that influence socialization of people in both the
tural and urban societies. These elements include family, neighbour, peer groups,
relatives, educational institutions, religious institutions, entertainment and sports
organization etc.

Both in the rural and urban societies, a child is reared up in the family. The
childhood of a person is spent in the lap of his family life. Naturally, all the
activities of family life are reflected in a large extent to his subsequent life. The &

The Family Structure of Bangladesh and Socialization 253
common impression held by a family of both the rural and urban society also has
impacts on the minds of the children of that family. A child learns to speak
language within the family, imitates the behaviours of other family members and
absorbs all elements of his/her family. A child learns about moral values, civic
sense, tolerance, fellow feeling, brotherhood, self sacrifice, love and other social
factors through the family.
Neighbours and group of neighbours are extant in both rural and urban
environments of Bangladesh. The rural children are in a intimate relationship with
the elderly neighbours which influence socialization. But this sort of relationship
is not found with neighbours of urban areas. The relationship among the kin is
much closer in village comparing to that of the cities. The relationship with the
classmates and peer groups in village is much more spontaneous and cordial
comparing to that of the cities. Through this peer group, children get knowledge
on cooperation, techniques of solving problem in dispute settlement and learn
wisdom on principles. And children also learn about different aspects of cultural
life from this peer group.
A student's relation with the school environment, textbook and with different
school activities is very deep. When a child enters the school crossing away the
border of the family, naturally his/her role gets enlarged. In this greater
atmosphere, his/her role and leadership capabilities get regulated. A student's own
qualities, capabilities and powers are developed in this environment.Different
components related to the school environment, have different impact on the
students depending on the difference between cities and villages.
In the cities of Bangladesh, there are different types of schools for the children
like kindergartens, international schools, pre-cadet schools. In most of these
schools, there is no co-curricular activity. Nor are their playgrounds, gardens,
ponds, etc. School debates are not held. Nor are various national and international
days, observed. As the studentscan not participate in such activities, it hinders the
students required growth of healthy attitudes. However, in the schools of rural
areas, this lack of co-curricular programs is less.
The working environment of a person Group work: Make a comparison of
and . his SAPSUSNCE! 1S atl important | the impact of school in a child’s life
medium of socialization. A person | both in the villages and cities.
chooses a profession after completing Group work: Identify the obstacles in
his/her study. The occupational fields in | the process of the socialization of a
the cities are different from that of the | child in the city life and propose steps

« villages. One can see the differences of | io resolve the same.

S environment in the process of

254 Bangladesh and Global Studies
socialization of a person. Besides, there is difference of ideals between rural and
urban societies in terms of social values, culture, faith, food habit, custom,
institutions and social structure. All these exert influence on a person's
socialization.
Exercise

Short Questions:

1. How will you define the concept of a family?

2. Identify the reasons of more Patrilocal families in our social systems.

3. What is the reason of change in endogamous family system? Explain.

4. Explain the roles of school in your socialization.
Narrative Questions:

1. Explain with examples the economic functions of a family.

2. Explain the economic functions of your family among all other works

in the family.
3. Explain the types of families of your village.
4. “The role of playmate is significant for the socialization of a person” —
Illustrate.
5. Find out the dissimilarities of socialization of two students living in
village and city.

Multiple Choice Questions:
1. How many types of families are there depending on the number of

husband and wife?

a, 2

b. 3

c. 6

d. 7.
2. The reason for breaking up of joint family system in Bangladesh is-

i. Poverty and increase of population

ii. Industrialization and urbanization

iti. Illiteracy and ignorance
Which one of the following is correct?

a. i&ii

b. i& iii

c. i & iii, ©

d. iii & iii s

The Family Structure of Bangladesh and Socialization 255
3. Which one of the following is the type of family depending on authority?
: Monogam
i : gamy
ae ° Patriarchal Patrilocal Polygyny
Extended Matriarchal Matrilocal Polyandry
i ii iii iv
ai. b. ii.
c. ti & iii d. iii & iv

Read the following passage and answer the question no. 4 and 5:

Anchal and Ankon have a family of five members, only Anchal participates and

gives opinion in the decision making process and in all the activities of his family.

On the other hand, Mongpru and Idongpru also have five family members.

Idongpru only takes decision in her family matters.

4. What is the type of family of Anchal and Ankon ?

a. Patrilocal
b. Patriarchal
c. Nuclear
d. Extended
5. What are the characteristic similarity regarding the types between the
family of Anchal and Mongpru and Idongpru?
a. Regarding family size
b. Regarding family status
c. Regarding family authority and Power
d. Regarding family Inheritance

Creative Questions:

1. Ripa resides next to the flat of Bidita. Ripa treats with care when relatives of
Bidita come to Bidita's house. One day Ripa got sick. That time Ripa's
parents were not in the home. Bidita's parents took her to the hospital. When
Bidita broke her leg by a rickshaw accident, Ripa cured her with her service
staying in the hospital for a week with Bidita. In Bidita's birthday Ripa and
her family come to her house with gifts.

s

256 Bangladesh and Global Studies
a. How many are the types of families based on authority?
b. Why a family is called the unit of income? Explain.
c. What are the influence of the element of socialization do you find
in the behaviours of Bidita ? Explain
d. “In the urban life neighbours are the most intimate persons”. Do you
agree with the view ?

2. Tahsan and Mahi work in a private Bank. After marriage they live together
in a flat. Their only child, Muna passed her time with the help of the
domestic servant. Muna remains in sleep when her parents come back home
after their work. Again, when they go for work, that time also Muna remains
sleeping. None of the parent can give time to Muna. After some days, Tahsan
and Mahi noticed that Muna talks and behaves like the domestic servant. It
becomes a matter of dispute between the husband and wife. They blame each
other, Tahsan says "Only mother is the ideal for all children". Mahi replies
by saying, 'Both the parents have equal responsibilities for their child.'

a. What is mass media?
b. “Socialization is a lifelong process” — Explain.
c. Explain the influence of the family stated in the event in changing the
behaviours of Muna.
d. Analyse the statement of Mahi in the context of this passage.
ES
8

Chapter-14
The Social Change of Bangladesh
Society is changeable. The society of Bangladesh is also no exception of this.
Since the post liberation time, a widespread change has taken place in the eco-
nomic, social and political fields of this country. The changes in education, tech-
nology and communication have taken the society and the economy of the country
one step ahead. The widespread industrialisation and urbanisation have brought
changes in women's role. Because of this change in social life, the old problems
are assuming complicated form on one side, likewise on the other side, new prob-
lems have evolved. In this chapter, we shall know about the concept of social
change, the reason of change in the society of Bangladesh, the impact of this
change compared with the perspective of the city and village, and the changes in
the role of women.
wa ry Dy gel’ 4
\ om oe cin Rte POR 1 ies | fh Daeg /
ilies AE ag or eo / a >
ya ah 1 es '. ces "Sane 2 4
After reading the chapter, we shall be able to —
e explain the concept of social change; change of Bangladeshi society;
© explain the components of the change in the e explain the changes in the roles of
society of Bangladesh; women as an important factor of
e analyse the impact of social changes on the social change;
tural and urban societies of Bangladesh; e adapt ourselves with situations
e analyse the impact of industrialization, caused by social change;
urbanisation, education, technology and e be aware of the matters caused by
communication as the components of the social change.
The Concept of Social Change
The Social Change means the change in social structure and its activities. The
fundamental structure of every society is formed through the production system of
that society and the relationship among various professionals related to that
system. Besides, some other super structures are also developed along with this
Forma- 33: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

258 Bangladesh and Global Studies
structure. They are, for example, the rules and regulations, politics, culture, etc.
So, the changes of fundamental and super structures of the society are called
social change.

On social change, sociologist Kingsley Davis said, "social change is the change in
social structure and activities". Maclver said "social change is the change in the
human relationship". That is, social change is the behavioural change of the
person, group and organization residing in the society. It is the change in the
culture and tradition of the society. To sum up, the social change is the overall
change of the life system of a nation, and it takes place sometimes at a slow pace
and sometimes at a quick pace. The impact of this change deeply touches the
economy, politics, social policy, religious values and even the age old system of
life. The creative activities of the society get new momentum. New branches and
skills of science are opened up. Enthusiasm for creating something new is born,
and the process of forming new society begins.

The Components of the Change of the Society of Bangladesh and its Impacts
Social change of Bangladesh is influenced by in various factors like the socio-eco-
nomic, political, educational, religious and cultural etc. There are some specific
factors at the root of the changes in these fields of the society. These factors are
discussed below:

1.The Natural factor: The geophysical position of Bangladesh is a notable cause
of social change. Slow as well as sudden.geographical change, the changes
regarding the climate, global warming, etc. put impact on the life of the people of
Bangladesh and cause a great change of the society. The natural calamities Such
as the river erosion, tidal surge, flood, tornado, drought, heavy rain, etc. are as
same as the daily phenomena in this country. These natural calamities spoil the
balance of the environment, and there appears the necessity of adopting new
systems for adjusting with the environment. Consequently, the change of social
relationship takes place among people. For example, the river erosion is one of the
causes of the growth of slums in the urban areas. The slum problem in the urban
areas has given birth to multifarious problems. Because of taking many
programmes by the government and non-government organizations in solving this
problem, various changes have taken place in the. urban society. In this way,
global warming and natural disasters cause various new problems. Taking
multi-purpose programmes to face all these problems, people accomplish the
change of the society.

2. The Organic factor: The organic factor is an important factor of social
change. The birth and mortality rate. Average life expectancy, the density of %
population, the nature of population and the standard of lifestyle, etc. form the 8

The Social Change of Bangladesh 259
organic factor. The change of the organic state of the people of the society such as
the increase or decrease in population, the change in migration
or in the density of population play an important Grup work: Idenuy the
role in the social change. Different strategies for impacts and changes of the
the birth control are being implemented to | natural factors on the life of
prevent the growth of population of our country. | the people of the regions prone
The decrease in birth and mortality rate is | to natural disaster.
contributing to the change of the structure of the | Individual work: Identify any
society. Because of the increase in population, | °° organic factor and write
diverse problems like tough competition have how it changes the society.
taken place'in the fields of unemployment, child labour and employment.
3.The Cultural Factor: Culture initiates social change. If we look at any society,
diversified culture, difference in people's values, difference in objectives and
ideologies, etc. will be noticed. As a result of this, organisations nurtured by
various cultures have been created, and those cause different kinds of changes in
the society. For example, during the British regime, the impact of foreign cultures
on the social system of Bengal was especially noticed. Besides, reading travel
stories, traveling the foreign countries, meeting people of other countries bring
about the social changes. Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.), Goutam Buddha, Jesus
Christ—these noble men presented before the people new views, new values, new
ideologies that initiated diverse changes in the society at thattime. A blend form of
diverse cultures is also perceived when we look at the cities of Bangladesh.
4. The Education: A special factor of social change is education. Education is the
making of one kind of reform and a ceaseless process. The spread of education
among the members of the society arouses the self-confidence, the power of
judgement and consideration. Education liberates us from all kinds of blindness,
ignorance, superstition, etc. For example, the expansion of female education in the
society of Bangladesh has created awareness among the people which has
motivated various social movements. So, in the establishment of women rights in
Bangladesh, various social policies and laws have been formulated. The Dowry
Act, the family laws, the women development policy, etc. are the outcome of
social awareness. The female education has made women eligible for outdoor
work and made them tend to jobs. As a result Individual work: Prepare a
women empowerment has taken place. In this | table of the changes created due
way, science and commerce, education etc.| to the impact of the cultural
have brought about changes in the society. factors.
5. The Technology: : Technology is the applied | Group work: Identify the role
x side of science. Through the introduction and of agricultural technologies in
& expansion of technology, the mindset of the ee

260 Bangladesh and Global Studies
people in a social-system and social structure experience changes. For example,
the invention of radio has influenced the medium of amusemant in social life,
education system, politics and many other kinds of social activities. Automobile
today has expanded the domain of social relationship. Because of the gradual
development of technology, we see two types of effects in our social system. One
is direct and another is indirect. Some of the social changes are the inevitable
consequences of technological change. They are, for example, the new
organizations of labourers, expansion of the range of social communication,
attainment of special skills for special jobs and the impact of urban life on rural
life, etc. These are examples of direct influnce of technology. The increasing
problems of unemployment, the distance between the labourers and owners, the
rise in the intensity of competition, etc. are the. indirect effects of the change of
technology. In agricultural sector, production has increased by manifold for the
use of improved type of seeds, irrigation, fertilizer, and the application of
technological knowledge. Besides, application of various new technologies is
now seen in Pisces culture in our country. Unthinkable changes in shrimp
cultivation, integrated Pisces culture, breeding of cattle, cow fattening, etc. are the
direct outcome of technology. The technology has brought about a big change in
the economy of agro-farming. Various rural development organizations have been
formed with a view to enhancing production in agriculture. Besides, changing
tural agriculture, these organizations have also changed human relationships.
6. The Communication: : The more the communication medium of a country is.
developed, the more developed is the economy of that country. The
communication is one of the main factors of social changes. The communication
by land, water and air, telephone, fax, internet, e-mail, dish antenna, mobile
phone, radio, television, different kinds of newspapers, etc. contribute to the
social changes. Nowadays one can communicate with all the countries of the
world sitting in one's own room. It is possible to pick and read the necessary book
using the world's best library sitting in the house. Because of this unthinkable
development in communication, students of this country are communicating with
the developed universities of the world sitting in the house, and are going abroad
for studies.
In the case of social change, the impacts of natural, organic and cultural factors
accelerate the flow of the change. Besides, the education, the technology and
various form of new communicating media cast a great impact on the social
change. The impact of these components is noticeable in the rural and urban life
of Bangladesh. -
S
N

The Social Change of Bangladesh 261
Though social change is caused by various components, sometimes special
factors such as the industrialisation and urbanisation cast extensive impact on
social change. The far reaching effect of it is noticed in the whole social system
such as in the social, economic, political, family and religious life. In this
circumstance, the impact of industrialisaion and urbanisaion on the society of
Bangladesh is significant. Besides, due to the effect of urbanization, in the
changed circumstance the role of women has also undergone a change.
7. The Industrialization and urbanization: The industrialisation is such a
process by which the agriculture based economy and social system is transformed
into a mechanical industry based and production oriented economy and society.
Urbanisation is the result of industrialisation. Due to a widespread
industrialisation, the process of switching from rural life to urban mode of life is
called urbanization. Since the post liberation time of Bangladesh to the recent
time, there has been a flourish of various industries‘/Among these, garments,
medicine, tea, sugar, cotton, paper, tobacco, biscuit, cosmetics, soap industries
are main. Due to the expansion of these industries, many skilled and unskilled
labourers of villages are going to cities to be relieved of unemployment and are
having urban life.
Because of industrialisaion, the higher class, the middle class, and the lower class
have emerged in our social life. Industrialisation is at the root of the increase in
employment of this country, a high increasing rate of production, per capita and
national income". Besides, due to industrialisation, the process of localisation of
industries has started, and it has caused urbanisation. For example, Khalishpur of
Khulna, Barobkunda of Chittagong, Chatok of Sylhet, etc. are known as
industrial cities today.
The transportation and communication systems have developed because of-the
industrialisation and urbanisation. Although geographical distance has been
reduced by it, it has widened social distance. Men* and women are working
together. The industrial workers spend most of their time with their colleagues.
The impact of the daily life at work influences the whole stream of life of a
person. The philosophy of life, attitude, mentality and values, etc. of an
individual have undergone change. Due to accommodation constraint in the
industrial cities, low wages, etc. it is impossible to live with all the members of
the family together. As a result, extended families are broken, and nuclear
families are created. Again, many problems including divorce in the family
organisation, problem in the appropriate socialisation of children and
g adolescents, insecurity of the elderly, criminal tendencies and other social
S problems have emerged. The growth of slums in the cities of our country is an

262 Bangladesh and Global Studies
outcome of industrialisation. Slums have been grown in the places where
garments industry, tannery industry, bangle industry, tobacco and biri industry
have been established, and it has given birth to many social problems like
conflict, hijack, robbery, crime, adolescent crime in social life. These problems
have also created chain of problems, which have embittered the city life.
Industrialisation is, on one side, a blessing for the urban economy, and a curse too
on the other. However, it is possible to remove the curses through concerted
efforts.
The Social Changes and the Role of Women
In Bangladesh the gradual development of industry has brought about great
changes to women’s life and their dignity. The spread of industry has dragged
women from their confined home life to the outdoor work-resonant world.
Besides, the opportunities of jobs for women have extended the scope for extra
income for the family. In the field of education, women are more advanced now
than anytime before. Women are not confined to the boundary of primary and
secondary schools. They are now studying in institutions like medical colleges,
general universities, engineering universities, agricultural universities and in
other institutions for higher education. A report presented by Bangladesh in the
Fourth World Women i Pee ee ee
Conference, Beijing-1995 states —_ ee Aig
that among the total students of me we AE Soon Hi) Ps '
the universities, the number of so f ? ; > Soe a ME] yy N
female students is 23%. In the J pte A De \h oe Le
medical colleges and in —QG Aa, = «ae ) - See
engineering universities MMs» CAA GE 7) Ne: 2
respectively 2006 and. 96 of the Photo 14.1: The development in female education
students are women. The female education being free, the rural girls are getting
more chances to study than it was in the past. Besides, the government has been
Tanne 2. Up abritti (stipend) project with a Group work: Identify the reasons
view to expanding the female education :

P P of changes in the roles of women
which has taken the rural female education at tlie sutaland vrbatl areas.
one step ahead. Now, the people of rural | [pdividual work: Represent the
societies, besides educating their sons, are | changes of roles of rural women in
putting importance equally on the education | the field of education.
of female children. As a result of this, in the SSC and the HSC examinations of ,
different education boards, girl students are much advanced in results. S

The Social Change of Bangladesh 263
Besides education, women, are now being involved in various works. At one time,
women were confined only to the household works, Today, in the urban areas of
Bangladesh, women are doing jobs in many industries, mills and factories like
garments industry, medicine manufacturing factory, telephone and
telecommunication industries, jute, tea, and paper industries, architecture
industry, fish processing industry, etc. Moreover, educated women are working in
different professions such as medicine, law, teaching, police, judiciary and at
different government and non-government institutions. In government jobs,
a major portion of women are serving almost in all cadres including the
administration, police, postal, cooperative | i ee se J
and ansar, The participation of women in i in re
the defence forces is also praiseworthy. In Dad wy = @) f
our rural perspective, women have created Le ¥h J ay he s
self employment taking loans from ji. ey, {\ f) % a
government or non-government we ‘\ , 4 iy Ay 4) ay =
organisations. In these self-employments, Hy, at, iad yt i ;
there are tree plantation, nursery, cow is eo a ¢ ) a
fattening, rearing goats, fish farming, x al i) \ : F Zz
apiculture, poultry farming, tailoring, fruit FRR Sa iM by “ne aX a
business, etc. With their income MEG /i\D\/RoREZ SS
households are being run, children are Photo: 14.2: Women in self- employment
households are being run, children are studying and members of the families are
getting health care. Moreover, alongside men, these women are also carrying out
many social responsibilities. With the social changes, the role of women has
undergone changes in various fields. These change in the womans role has
facilitated woman’s empowerment . It has placed her on the seat of dignity.
Short Questions Eexereile
1. What is industrialisation?
2. How will you define Women Empowerment?
3. What is the social change?
Descriptive Questions
1. How has the social change empowered women and established dignity? Explain.
2. Explain the role of technological knowledge in the change of rural agriculture.
% 3. Analyse the impact of social changes on the rural and urban societies of
8 Bangladesh.

264 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Which one of the below is the cultural factor of social change?
a. The Impact of global warming
b. Increase in the density of population
c. The Cooperative movement
d. The expansion of garments industry
2. What is urbanisaiton?
a. The process of taking urban life leaving rural life
b. The continuous ways to the expansion of industry
c. The method of developing urban civilisation
d. The process of social and economic development
3. The reason of the recent changes in female education of Bangladesh is —
i. the free-distribution of text books
ii. free education up to the secondary level
iii. The impact of upabritti (stipend) programme
Which one is correct?
a. i&ii
b. i& iii
c. i & iii
d. i, ii & iii
Read the paragraph below and answer to the question nos. 4 & 5:
Chandan Nagar once lagged behind much in female education. The number of
female students was less than half the number of male students in the schools. In
recent times, in this region girl students are much advanced in respect of school
attendance, achievement in examinations and in other fields.
4. The reason of the change in female education in Chandan Nagar is—
i. the increase in the parents’ awareness
ii. the Government and non-government initiatives
iii. the development of technology
Which one is correct?
a. iii
b. i & iii
c. ii & iii 29
d. i, ii & iii s

The Social Change of Bangladesh 265
5. The reason of backwardness of female education in Chandan Nagar is —
i. the ignorance and lack of education
ii. the inadequacy of educational institutions
iii. the development of socio economic and communication systems
Which one is correct?
a. i&ii
b. i&iii
c. i & iii
d. i,ii & iii
Creative Questions
1. Once the "Shorbodoya" movement of Mahatma Gandhi led the backward
people of India to life. Taking up a programme named 'Sromodana’' similar to
Gandhi's programme, a non-government organization of Bangladesh called
CDM is doing many works to solve the problems of the neglected people of
Bogra, and it has made various changes in different villages of Bogra. In this
region, there is hardly any dowry and child marriage. Various women
development organizations have brought widespread changes in social life
here. Working in population control and micro credit projects.
a. What is the social change?
b. Explain one reason of social change in Bangladesh.
c. The impact of what factor has resemblance to the social changes created
by ‘Shorbodoya and Sromodana’ programmes? Explain.
d. What impacts has microcredit programme made on social life through
the change of women’s role? Analyse.
2.
Women Eradication of The rise of Increase in
empowerment superstitions crime production
Poverty Increase in self Drug addiction Increase in per
alleviation confidence capita income
Table: A Table: B
Forma- 34: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

266 Bangladesh and Global Studies
a. ‘Social change is the change in the human relationship’- who said this?
b. Explain the impacts of cultural factor on social change.
c. Explain the positive side of the factor which has effect on the indicators in
Table ‘A’.
d. The factor of the indicators in Table ‘B’ is blessing in one side and curse
in the other — do you agree to this statement? Give reasons.
20
Ss
AQ

Chapter-15
Social Problems of Bangladesh and Their Remedies

The society and the social problems are closely related. The social problems

persisted at the very birth of the society and are still continuing. Only the nature of

the problems has changed. The social problem is such an abnormal situation of the
society that influences most of the people of the society, and everyone needs to
work together to overcome the situation. We have known about the social changes
in the earlier chapt6r. There is a deep relation between the social changes and the
social problems. Due to unplanned social changes, the role of various social insti-
tutions and its failure to work properly create these social problems. The forms
and types of social problems vary from society to society. There are many social
problems in Bangladesh. In this chapter we shall be aware of the social anarchy,
the degradation of values, the violence towards women, the HIV-AIDS, the road
accident, and the militancy and corruption.

\eee lo. RE eo

sith ts « ae 7 = x A. Bs D | oe

After reading this chapter, we shall be able to —

® explain the concept of social problems; ® analyse the impact of HIV-AIDS and

e explain the concept of social anarchy and can explain the activities for the
degradation of social values; prevention of AIDS;

e explain the reasons and impact of social e explain the reasons of road accident;
anarchy and the degradation of social valuesin © describe the situation of road accident
Bangladesh; in Bangladesh;

© identify the steps needed to prevent social « explain the impact of road accident;
anarchy and degradation of social values; e explain the ways of accident free, safe

© identify the concept ‘violence on women’; toad and the steps to reduce road accident;

e explain the nature and reasons for cruelty explain the concept of militancy;
towards women; .. © explain the reasons and impacts of

® analyse the impact of cruelty towards women in militancy;

Bangladesh; . . © indentify the steps to prevent militancy;
the law to prevent cruelty towards women; corruption;

© explain the way of developing social movement © explain the steps of preventing corruption
for preventing cruelty towards women in and get motivated to build an ideal life;
Bangladesh; ; ¢ be respectful to women and be aware

e explain the nature, concept and legal remedies to prevent all sorts of oppression for them;

ge _ for child labour and juvenile crime; e aware of HIV-AIDS and come forward
& spontancously to serve the patient;

268 Bangladesh and Global Studies
e explain the concept of maternal welfare and e aware of the prevention of corruption

maternity benefit; and accident;
e explain the concept of HIV-AIDS; e be motivated to lead an ideal life based
e explain the situation and reasons of HIV-AIDS; on religion.

Section 15.1: The Social Anarchy and Degradation of Values

The harmful and problematic elements and the inconvenient situations for the
society are commonly known as Social problems. The social problem does not
happen temporarily, it becomes more or less permanent, and unified effort is
needed for its remedy. So, the social problem is such a state of social life which
impacts on the majority of the social people and which is treated as unwanted, and
unified effort from the people of the society is needed for its prevention.
The social problems originate from social indiscipline. The social disorder is the
disregard for traditional norms, regulations, customs, conducts and behaviour in
the society. The social indiscipline can be seen only when the influence of social
rules and regulations will be reduced from a man's life. It means when the social
norms fails to regulate the behaviour of a person, then the moral deterioration of a
person starts its formation. The social institutions become nonfunctional when the
moral deterioration of the society becomes massive. In such a situation, various
types of social problems can happen to be generated.
The mentionable symptoms of social indiscipline and anarchy are crimes, juvenile
crimes, drug addiction, kidnapping, suicide, oppression of women, divorce, dete-
rioration of the law and order situation, bribe, hijacking, terrorism, highway
robbery, extortion, nepotism, sexuality, outbreak of sexual disease, child labour,
negligence of the children, murder and so on.
The Concept of Social Anarchy
The social anarchy is the highest form of social disorder. Anarchy descends when
the governmentmachinery does not work properly and administration cannot
control the evils of personal or group conductSome examples of anarchy are
brivery, torture of woman, abduction, sex perversions, etc.
The Causes of Social Anarchy
Many factors are responsible for social anarchy.The proper exercising of social
values is an important factor for the society. The social anarchy is created due to
the degradation of values in the society. The deterioration and the looseness of law
and order situation are also responsible for the creation of anarchy in the society.
Besides, when the law enforcing agencies show discriminatory behaviour and
negligence to the people seeking help is also responsible for the creation of
anarchy. Different activities subversive to culture, invasion of bad culture,
political instability, corruption, etc. is also responsible for the creation of anarchy %
in the society. “

Social Problems of Bangladesh and Their Remedies 269
The Concept of the Degradation of Social Values
The social values comprises of the integration of social norms, rules, views and
other socially recommended conducts of any society. Therefore, the values are the
combination of those concept, faith, goal, objectives and determination that
indirectly control the behaviour and activities of the people of the society. For
example, showing proper honour to the elderly persons-, showing respect to the
guests, showing love and affection for the younger, etc. are some of the examples
of social values,. The deterioration of these values is called the degradation of
social values. Social inconsistency arises as its outcome.
The Causes of the Degradation of Social Values
The change of the social values is closely associated with the changes of the
society. When the society develops in education, industrialization, urbanization,
and in technology, then its social values also gets changed. Such changes of the
social values may be both positive and negative. The positive changes are socially
accepted facts and the negative changes are socially unaccepted facts. This is
degradation of values.
The social disorder or inconsistencies increase when there is the dearth of
establishing social justice. As a result, there will be the degradation of social
values/Besides, the values will be degraded when the weakness and lacking of the
tules of law, the absence of tolerance among the people and unruly environment
persists in the society. The misinterpretation of religious rules may also lead
people to a direction with no values. For example, striping in the name fake
offakefatwa is an act contrary to values.
The Effect of Social Anarchy and Degradation of Values
ies effect of anarchy and the Group work: Identify some of the
gradation of values are far reaching in Faoatalakoneb odessa Ti ‘

: : : : legradation of values in the society and
Our social life, especially in the write down the measures to prevent it.
socio-economic —_ perspective. The | tndividual work: Show the difference
deprivation of the rights among the | with example between degradation of
people increases if there is the social values and social anarchy.
degradation of social values and state of anarchy in the society. The whole
society becomes nonfunctional because of corruption. The criminals become
more powerful. In such situation, innocent person gets punishment. A fearful
situation prevails in the social life. Standards of all service providing agencies go
down trodden. Various social problems in the society also increase in an alarming

= rate.
N

270 Bangladesh and Global Studies
The Steps to Prevent Social Anarchy and Degradation of Social Values
The steps that can be taken to prevent social anarchy and degradation of social
values are:
e Making extensive social movement and taking social awareness
programme to prevent degradation of social values;
e Bringing mobility and transparency in the programmes and activities of
law enforcing agencies;
e Taking extensive awareness programme to prevent bad culture;
e Taking awareness programme and insuring accountability at the
workplace to prevent corruption and nepotism;
e Bringing transparency to the entire institutional programme for
Testablishing justice;
e Creating awareness to prevent malicious activities in the society; and
e Establishing the rule of law, etc.
Section 15.2: The Violence towards Women
The Concept of Violence towards Women
If any violence is done towards a woman by any man or women only for being a
woman of any age is regarded as the violence towards women. A person or a
group of persons commits violence againest woman on any excuse due to her
socio-economic condition, physical or mental weakness, etc. Tortures of various
types, either physical or mental are inflicted on a woman against her wish. This
violent attitude towards woman can happen anywhere, such as: home, street,
school, college, workplace, shopping mall, etc.
The Nature of Violence to Women
In Bangladesh violence againest woman is the main inpediment to womans
freedom. Violence towards women is of diverse natures. When a woman becomes
the victim of torture, either physical or mental, inside her home it is called
domestic violence. Generally she becomes a victim of such type of torture by her
husband, mother-in-law, sister-in-law and other family members. This violence
mainly includes beating up the wife, torture to get dowry, deprivation of education
and property rights, compelling to do excessive work, beating up the female child,
sexual harassment and so on.
Sexual harassment, torture and rape, wishful Judgement acid throwing, trafficking
of woman and children etc. are all brutal, cruel and heinous violence. s0
S
aq

Social Problems of Bangladesh and Their Remedies 271
The Sexual Harassment: In recent times, the sexual harassment is one of the big
social problems in Bangladesh. It is the highest moral degradation and social
disasters. Like other countries it has gripped Bangladesh also. Women of our
country become victims of various sexual-harassment. Presently girls and young
ladies, even married women become the victim of sexual harassment. This sexual
harassment of women is known as eve-teasing which is becoming unpreventable
day by day. Eve-teasing is the english synonym of sexual harassment. Eve-teasing
means a mans disturbing or irritating a woman in a public crowded place. Women
can be the victims of sexual harassment by man inside houses, at work places, in
the streets or other isolated places with ill motive or to have any immoral contact.
Many a time, children to fall victim to sexual harrssment and torture.
The Fatwa: In rural area, the violence is administered towards a woman through
"wishful Judgement." Sometimes the influential peoples of the villages administer
judicial proceeding according to their own will. All this is inconsistent with
existing laws.
The Acid Throwing: The acid throwing is a very dangerous violence to woman.
The incidence of acid throwing has increased in Bangladesh recently. Acid
throwing in most of the cases happens towards woman. The love affairs and the
refusal of indecent proposal, dispute concerning property, quarrel in the family
and many such become the causes of acid throwing.
The Trafficking of Children and Women: Women and children, who have
become the victims of trafficking, also become the victims of violence. The
situation of women and children trafficking is even worse in the South Asia. Many
women and children of Bangladesh are being trafficked every year. They are
exploited through various inhuman and humiliating works like prostitution, camel
jockey, etc. Many a time the organs and limbs etc of these woman and children are
sold out.
The Causes of Violence to Women
There are many reasons in the society for violence towards women. In our social
system, women are treated always as inexpert person. The violence against
women is increasing gradually because of various social outlooks like deprivation
of women from different social and religious rituals, child marriage, dowry,
polygamy, interest for a son in case of repeated birth of daughters, etc.
The vulnerable economic condition of our country also encourages establishing
the custom of dowry. Gradually dowry becomes a tool for torture. Besides,
depriving a woman from education, fake fatwa, various evil social customs etc,

e9 are important causes of violence towards women.

S Inour society, still many men consider women weak and feeble. In both the rural

272 Bangladesh and Global Studies
and urban societies, the attitude of several men — ;
in different families i that women's only ata works Wie owe

: : e types of violence towards
occupation will be to serve the household the rural poor woman,
chores, i.e. she will cook, give birth to a child, Group work: Make a chart of
look-after the children, make kitchen garden, | the causes of violence against
rearing cattle, teach the children, nurse the sick, woman.
ete.
The attitude of mail supremacy engenders stubborn attitude in man in a number
of ways. Such attitudes as male is superior tofemale, women are servant wife
paradise lies beneth the feet of their husband, etc. Promote violence towards
women. Again,getting lessons from their childhood experience of their own
families about the crulty and deprivation of women may make a man violent
towards women. The negligence ofparents towards daughter’s education,
indifference of parents to girl babys, giving preference to son, ignoring the desires
of their daughter for marriage, etc. are some of the attitudes towards women that
further escalate violence toward women.
One important reason for violence towards women is poverty. To eradicate
poverty, many women come out from their house’s in search of jobs and becomer
victims of violence. A huge member of female workers of Bangladesh work in
garments sector. Lack of housing facilities leading to congestion in common
bedrooms, returning late at night from their work place make them face sexual
harassment. Besides girls and women that work as domestic servants often
become the victims of sexual repression .
In most cases, the female folks of Bangladesh cannot express about the torture or
raise their voice against such torture because of the fear of losing family or social
status. So, incidences of violence towards women and children are increasing in
abundance. But to* speak in favour of women and children, different activities
have been administrated by the Ministry of Education, the Ministry for Women
and Children Affairs, various NGOs, etc. For example, Ain O Shalish Kendra,
Breaking the Silence, etc. have taken various activities to voice for the victims.
The Impact of Violence towards Women
The impact of violence towards women's life is | how violence to women
terrible and complex. Sometimes physical torture to | impacts the economy of
woman results the loss of bodily organ. Such violence | our country with special
add injuries to the physical and mental health of |reference to the female
woman. In many cases, women go to the extreme to _| Satments workers.
commit suicide. Female victims of violence can not lead a normal life. The
violence towards women is affecting the economy of our country. Ss

Social Problems of Bangladesh and Their Remedies 273
The Legal Supports to Prevent Violence towards Women

Some of the legal aids of preventing violence towards women are:

1. The Prevention of Oppression towards Women and Children Act-2000:
This act (amended in 2003) identifying sexual harassment as punishable offence,
has said that 'if a man assaults a women sexually or makes any indecent gesture
and commits any sexual harassment to fulfill his sexual desire, he will get
punishment of not exceeding 7 years and not less than 2 years rigorous
imprisonment and also with the additional punishment of fine.

2.The Prevention of Acid Crime Act-2002—This Act clearly identifies matters
like punishment for killing any person through acid throwing, causing injury by
throwing acid or trying to throw acid or assisting of any of these crimes and
judicial proceedings and other related matters.

The Punishment for Killing through Acid: If a person kills another person by
throwing acid, he will be punished with capital punishment or death sentence or
lifetime rigorous imprisonment and with additional capital fine of maximum one
lakh taka.

The Punishment for Causing Injury by Acid: The act also says that if a person
by throwing acid injuries another person by which he loses (a) either partly or
wholly, eyesight, hearing or his face become mutilated, the criminal will be
punished with capital punishment of death sentence or lifetime rigorous
imprisonment or additional fine of maximum taka one lakh, (b) Any of his body
parts, organs, glands becomes nonfunctional or any parts of his body gets injured,
then the offender will be punished with rigorous imprisonment of maximum
fourteen years but not less than seven years and fine of Taka fifty thousand
maximum. Besides, acid throwing or attempt to acid throwing is also a punishable
offence. Through these Act, the government regulates the storage, transportation,
carrying of Acid. The Acid Control Amended Act is passed by our national
parliament in 2010.

3.The Laws for the Prevention of Trafficking of Women and Children:
Accordingly to 'The prevention of oppression towards women and children
Act- 2000,' if a person brings any woman or child inside Bangladesh or traffics to
another country or sell or purchase with a motive of engaging her in any illegal
or immoral act like prostitution, he will be given capital punishment or death
sentence or lifetime rigorous imprisonment or rigorous imprisonment for not
exceeding 20 years, but not less than 10 year and with fine as additional
punishment. Besides, this Act also has provision regarding kidnapping of
women c.nd children, taking ransom, rape, death due to rape, sexual harassment,

Forma- 35: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

274 Bangladesh and Global Studies
death for dowry, etc. According to the law, 'Human Trafficking Prevention
Act-2012' if a person convicted for human trafficking, it shall be considered
punishable offence and will be given death sentence with capital punishment of
fine, Taka five lacs.
Group work : Mention the punishment under law and
identify the duties of a citizen in the following table.
Law Provision | Punishment | Duties and
Resposibilities

Sexual

harassment

Acid

Throwing

Women

and

Children

Trafficking
The Things to Be Done by the Society to Prevent Violence against Women
The society should come forward to prevent violence to women. To prevent
violence towards women, the society must take the following steps:

1. Enhancing women empowerment programmes through adopting activi-
ties to educate women, to give allowance to the widows and to function
credit programme for the women;

2. Enacting laws and its proper implementing in accordance with the
nature and type of oppression and violence;

3. Providing education for both son and daughter of the family to lead a
life with moral values;

4. Creating mass awareness about women's rights and its associated laws;

5. Expanding activities of the organizations associated with women rights;

6. Giving exemplary punishment to the criminals of creating violence
against women;

7. The proper implementation of the laws on violence against women, for
example, The Prevention of Acid Crime Act, The Regulation of Acid
Throwing Act, The Dowry Prevention Act, The Family Court Ordi-
nance, The Early Marriage Prevention Ordinance, The Prevention of
Terrorism Ordinances.

20

8. Prevention of violence towards women by way of social pressure. S

Social Problems of Bangladesh and Their Remedies 275
9. By creating mass awareness through publishing the impact of violence
againest women positive results may be derived.
10. Again another effective tool in this respect is to present before the public
the relevant laws in simple and lucid language.
There are few other issues that should be given equal
importance to prevent violence to women. In this | Group work: Mention
respect, prevention of degradation of social values and | what kind of steps you
shunning bad-culture, building respectful relationship | ¢am take to stop sexual
between man and woman, providing education for a | arassment.
sound and sensible family, exercising religious values
and ideals, proper evaluation of the status and role of women etc are useful tools.
The pressure creating institutions of the society are village court, union council,
etc. Violence towards women can be prevented by united effort of creating pres-
sure to the criminal and his family, for example, giving compensation to the
victims, keeping the criminal isolated from the society, etc. Besides, pressure can
also be given to find out the criminals.
Child Labour
Like many other countries of South Asia, child labour persists in Bangladesh.
A child has to work for his livelihood when the child is supposed to go to school
for study or play with friends. The poor economic condition is the first and
foremost reason for child labour in Bangladesh. It is not possible for the parents
of a poor family to bear the cost of their children's education after arranging their
food. As a result, the guardians of these children lose interest of sending their
children to school. In this circumstance, their father or mother thinks that it
would be beneficial for them if |W PS) Ra
their children engage in any ; Areca, sig
occupation and earn bread for A Cea So yi a
the family. Besides, the Pm ue J =e at
employer also gets interest in v7) = cB cel
engaging children in work as it => 9 eal
is lucrative for them to engage |aAo Nef ; ta
the child in work by spending Sy \ = A —
less money and to exploit child A&A } FB — .
labour for long hour than the ~ al @as a
adult. Poor parents consider COOT rae WEL
Picture 15.1: Child Labour
c cost of education of their children for 15 to 16 years. The child labour is increasing
& day by day as a result of the indifferent attitude of parents. In the urban life, the

276 Bangladesh and Global Studies
dependence on the domestic servants for all domestic works is also liable for the
quick increase of child labour.

The National Laws and International Conventions Ratified by
Bangladesh on Prevention of Child Labour

: The constitution of Bangladesh has recognized the fundamental rights of all
citizens including children. The constitution on its part ‘Fundamental Principles of
State policy’ has emphasized on taking steps for compulsory primary education
for all children and special measures for physically handicapped and mentally
disabled children.

According to 'The Bangladesh Labour Act, 2006', the minimum age of children
and adolescent is ascertained 14 years and 14 to 18 years. This Act also mentions
that to engage no child below 14 yearscannot be employed and the parents of that
child can not enter into any agreement to engage that child in any work. An
adolescent can be engaged in work only if his employer, at his own costs, gets a
fitness certificate of that adolescent from a registered physician. The normal
working hour of an adolescent is ascertained 5 hours daily. But, he cannot be
allowed to work from 7 pm to 7 am. An adolescent cannot be allowed to do any
tisky or dangerous job. Besides, this Act also provides that a child of 12 years of
age can only be allowed to do a light job in which there is no risk of any harm to
him or which may impede his education. In order to stop child labour, 'The
National Child Labour Prevention Policy-2010' has determined some specific
goals. It talks of taking some short term and s aya =
long term strategic measures to prevent risky
child labour from all institutional and ayes casio tosetep eile apo:
non-institutional sectors and to eradicate all kinds of child labour.

The United Nations Convention on Child Rights: : The convention of 1989 by
the United Nations has clearly cited its commitments on matters related to child
labour. The convention has said that member states realising their local situation,
must decide appropriate terms and conditions on the working hour, appointment,
age of child labour, etc. In addition, this convention provides commitment to child
security, compulsory primary education, etc. which indirectly will help eradicate
child labour. Bangladesh has ratified this convention in 1990.

Juvenile Delinquency

Juvenile delinquency is a fearful social problem for every society. The existence
of this problem in our society and all around the world persists in a significant %
tate. Juvenile's become delinquent due to bad social environment and deprivation &

Social Problems of Bangladesh and Their Remedies 277
of fundamental rights; the juvenile gets associated with evil company, becomes
victim of trafficking, and becomes the target of abuse in different forms.
Children are the precious wealth of the nation. So, all required steps should be
taken for their development and for giving them equal facilities. By this, they will
be able to have physical and mental fitness, morally enriched, and also achieves
abitilies to work for the society. Deprived children and underprivileged
adolescents easily get involved with crimes. They do not care anybody; they
become associated with diligence, spirit, physical strength and power to sustain
and also because of their daring attitude, they become associated with delinquen-
cy and in severe fighting. Juveniles of urban slums get more involved in delin-
quency because of poverty, deprivation from educational opportunity, irresponsi-
ble attitude and lack of control of their parents. Besides, adolescents also get
engaged in such crimes due to loneliness in cities, aloofness from their parents
due to remaining busy, intrusion of bad culture through internet and satellite
chanels and many other reasons. Juvenile delinquency can be prevented by main-
taining healthy family environment, providing religious and moral education in
home and in school, taking activities for good entertainment, preventing bad
culture, etc. Again, those who are already engaged in crimes, attempts can be
taken to rectify their character and to bring them back into right path through the
help of Juvenile court, Juvenile custody, Juveniles Correction Centre, etc.
The Suppression of Juvenile Delinquency Act and its Trial System: The
purpose of trial system for Juvenile delinquents is not to punish the delinquent
juvenile; rather realising their misdeals, they should get opportunity for correc-
tion.
Juvenile Delinquents: According to "The United Nations Convention on Child
Rights’, all persons below 18 years of age are treated as children. Bangladesh has
approved this convention in 1989. There are different laws in Bangladesh that
define the word 'Child'. According to the definition given in "Bangladesh Children
Act, 1974,' ever., person under 16 years of age is child.
The Law on Juvenile Delinquency: Generally children between seven and eigh-
teen years are conciderd as adolescent. 'The Children Act, 1974' in Bangladesh is
considered the basic law for the trial of Juvenile delinquency. This Act directs
to constitute a court for trial of Juvenile delinquency, provide separate custody or
lock up for them and to take sufficient measure for their correction.
Besides, this Act also directs to constitution a child court comprising of a
« magistrate of T class and other officers which will sit at least 2 to 3 time or more
S in each month.

278 Bangladesh and Global Studies
This act also says that custody for Juveniles should Gap eke tieceh be
be different from the usual custody. Often, the : A

. ; steps to bring a Juvenile
adolescents are required to be detained for the delinquent in a right path.
investigation of the crime, judicial hearing and
disposal. During this time, the investigating officer will observe the detained
adolescent from different perspective and find out the reason of committing the
crime by analysing the character of the adolescent. The investigating officers will
submit report to the court according to their analysis, observation and judgment
and also through the information provided by the parents of the victim. The
adolescent in the custody is given scope to participate in different sports and
activities for rectification.
The Correction of the Adolescent: The law directs to take necessary measure for
the correction of adolescents. According to the law, accused and convicted
juveniles who need formal correction have to be sent to the correction centre.
The Maternal Welfare
The Right to achieve sound health is a human right. It is needed to ensure equality
in getting service for all people between men and women for having good health,
or ensuring service for entire people. While giving health care, it is very important
to ensure maternal health. Maternal welfare means all organized efforts by society
and social organizations so that maternal health can be well protected and ensured.
To be specific, the most important sides of maternal welfare includes health
service during maternity period, fulfilling the demands of required food and
nutrition, safe service, The presence and nursing by trained midwife during the
birth of child and stopping the death during maternity period, etc.
From the perspective of human rights, death during maternity period is a serious
blow to the right to the survival and to get health service. In Bangladesh the over-
all maternal health situation is on the way to improvement. However, many preg-
nant mothers still die due to pregnancy.
One of the goals of National Health policy is. to reduce the rate of maternal death,
specially lessening the rate reasonably by the year 2021, the fiftieth anniversary of
the independence of Bangladesh. For this reason, the government has taken
satisfactory steps for the improvement of the health of mother and children.
Various measurs have been taken as far as possible in every village to provide safe
service during pregnancy.Bangladesh has earned reputation in the international
arena for success in reducing the death rate of children and mothers.
The Government of Bangladesh through a gazette notification on 11 January, 2011 S

Social Problems of Bangladesh and Their Remedies 279
declared maternity leave for 6 months for all females working in government
service, which is effective from 9 January 2011. The increase of maternity leave
will help the mothers to be able to breast feeding their infants that in the long run
help eradicate the problem of malnutrition of infants.
Section 15.3: HIV/AIDS
The Concept of HIV
The HIV is a special type of micro lentivirus. The full name of this virus is Human
Immune Deficiency Virus, in short HIV which once entered into a human body,
destroys gradually the immunity power of the body. HIV viruses remain dormant
in the body for a long time, but usually this dormant period lasts for 6-7 months.
This virus remains in different organs of the affected person, in the blood, semen,
vaginal secretion, spit, tears, urine and breast milk. But, experts opine that the
thickness of virus in tears, urine and spit is very less. That's why through these
organs there is no possibility of being infected.
The Concept of AIDS
The full name of the acronym AIDS is Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
(AIDS). Entering into human body, HIV destroys excessively the immunity level.
The last stage of the HIV infection is called AIDS. As the immunity system of
body reduces a lot, any other disease can easily attack the AIDS affected person.
No effective immunization has yet been invented. For this reason, the obvious
consequence of the AIDS affected person is untimely death.
AIDS is not a communicable disease. There is no ina iidual wane dna
possibility of getting infected on AIDS by the causes of AIDS infection
regular work with the AIDS affected person. | tngividual work: Why is viet
Those who have HIV positive got ultimately | amps infectious? Show your
affected by AIDS. A person is called HIV arguments.
positive only when this virus is identified through blood examination in his/her
body.
The Causes of AIDS
The AIDS is such a destructive disease. It enters into a human body through HIV
infection. This disease occurs due to sexual intercourse between HIV infected
male and female or transfusion of the blood of HIV carrier to another person.
Besides, using a syringe, needle or other surgical instruments with HIV virus,
without disinfecting them. Moreover, homosexuality, child birth from the infected
so mother or breast feeding by an affected mother, may spread this disease. Getting
& close contact with the blood of a healthy person with that of an infected person,

280 Bangladesh and Global Studies
for example, wound, burn, cut of both persons and by the tools used by the
affected person and needle used for piercing ear and nose, if used without
disinfection, may spread this disease. By the transplantation of the affected
person's cornea, heart, kidney, liver, etc. or cells may spread this diseases. A patient
of this disease loses weight by 11% in two months, suffers from fever and
diarrhoea all the time. The infected person suffers from coughing for continuously
one month, gets respiratory infection and dry cough all the time. He also feels
terrible pain at shoulder and armpit, suffers from fungal inflection at different body
parts. He always has a feeling of depression. AIDS does not spread by the use of
utensils, cup, glass, cloths, etc. of the affected person. It does not also spread by
shaking hands, hugging, playing sports, studying and nursing the affected person.
Situation of HIV/AIDS in Bangladesh and the World

The first patient of HIV was identified in 1981 in this world. In Bangladesh, the
HIV infection comes to light in 1989. According to the statistical report of the
World Health Organization (WHO) in 1995, the number of AIDS patient in
Myanmar is 475, in Vietnam 228, in India 1036, in Malaysia 200, in Pakistan-46,
in Phillipines-198, in Thailand 19095 and in Bangladesh 9 persons. But recently
AIDS has spread extensively at places surrounding Bangladesh. The Ministry of
Health presented a statistics about AIDS/STD (sexually transmitted disease) on 1
December, 2002 on world AIDS Day. It has said that in 2001, the number of
carriers of HIV virus was 188 persons that increased into 248 persons in
Bangladesh in 2002. The latest situation of Bangladesh as per national AIDS and
STD programmes 2010, the identified HIV affected persons were 2088 in number,
AIDS affected persons were 850 of which 241 persons died. According to the
2016 report of the same programe, the number of HIV detected person is 578. As
per this survey, the number of HIV affected persons and that of deaths between
1989-2016 are 4921 and 599 respectively. There are more than 3 crore young
people from 15 to 24 years who have no clear idea about HIV infection and
prevention of AIDS.

There are many reasons for spreading of AIDS or HIV in Bangladesh. The terrific
spreading of AIDS is already huge in the neighboring countries of Bangladesh.
Everyday thousands of people of our country go to different other countries for
business or for any other purposes. The number of sex workers is increasing in
Bangladesh. By this time 6% sexworkers are infected by HIV virus and 52% are
at risk to be infected. Besides, the numbers of professional blood donors have
increased a lot. Among the blood donors, most are drug addicted person. The
experts opine that lack of proper conception and awareness is the main cause of 3
AID infection in our country. For example 99% of the transport workers and “

Social Problems of Bangladesh and Their Remedies 281
rickshaw pullers do not have any knowledge about AIDS, whereas they get
engaged every day in various risky sexual contacts. Every year almost 80,000
people go abroad from Bangladesh. Some of them come back with carrying the
virus of this disease. Besides, the numbers of drug addicted people who share
same syringe to take drug have increased day by day. It is mentionable that the
first person infected by HIV used to work in Dubai.
The Impect of AIDS
The HIV/AIDS infected person and his/her family have to suffer social torture.
Almost all society of the world treats the affected persons with hatred. No
cooperation or sympathy is shown to the affected persons rather they have a
negative impression about them. As a result, they die mental death before their
physical death. The AIDS infected person gradually loses all his working
capability which makes his/her family in a
financially fragile position. Besides, by the | Individual work: Give your own
untimely death of the bread winner of the | arguments why in Bangladesh the
family, the whole family faces a sudden | HIV/AIDS is very risky.
inconsistency and disaster. The mutual relation | Group work: Identify the impact
and trust between husband and wife faces|of the HIV/AIDS at personal,
deterioration in many cases due to these poe an en aaa level. -
} I f hi I naividual Work: pare a repo:
diseases. n most ° the cases, the blood on the HIV/AIDS in the context of
transfusion creates risk in our country due to bancladeshy and woud
HIV/AIDS. Besides, the continuous . -
development and services in the developing
countries and the developed countries as well are on the face of threat. Due to
AIDS, the rate of untimely death is increasing and the average lifespan decreases
in the world. On the other hand, the economic development is facing obstruction.
Besides, due to AIDS, the rate of reproduction is reducing, the health service is
facing pressure, the productivity is reducing and the person, family, society and
country are getting affected.
The Ways to Prevent AIDS in Bangladesh
There is no preventive vaccine for AIDS. Death is its only consequence. So to
survive, we must resist it. The following measures must be taken to prevent AIDS:
¢ Following the religious rules and obeying the ideals set by the society for our
character and attitude;
¢ — Having trust on only one life partner/having sexual relation only with one
sexual partner;
Forma- 36: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

282 Bangladesh and Global Studies
¢ The prior checking of HIV, before taking blood from any donor or source;
¢ Avoid using the needles, blade and syringe of others;
* Creating awareness amongst all people including adolescents
* Using disinfected scissors and needles while piercing ear, nose or skin of boys;
* Taking steps with cautions while transplanting organ in our body;
* Taking special precautions while going abroad or non-residents;
¢ Engaging youth in mass awareness program to prevent AIDS.
The Duties to be Done to the AIDS Patients
The AIDS contaminated persons need essential treatment besides social and
mental support. They must be taken to healthcare centres .if they get fever,
diarrhoea and pain. Arrangements for regular nutritious food and enough rest in
needed. Mental and social support from the family and society is important for
them too. We should always abide the policy. 'Hate the disease not the
contaminated infected person’. Keeping friendly relation with them and cheering
their minds through Jove and affection is necessary. The AIDS contaminated
people should not be kept isolated from others. They should be kept carefully so
that they do not get affected by other contagious diseases. The blood of the
infected people should not be taken or physical relation with them should be
avoided.

Section 15.4: Road Accident
The Situation of Road Accident
The road Accident is a common phenomenon in almost every country in the
world. But the situation is terrible in Bangladesh. This problem creates
multifarious socio-economic obstructions in our social life which influences our
psychological problem. The incident related to the roads and highways like the
owner, driver, traffic police and the defects of roads and other incidents related to
roads is known as Road Accident. The rate of road accident is growing
uncontrolled with the increased number of roads and vehicles. The numbers of
dead and wounded persons of road accident are also increasing. A statistics
published by the Highway police of Bangladesh in 2001, is observed that the total
number of road accident were 4091 and by the year 2002 it rose up to 4918. From
the year 2002 to 2004, 50.58% of the total road accidents victims died, 38.10% got
severe injury and 11.32% got light injury. Many of those severely injured died
while receiving treatment in hospital that is not included on the statistics. The real 2%
situation is even worse than the statistics. We will be able to know the severity of &

Social Problems of Bangladesh and Their Remedies 283
road accident from our daily newspaper. We can also know the reasons behind this
problem, the impact of which is multifarious.
The Causes of Road Accident
The rate of expert drivers is not yet increased than the rate of vehicles in the cities
of Bangladesh. Most of the accidents happen due to the inexpert and untrained
drivers. Most of the drivers do not know the rules, regulations and laws for
driving. For this reason they drive in extremely high speed. Sometimes drivers
without license get appointment with fewer wages. Most of these drivers are
young in age who drive recklessly and overtake in a dangerous condition. For this
reason, road accident is also increasing everyday.
Most of the truck drivers of our country overload their truck with goods. Again, in
some cases, they carry passengers when get chance. The use of trucks in different
activities like participating in the rally, procession and sports by the students
sometimes also cause road accident. A big number of truck drivers are addicted
and sometimes drive recklessly being drunk, resulting the road accident.
Accidents also happen due to loading with passengers more than the seats
capacity or even loading passengers at roof.
Sometimes, less educated owners, in order to get more profit, handover their
defective cars to drivers. Besides, cars of lightweight body are seen to be roaming
in the highways. For this reason, road accident also increases.
Most of us do not know the rules and
regulations of the uses of road. | Group work: Make a chart/table of the
Accidents happen as we do not know | causes of road accidents based on
through which side of the road we | following heads.
should go, when to cross the road, etc. | Road |
Sometimes indifferent person, Peter | Onaer tent | One
children, old aged people, children with
special need walk on the road without a ee ee
attention and this negligence and
carelessness causes road accidents.
Accidents also happen due to building shops, markets on the roads, drying up of
paddy, jute, chilies and holding cattle's on highways, playing mechanical and
non-mechanical vehicles on the same road or walking of the pedestrians on roads.
Another reason for accident is not using the zebra-crossing or foot over bridge
while crossing the road.
x Talking to the driver while driving, engaging in competition while driving with
& others, no prior mechanical checking of the car, not using seatbelt, helmets,

284 Bangladesh and Global Studies
driving at midnight and negligence of law enforcing agencies in discharging their
duties are also the causes of road accident.

Some of the highways of our country have defective designs and are badly
constructed. The negligence of road engineers and constructor and other adverse
situation is responsible for this problem. Accidents also happen due to such
defective roads and highways designing.

The Impacts of Road Accident

The impact of road accident on our family, social and economic life is severe
which is also responsible for many problems. As per a statistical report of
highway, 24% of road accident victims are below the age of 15 years and 39% are
in between 16 to 50 years of age. According to the research report of the Centre
for Accident Research of Bangladesh |, dividual work: How can the
University of Engineering & Technology, | oad accidents of a child influence
most victims of road accidents are the capable | this family life?

person to earn. Because of the death or injury | Group work: A road accident
of the earning member of the family in road | does not only devastate the family
accident, the other dependant family | life but also make the socio-
members have to live amiserable life |¢conomic and mental life
and face financial loss. The children of this | ™Serable. Explain.

family also face problem in getting education. Sometimes the victim of road
accident becomes physically crippled and loses his/ her working capability, which
makes his/her personal life unbalanced. Mental imbalances impact the personal
life in many ways. In some cases, it may turn into suicide. Some of the victims
also choose begging as a profession. Some may associate with criminal activities
for their living. Someone even becomes addicted to drugs to reduce frustration. So
a road accident not only devastates one's family life but also make terrible his
mental and socio-economic life.

The large scale devastation, road blockage or other deterioration of law and order
situation happen because of road accident. Due to the disruption of
communication various sectors of economy face loss. The working hour of an
employee is the waste. Raw materials also wested due to lac of transport. Delayed
transportation of goods that indirectly causes price hike.Urgent needs including
medical treatment get hindered. We can get more information on this from the
National daily newspapers.

The Ways to Keep Roads Accident Free and Steps to Reduce the Accident

In all countries of the world including Bangladesh road accidents occur, more or %
less. By taking the following steps, we shall be able to keep our roads free from  &

Social Problems of Bangladesh and Their Remedies 285
accident.
¢ Recruit drivers with proper education and training.
* Mobilize and encourage car drivers to follow traffic rules and drive cautiously
by following regulations of signal, giving sides and speed;
* Motivate the drivers not to drive recklessly or not to drive under influence of
addiction, not to transport with overloaded vehicle with too many goods or people,
not to overtake and to follow the laws and regulations of roads;
¢ Taking steps to make a separate lane for heavy vehicle Constructing
electrical signal at all points;
¢ Establishing a modern and standard driving training Institute;
¢ Making a safe road network by reconstruction of risky road, culverts, bridge,
ete.;
* Taking appropriate steps and awareness eae ic: Identify th
. ndividu: Work: ent ic
~<a iat ne Pihowahis e aH yEoeiS steps to prevent accidents that
on the top Toor oF the vehicle, may victimise young children.
¢ Not to engage with any competition with |Individual work: Identify the
other vehicles, steps that have taken in your
_ . . . locality to keep road safety.
* Before driving, prior checking of mechanical
defects of the vehicles, etc;
° Awareness of the law enforcing agencies to perform their duties;
° Encouraging the public media to play their role in making people aware of
the problem;
° Not constructing house, shops, markets, beside the highways or drying up
of paddy, jute, etc. on the highways and keeping cattle on highways;
° Making the relevant organization responsible while giving driving license
or taking proper steps against fake license-holder;
° Identify the alcohol drunken drivers, through blood examination and
withdraw their license.
Things to Be Done for Our Safe Movements-
e Walking through the footpath, not crossing, ine road without looking left
and right, not getting in or out while the vehicle is moving, no talking with
© the driver while he/she is driving, and crossing the road only through
S zebra-crossing, over bridge and underpass.

286 Bangladesh and Global Studies
e Familiarize the children with highways, access roads, semi-constructed
toad to prevent road accident. Besides, to introduce the children about
zebra-crossing, bridge, traffic police, traffic signal, and dangerous places.
° We should be careful about our younger brothers and sisters. It is our duties
and responsibilities to assist the child with special needs and the older
person who need special help while walking. It is our regporsiility to be
sympathetic to the victim's family of road accident and offer them our full
hearted cooperation.
Section 15.5: Militancy
The Concept of Militant and Militancy
The English word militant comes from the Latin \vordMilitare which means
working as a soldier. From the perspective of behaviour, militant is the person
who loves war, and is aggressive, hostile and destroyer. Militants work
collectively by means of hostility or aggressiveness getting support from any
established organisation which is not approved by the state or society. The
militants use any extreme and hostile methods. Not only the militants, but also
those who participate in destruction but also engage in many activities like
donating and collecting money, making plan, and executing them are also
terrotists. The activities of the militants can be administered individually or in
group. To fulfill their objectives, the militant want to establish their political or
religious concept and philosophy made by their organization. To attain this, they
use many techniques to propagate their concept like giving leaflets, posters and
booklets. In many cases, murdering any person or doing any destructive work,
they publicise their confessional statements. They carry on their activities by
using modern information technology like e-mail, facebook, twitters, etc. They
always want to establish that their concept is right whether it is acceptable or not
to the state and society. They do not want to abide the existing ideas, values, rules
and regulations in the society. In many cases, they even use bombs, landmines,
military weapons and modern deadly weapons. Terrorist activities are conducted
also by way of suicidal incidents. Sometimes, they also engage with destructive
activities by hijacking aeroplane. To prepare these militants, secret military
training is conducted for them. They have secret connections and communications
all around the world. Any policy, contrary to the policy of the state or society is a
terrorist policy. The concepts, ideas and activities formed published and followed
by the militants are called militancy.
The Causes of Militancy
The craziness among the militants may be created through the spirit of the .,
particular group to realize any political or religious rights and interests of any $

Social Problems of Bangladesh and Their Remedies 287
special community groups. The activities of the militants may happen to create
anarchy in the country, even there may be any hidden political cause for creating
such anarchy. A person may become a militant because of his misconception of
life and world or because of his ignorance of proper religious knowledge. The
militant activities may also be created due to matters related to the interest
between different groups or intra-groups.
The Impact of Militancy and Its Prevention
The impact of militant activities is acute and serious on our life in the society and
at the state level. Such activities of militancy may hinder the development
activities of a country. Militant activities may create various adverse situations in
our socio-economic, political and cultural life. The normal way of life becomes
non-functional because of militancy. We all know more or less about the criminal
activities of the militants in many countries of the world. The cause of destruction
of the Twintower in the USA was due to militancy. This militant activity killed
thousands of people and destroyed a huge amount of property. In our county, the
militant murdered peace-loving people through bomb explosion at the programme
of the Udichi Shilpi Goshti in Jessore and on the Pahela Baishak (Bangla New
Year Celebration) at Ramna Batmul in Dhaka. Recently the militants killed quite
a few local foreign man and woman in a terrorist raid on Holy Artism Bakery at
Gulshan in Dhaka. Sometimes the militants happen to sacrifice their own lives
while performing militant activities. The continuous militant activity in a county
is a big threat to the easy flow of life of the common people. These militants are
also a threat for their own families. In many cases, a massive destruction is caused
of people, dwellings and neighbours by the explosion of the bombs kept by the
militants. Basically, militants do not have any sound family life. They are
considered as criminals in the eyes'of state, society and family. Sometimes, their
family and society cast hateful eyes over them. In the family, all the family
members must be vigilant about their children's behaviours, works and deeds. For
the massive prevention of militancy, a forceful social movement is required. As a
part of the social movement, the community should be mobilized properly to
provide correct interpretation on any political or Tudividual works identify thie
religious concept. For this placards, leaflets, | noracteristic of the militants.
posters can be used. Besides, the religious | Group work: Write down the
institutions may arrange discussion programme | preventive measures after
to make people aware about militancy. The | identifying the impacts of
militant can be brought to a normaf life by giving | militancy in our life in social

«» Special training to lead a sound family and social | as well as in the state level.

S life.

8

288 Bangladesh and Global Studies
Section 15.6: The Corruption

The Concept of Corruption

The corruption is the activities done by the individual or group that stands against
public interest or contrary to the established rules. For example, both the bribe
and nepotism are corruption. The corruption in politics and the corruption in the
government and non-government administration means to abuse the
organisation to gain any personal interest. Generally by bribe, coercion, undue
influence and giving any special advantage to an individual by abusing the power
of the administration is called corruption. Any deliberate negligence to perform
specific responsibility so as to get any illegal opportunity and advantage is also
corruption. The corruption has connection with occupation, power, interest, cash,
material, etc. Someone has to be suffered because of corruption. The nature and
technique of this crime is different from other crimes and it requires more cunning
ploy than physical work.

The Causes of Corruption

The causes of corruption in Bangladesh are many. Basically greed and ambitious
attetude turn a person corrupt. Some service holders want to earn additional
money through corruption. They take tips, commission, tea charges,articles etc, in
return for processing the files. Sometime they take bribe by withholding the files.
Some times this corrupt officials realise bribe by locking the files in red tape in the
offices. Again, in most of the cases, the subordinates get the opportunities to take
bribe for the files being stacked up on the table of the chief executive of the office.
In fact, holding up the file is also corruption. If the officehead or branchhead is
corrupted, it transmits to all other branches as well. Sometimes, the luxurious life
of the officials and high ambitions to become the owner of huge wealth in a few
days make the officials corrupt. There is no similarity between their legal income
and their life-style. Corruption mixes with the thinking, spirit and value of their
family members. Subsequently they too turm corrupt. Their service life also starts
with the help of another corrupt person. Sometimes too many demands of the
family members of the service-holder also force him/her to become corrupt. An
adverse situation persists in our country; in one side the lack of opportunities in
service sectors, and the huge unemployed youth in the other. In this situation, the
young generation is bound to offer large scale bribes in the expectation of getting
job. It is a sad trouth that in social system, it is seen that those who have much
wealth are considered to be of social status. So, with a view to achieving dignity
and wealth, many take to corruption. In our political arena, lack of practicing the
democratic values, the change of power in an undemocratic means and the $

Social Problems of Bangladesh and Their Remedies 289
extreme desire to hold the political power, etc. create a positive environment to
spread corruption. These corrupted people do not have any humanitarian quality
or any patriotism. The political instability sometimes makes our social life
restless. This social instability again creates corruption. Corruption alsoincreases
due to business competition. Persons engaged with corruption, by counterfeiting
or adulterating, try to make more profits, and this causes corruption in our society.
Generally due to high comodity price and inflation businessmen, wholesaler,
middlemen, hoarders, profiteers, traders, and stock brokers make their most with
corruption. They gain much profit by cheating and corruption.
Due to this, p eople with low income Individual work: Choose one office and
adopt corruption, just for mere hishlight j : 5

: eee ighlight in what different ways corruption
survival, When the institutions formed may happen there.
to prevent corruption, fails to perform | Individual work: Identify an institution
their jobs well or when its officials having an objective of prevention of
themselves have engaged in | corruption and highlight the corruption
corruption, then corruption spreads all | happen in it.
over the society in a massive level. | Group work: Identify the impact of
Degradation of religious and moral | °tuption in family life and write down
values may also cause the increase, the measures for prevention.
corruption in the society.
The Impacts of Corruption and Its Prevention
The harmful impact of corruption in our social life is far reaching. One can be
easily cheated by the other in a society where it is full of corruption. A corrupt
person may also become the victim of corruption by another person. A corrupt
society holds the senario of deprivation of just rights. If the nonqualified persons,
through nepotism or bribe get appointment and promotion, the qualified persons
become deprived from their rights. The social justice cannot be ensured because
of corruption. Corruption creates frustration in people of the society. Creativity is
lossed. In a corrupted society, people lose respect for the law and order situation,
tules and regulations of the society. It impedes the socio-economic development.
Corruption , creates a negative mentality among the officers of an office, and they
become negligent of their duties and responsibilities. They also develop a mind of
abusing the property. Corruption increases the rate of poverty. Honesty, ideals and
values start declining. Above all, corruption is the main reason of the national
disaster. It is an impediment to the development and prosperity of the county. It is
necessary to create mass awareness and social movement against corruption to
prevent it from the society. The Mass media as an effective tool for creating mass
awareness. Mass awareness can be created by disseminating information about
Forma- 37: Bangladesh and Global Studies, Class-9-10 (xv)

290 Bangladesh and Global Studies
corruption through the public media. Ensuring accountability among all the
levels of the society may eradicate corruption. It is possible to lift the veil of
corruption from the people through proper auditing of income, expenditure,
assets, wealth, etc. Corruption can be eradicated by organizing the people of the
society for massive social movement. It is also possible to unmask corrupt
persons, counterfeiters, frauds and cheats by investigating in to their income and
expenditure and putting them to trail for corruption. Corruption can also be
prevented by creating necessary job facilities, establishing law and order
situation, taking programs for eradication of poverty, social movements etc.
Besides, if family values are revived and degradation of the social values are
prevented , corruption will come to an end.
Exercise

Short Questions:
1. What is the cause of AIDS contamination?
2. How can anarchy be created in the society?
3. Explain the concept of degradation of social values.
Which one of the following is correct?

a.i & ii

b. i & iii

c. ii & iii

d.. i, ii & iii
4. Why does AIDS occur?

a. For the contact with the tears of the affected person

b. For the attack of HIV virus

c. For the use of utensils of the affected person

d. From the hugging of the affected person
Read the following passage and answer the question nos 5 and 6:
Limon has grown up by experiencing the family clash, quarrels and fighting
between his parents. He grew up alone after the divorce of his father and mother.
He had also experienced the same attitude in his neighbours. The same incidents
are happening after he got married. The family of Limon has gone to get
assistance of a social worker in order to get rid of this problem.

S

Social Problems of Bangladesh and Their Remedies 291
5. What is the main cause of violent attitude of Limon towards his wife?
a. Desire to get dowry
b. Being grown up in extreme poverty
c. Influence of the neighbours
d. Experience of deprivation at childhood
6. The steps that can be taken by the social worker for the family of Limon is —
i. Motivation to form a sound family
ii. Awareness about the existing laws
iii. Handing him over to the law enforcing agency
Which one is correct?
a. i&ii
b. i& iii
c. ii & iii
di, it & iii

Creative Questions:

1. Rimi's father went to Singapore for service. While working there, he felt
physically sick and came back to Bangladesh and died in two weeks. Her
mother becomes sick after six months of the death of her father. Her
treatment got started with the help of a development organization name
Nirmal Hashi and after the diagnosis, the doctor has ascertained that she is
suffering from AIDS. This matter has spread over in the locality. This family
is now overcoming many problems. To prevent this problem, the
organization called Nirmal Hashi stands besides Rimi's family.

a. What is HIV identified
b. Explain a way of spreading AIDS.
c. How has the doctor been confirmed that Rimi’s mother is affected by
AIDS? Explain
d. Analyse the steps taken by the organization named Nirmal Hashi to
tackle the problem of Rimi’s family.
20
S
x)

292 Bangladesh and Global Studies
2. According to the information of Roads and Highways Department in 1997
that almost 125 out of every 10,000 vehicles create road accident. The
accident rate is the highest among other Asian countries and the rate is 100
times higher compared to Norway and Sweden. In Bangladesh every year
3412 children die in road accident. This problem causes injury to 1200
children and they become crippled which means every day in an average 3.5
children become crippled. The report of Bangladesh Highway police has
shown that from 2000-2004, 24% of the wounded persons of road accident
were under the age of 15 years, 30% people were between 16-50 years of
age. According to the statistics of the accident Centre of BUET, workable
people between 20-44 years of age are becoming more victims of road
accidents.
a. How many road accidents happened in 2001 according to the report
of Bangladesh Highway Police?
b. Explain the causes of Road accidents with examples.
c. Explain the economic and mental impact in our social life of the crippled
and. death of children and workable persons.
d. Analyse the steps for prevention of road accident in the light of
the information given above.
2
The End i.

Academic Year
9-10 BGS
dom Fea-9 (Corer BF, a8 Vor HSA) Car PT
renter

