eligion and
ducation
Classes
1
‘4g eS
a
oU Ji NATIONAL CURRICULU

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a textbook for classes Nine-Ten from the academic year 2013
Buddhist Religion and Moral Education

Classes Nine -Ten
Written by:
Dr. Suman Kanti Barua
Geetanjali Barua
Dr. Biman Chandra Barua
Uttara Chowdhury
Edited by:

Professor Dr. Dilip Kumar Barua
Translated by:
Professor Dr. Dilip Kumar Barua
Geetanjali Barua
Afroze Jesmine Hossain
A. K. M. Bazlur Rahman
NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka-1000
[All rights reserved by the Publisher]

First Publication December, 2012

Revised Edition November, 2014

Reprint : September, 2017

Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh
For free distribution by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Printed by :

Preface
The aim of secondary education is to make the learners fit for entry into higher
education by flourishing their latent talents and prospects with a view to building the
nation with the spirit of the Language Movement and the Liberation War. To make the
learners skilled and competent citizens of the country based on the economic, social,
cultural and environmental settings is also an important issue of secondary education.
The textbooks of secondary level have been written and compiled according to the
revised curriculum 2012 in accordance with the aims and objectives of National
Education Policy-2010.Contents and presentations of the textbooks have been selected
according to the moral and humanistic values of Bengali tradition and culture and
the spirit of Liberation War 1971 ensuring equal dignity for all irrespective of caste
and creed of different religions and sex.
The present government is committed to ensure the successful implementation of
Vision 2021. Honorable Prime Minister, Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina expressed her firm determination to make the country free
from illiteracy and instructed the concerned authority to give free textbooks to every
student of the country. National Curriculum and Textbook Board started to distribute
textbooks free of cost since 2010 according to her instruction.
The textbook ‘Buddhist Religion and Moral Education’ has been enriched with
topics and information suitable for the respective class. Content based pictures and
exercises have been incorporated to create more interest an to make attitude pragmatic
to student’ learning. Studying this book, students will be inspired deeply to the ideals
of religion and morality. As a result, knowing about Goutama Buddha’s Ahimsa (free
from malice), the amity, the kindness, the means to moral and honest life, the
philosophy of Buddhist Religion, culture and heritage, they will be able to build their
life beautiful and benefactor. Above all, the learners will be capable to build their
moral and religious life as well as they will be conscious to maintain their duties and
responsibilities in their virtuous festivals. Besides they will be inspired to the feelings of
universal welfare, patriotism, endurance. It is expected that this textbook shall be a
better step as the source to overcome all narrowness rather to be a theology.
I thank sincerely all for their intellectual labor who were involved in the process of
revision, writing, editing, art and design of the textbook.
Prof. Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

Contents
rove [ied EiinotComas Baits [128
Buddhist Bhikkhus and Devotees

Chapter One

Life and Education of Gautama Buddha
Gautama Buddha is the founder of Buddhism. His philosophy of life is the basic
foundation of Buddhism. During his long life of eighty years, from birth to great
demise (Mahaparinibbana), he showed many rare instances of morality and
humanity. In spite of being a prince, he left house and took the life of an ascetic
to search ways for the redemption of human sufferings. He attained
Enlightenment after six years of hard meditation. He discovered the ways for the
redemption of suffering. He preached his new religion for the betterment of all
creatures and showed that way for the redemption of suffering. His life was
soaked in the essence of comapassion and pity. He became known as
Mahakarunika Buddha for preaching the words of love for all creatures,
non-violence, equality, comapssion and pity. His messages of great compassion
(mahakaruna) inspire us to protect all creatures, both big and small, on earth. He
did not neglect those who have been neglected as filthy in the society. He has
established them as dignified human beings. He showed the right way to the
derailed ones and led them to the right path. He freed there who used to lead a
dirty life. He led the people affected by pains and sufferings to the path of
highest bliss (Nibbana) and made them free from sufferings and pains. He tried
to establish a peaceful society inspiring people to lead a life of morality and
humanity. So, Gautama Buddha has occupied a dominant position in the history
of civilization. In this chapter we will study about the life and education of
Gautama Buddha.
By the end of this chapter we will be able to-
% Narrate the birth history of Siddhartha
% Explain special incidents of the childhood of Siddhartha
* Explain the significance of the Cari Nimittas seen by Siddhartha
% Explain the cause of Siddhartha’s renunciation and his ascetic life
% Discuss Siddhartha’s attaining Enlightenment and his preaching
¥% Narrate the story of Buddha’s attainment of Mahaparinibbana
Forma-1, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

2 Buddhist religion and moral education
Lesson: One
Birth of Siddhartha
There was a beautiful and peaceful kingdom named Kapilavastu at the feet of the
Himalayas. There lived the Shakkyas. The name of the king of this kingdom was
Suddhodana, and the queen Mahamayadevi. There was plentiful of happiness
and peace in the state. But there was no peace in the mind of the king and the
queen because, they had no child. They had been egarly waiting for a child.
Completing the festival of the full moon day of Ashara (Ashari Purnima), queen
Mayadevi felt asleep. There was the full moon in the sky. The world around was
flooded with the moonlight. The queen dreamt a very beautiful dream. Four
pioneer gods from four sides arrived and put the queen to a golden cot. They
carried her to the Manasasarovara of the Himalayan Mountain. There the
mistresses of the gods bathed Mayadevi and dressed her with sweet scented
celestial clothes. The queen also dreamt that she was lying on a golden cot.
There came down a white elephant from the golden mountain beside. The
elephant was carrying a white lotus on its trunk. The white elephant cinctured
thrice around the cot of the queen. Then it penetrated the white lotus into the
south side of the queen's abdomen. The queen was overwhelmed with a
miraculous pleasure. At that time there was the bright full moon of Ashara in the
sky.
Saar — 7 —
FSS 2 -—
Th WAP Pegg ae Ye omy —_
meet ls, ee eo
m WN Ss a — Haas ee Se pn EEA
— Wen Mii
= Zo Se oS
le —— bo
Dream of queen Mahamaya q

Life and Education of Gautama Buddha 3
Next morning the queen woke up from sleep and told king shuddhabodhan of
her dream. The king called all his astrologers and demanded the explanation of
that dream. They said "Your Majesty, there is a good news, be cheerful, queen
Mayadevi will give birth to a male child. A great man will emerge in the Sakya
clan. In the long run, he will be an enlightened one and a reliever of sufferings
of all creatures. Your Majesty, enjoy please.’
Days passed by this way, finally there came that happy full moon day of Vesaka
(Vesaka Purnima). At that time, the queen desired to go to her father's house. The
king consented and arranged her visit to her father's house. Kapilavastu to Deva-
daha, the path way for the queen's journey, was adorned and smoothed. The
queen got into a golden palanquin (palki) with her friends and started for her
father's house. In between the two cities, there stood Lumbini forest. The queen
desired to take rest in that cool-shadowy forest surrounded by Shal trees, plenty
of flowers and leaves and noisy with the chirping of birds. At her behest, the
palanquin stopped. The queen walked a little ahead and stood under a Shal tree
and touched one of its branches with her hand. Right then her labour pains start-
ed. The attendants cornered the surrounding area with clothes.
The light of the earth, the future Buddha Siddhartha Gautama was born at the
happy full moon day of Vesaka under the Shal tree of Lumbini forest. After long
worship and prayer, the desire of the king and the queen came to reality, so the
son was named Sidhartha. There is a saying that Siddhartha went forward in
seven steps immediately after his birth and there bloomed a lotus on each step.
At this moment, the gods around expressed their cheerfulness. Siddhartha took
his birth on earth. There is saying that the Bodhi tree of Gaya, Rahul's mother
Gopadevi, Cari Nidhi Kumbha, four noble elephants (Cari Mangala Hasti),
Horse king Kanthaka, Sarathi Channa, and Minister's son Udayee also were born
on the same day. All of them had a special relationship with the life of
Siddhartha.

2

R

4 Buddhist religion and moral education
Wy YN ie OR ONY
Chie yA eae seg | al Va ee i \ a \ ail
Birth of Siddhartha in Lumbini Forest
The queen returned to Kapilvastu with the little prince amidst pomp and train.
The kingdom was flooded with happiness. The city dwellers engrossed
themselves in great festivity. But a shadow of gloom came down to their
happiness. Queen Mayadevi died after seven days. Step mother Mahapajapati
Gautami took the responsibility of child Siddhartha's upbringing. She was the
sibling of Mayadevi. As he was reared up by Gautami, he was known as
Siddhartha Gautama. Throughout the world he is known as Gautama Buddha.
Exercise
Describe the birth-story of Siddhartha
Lesson: 2
Childhood

After the birth of the prince Siddhartha saint Ashit came to see him. He was also
known as the great saint Kaladevala. He was overwhelmed to see the little prince
and first expressed his delight. After a while his two eyes turned wet with tears.
The king asked anxiously what the cause of this sudden pleasure and pain. Saint
Ashit said, "Your Majesty, this prince will become the Enlightened Buddha, he ,
will show the world the ways of redemption from sufferings. For this, I was S$

Life and Education of Gautama Buddha 5
delighted. But I am old. I will not be fortunate enough to listen to the amiable
sermons of Buddha, I will die long before. That is why my mind is filled up with
sadness.'
Siddhartha was growing up with great care and attention of his step mother
Gautami. Pet hare, fawn, swan and peacock were his playmates. His childhood
days were passing joyfully in the exquisite environment of the palace and
garden. The king did not want the prince to be out of sight. Once there held a
ploughing festival in the city. That day the king, the bureaucrats and the no-
blemen inaugurated the cultivation work of the whole year driving ploughs in
their own hands. The king attended the festival with the prince. There the prince
noticed that the birds and the frogs were eating up the insects coming out of the
wet land because of tilling. A snake came and devoured the frog. Again, a kite
flying from somewhere pounced upon the snake and took it away. What
happened in front of his eyes made Siddhartha very anxious. He started thinking
of the cruelty of human beings and animals for their survival and went to __ sol-
itude, away from noise and crowd. He absorbed himself in deep meditation
sitting under the shade of a huge Jambutree. In the mean time ploughing festival
was over, then it was time for everybody to return home. But where is the prince!
After searching all around, he was found absorbed in deep meditation under the
shade of the Jambutree. The face of the prince was dazzling in a celestial light.
The king and the others were wonder struck and overwhelmed at that sight.
Everybody along with the king was perturbed at that incident. King Shuddhodan
again remembered foretelling of saint Ashit. After the break of meditation the
king returned to the palace with his son.
His education life started under the great scholars. His first learning started with
Brahmin son Vishvamitra. At the outset of learning alphabet, he showed a mark
of peerless talent. When he uttered each alphabet, immediately, he uttered a
moral sentence containing the same alphabet. Gradually, he attained efficiency
in many languages, scriptures and 64 types of calligraphy. He also mastered the
scriptures like Puranas, History, Yoga, Vaisheshika Nyaya, Mathematics and the
science and art of medicine. Simultaneously, he successfully mastered the art of
politics, hunting, horse-riding, archery, driving etc. as a kshatriya (warrior). Yet
he showed some exceptional behaviour. For example when he nearly reached
victory, he let loose the reins to give opportunity to Devadatta, His competitor,
to win. Once he went on hunting but set the prey free although it was in his
« reach. At this, his companions got annoyed but he was pleased as the life of a
S helpless fawn was saved.

6 Buddhist religion and moral education
The mark of Siddhartha's talent was found in his very childhood. Siddhartha,
with his merit settled the crisis created with water of the river Rohini flowing
between the kingdoms Kapilavastu and Devadaha. A huge tree fell on the River
Rohini and created obstruction to its flow. As a result, the whole water of the
river began to flow towards Kapilavastu and Devadaha was being deprived of
water of the river. People from both the cities tried hard to move the tree away
but in vain. Paying heed to the hue and cry of a lot of people, Siddhartha who
was playing nearby arrived at the spot with his group.
The Sakya youngsters failed to move the tree despite their heartfelt effort. Then
Siddhartha ought to hold of the top of the tree and pulled with full force towards
the current. At this, the part of the tree which was lying on earth, moved with
mud from the horizontal to a vertical position making the water flow
unobstructed. The prince reached his youth from his boyhood. Quickness and
agility is the characteristic of this age. But Siddhartha was different in his
behaviour. He often passed his hours in the touch of nature in a peaceful mind.
Sometimes, he left the company of his playmates and engrossed himself in deep
meditation.
One day the prince was enjoying the beauty of nature sitting in the garden. A
flock of white swans was flying through the blue sky. Siddartha was amazed to
see the sight. Suddenly, a swan struck by an arrow fell down on his lap. The bird
was moaning in pain. The heart of Siddhartha was flooded with pity at the
painful sight of the arrow stricken swan. He removed the arrow with care. He
nursed and cured the swan. At that time another prince Devadatta came and
demanded the swan. He said, 'Prince, the swan is mine. I shot it. Return me my
swan'. Siddhartha did not return the swan. He said, 'you wanted to kill the swan
by throwing arrow. I saved its life. Whose right is more? Who wants to kill or
who has given life?' Devadatta did not pay heed to the logic of the prince. To
settle the conflict, the case was taken to the elders. The elders supported the log-
ical reasoning of Siddhartha Gautama and said, 'the prince is right. The giver of
life has a better claim on the swan.' Siddhartha cured the swan and set it free.
The amiable behaviour, generosity, friendly manners, his talented foresight won
the hearts of all the palace dwellers and the common subjects. He became
favourite to all.
Exercise Work ~
Describe any one event of Siddhartha’s childhood s

Life and Education of Gautama Buddha 7
Lesson: 3
Siddhartha Gautama and Gopadevi
Siddhartha Gautama was sixteen. Seeing indiference and aloofness of the son,
kind Suddhodana wished to tum his son to family life. He arranged a Sayongbara
ceremony. The prince Siddhartha sat in the royal meeting with Ashokabhanda at
his side. The beautiful princess and the brightest dames from different states
came by turns. The prince gave away diffrent gifts to them from Asokabhanda.
The whole day passed away. Asokabhanda became empty. The prince could
choose none of the princesses. He was about to leave his seat. Just at that
moment entered the beautiful and sweet smiling princess J asodhara Gopa of the
neighborhood democratic state Koliya. Asokabhanda was exhausted. The prince
felt hesitated. Then, with a smile on her face, Jasodhara Gopa, the daughter of
Dandapani, asked, ‘Is there no gift for me?’ In a moment, Prince Siddhartha
adorned Gopa Devi's finger with his own ring. At that sight, every body present
in the meeting was overwhelmed with joy.
King Suddhadana sent a formal proposal of marriage of his son to Gopa's father
Dandapani. Dandapani was glad to receive such proposal. But he informed that
according to the custom of their clan, the wooer of their daughter should have to
prove his excellence in horse riding, archery, sword playing etc. So, Prince
Siddhartha involved himself in a competition with the Kshatriya princes from
home and abroad on an appointed day. He proved his excellence in horse riding,
archery, sword playing-in all one by one. On the stage Gopa garlanded
Siddhartha as her bridegroom. Companion of Bodhisattva for life beyond life,
Jasodhara Gopa was tied into wedlock with Siddhartha Gautama. King
Shuddhadana celebrated his son's marriage ceremony in great ostentation and
festivity. Gautama turned to family life. The king also became free from anxiety.
The days of the prince Siddhartha and the royal wife were passing very happily
in magnificent palaces built in the flowery gardens noisy with the chirping of
birds to suit each different season. There was no pain or suffering anywhere.
The world seemed full of joy.
oo Exercise Work
s How was the king relieved of tension?

8 Buddhist religion and moral education
Lesson: 4

Encounter with the four nimittyas
One day Siddhartha decided to go on a tour. King Suddhadana made
arrangements for a cheerful tour for his son. The prince went out to travel around
the city with charioteer Channa. He took his dear horse Kanthaka with him.
They traveled far away. The city was well decorated, the city dwellers were well
adorned and happy. Everybody welcomed the prince with pleasure. He advanced
a bit far. Suddenly he noticed an old man, weak and white hair, with a senile
body walking with lot of efforts with a stick in his hand. Siddhartha asked
Channa, 'Who is this?’ White hair, flabby skin and senile body?' Channa replied,
'He has become old because of age, when age increases, one day everybody gets
old and weak.' Siddhartha thought, will I become old someday? Will my dear
Gopadevi also become old? He told Channa to move around the chariot. I will
not travel anymore today.
Next day again he came out to travel around the city. He came outside the city
and saw that a man was wailing beneath a tree, his eyes and face looked pale in
pain. Siddhartha again asked Channa, 'What has happened to him?’ Channa
informed, 'All human beings are subject to suffer from illness someday.’ The
prince again became sad. He engrossed himself in deep thought. That day also
he returned to the palace. Returning to the palace, the prince began to think of
that old man and the sick man. Will everybody become such old? Are all men
subject to such sufferings being attacked with diseases?
In this way, the thoughtful Siddhartha came out to travel around the city on the
third day again, with charitter Channa, riding on his horse Kanthak. When he
came to a little distance outside the city, he saw some people going bewailing
carrying a dead body on their shoulder. Seeing the group of mourners,
Siddhartha asked Chhanna, "What has happened to them? Why are they crying?’
Channa replied with a sad heart, ‘they are carrying a dead body. The dead was
their near one. They were bewailing at the death of their dear ones.' Siddhartha
asked again, "Will the bewailing bring the dead man back to life?' Channa said,
‘No, the dead never get back to life.' He asked again, 'Will all men die like this?’
Channa replied, ‘Yes prince, all who are alive will once die.' Siddhartha was very
sad seeing this pitiful plight of the creatures on earth. He returned to the palace
with a sorrowful heart.
On the fourth day, he came out to see the city again, and went far away outside
the city where he came across a meditating ascetic in a solitary place undera big 2
tree. Siddhartha g

Life and Education of Gautama Buddha 9
felt attracted to the sight of this steadfast, calm and contemplating ascetic. He
asked Channa, 'Who is he? What's he doing?’ Channa replied, ‘He is a ascetic
who has left everything. Giving up the attachment of his family, he has been
meditating to know the truth. At once a feeling of monkhood awakened in
Siddhartha Gautama.
He found himself in a monk. He took a vow to search for the ways of redemption
of sufferings, decrepitude and disease of the world. He ordered Channa to tum
the chariot back.
Traveling around the city, Siddhartha fully realized the catastrophic end of
human life encountering the decrepitude disease, death and the monk. These are
called the encounter of the Cari Nimmittas philosopy by Siddhartha.
Exercise Work
Describe what are the Cari Nimittas
Lesson: 5
Siddhartha’s Renunciation

[- 2 ON Se A agin.

EN / CN Se a we sey =

pie hi Cling Vf oN An AK UM

it | YZ pax j eb

NNN

VV ee ot Se

Renunciation of Siddhartha

Forma-2, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

10 Buddhist religion and moral education
Siddhartha Gautama could not find any peace in his mind after seeing the four
causes. All the while he lost himself in deep contemplation. That very scene of
the youngster ascetic engrossed in deep meditation made a lasting impression on
the mind of Gautama. He decided to leave home in search of ways of
emancipation from sufferings. He thought of taking permission from his father
before leaving home. He went to his father and expressed his decision. Listening
to his son's words, the king felt as if he were thunder struck. He controlled his
feeling with much effort and asked his son, 'who is dearer than his own life, you
are the prince of the kingdom of Sakya, the heir to the throne, for what you want
to leave home?' Siddhartha said in reply, 'If you can ascertain me four things, I
will not leave home.

1. I will never be broken down with old age, I will be evergreen;

2. I will never be affected with disease;

3. Death will never snatch away my life; and

4. I will attain inexhaustible wealth.
Listening to his son's condition, the king was surprised and said, 'It's impossible!
Decrepitude, illness, death can not be prevented by anybody, rescind this
conditions, son.' Siddhartha said, 'Death also can separate us at any time. A
house on fire is to be left. I am determined to renounce home.' The king got to
realize that the son is adamant accomplish magnanimous tasks, he can not be
bound any more. He told with a saturated tone, 'Son! Let your desires be
fulfilled. Siddhartha left his father's room with tearful eyes making obeisance to
his father.
In the meantime, a son was born enlightening the lap of Gopa Devi. Hearing the
news of his son's birth, Gautama absentmindedly uttered, 'Rahu is born, a bond
is created.’ King Shuddhodana came to know it from a messenger and named his
grandson Rahul.' On this side Gautama took the decision that this tie is to be
broken. On the other side, the king arranges singing and dancing to keep
Gautama in a cheerful mood. But Siddhartha could not pay attention to pleasure
making, he fell asleep. The dancing maids also hesitatingly fell asleep here and
there seeing the prince in a sleeping state. Gautama woke up and became
annoyed looking at the dancing maids sleeping in a disheveled posture. He took
decision, 'Right today I will have to leave the house’. It was the full moon night
of Ashara. The city was flooded with full moon light. The prince went to Gopa ,,
Devi's room for the last time. He found that his baby son was sleeping withhis $

Life and Education of Gautama Buddha 11
mother. Looking at the innocent face of his son he felt a kind of love. He thought,
he would caress his son. But if he tries to fondle the son, Gopa may wake up. He
controlled himself. He came out of the house silently. He woke his charioteer
Channa up. He ordered him to prepare the horse. Channa brought forth
Kanthaka, the horse king, well prepared. Siddhartha Gautama rode on Kanthaka
and drove away out of the town. Then he reached on the bank of the Anoma. This
is the time for farewell. Gautama got down from the horse back and cut his long
hair with his sword. He put off his royal dress and ornaments. Giving the crown
to the hand of Channa He said, 'Give it to father.' He ordered to give the royal
dress and ornaments to the hands of his mother, His shoes to Gopa Devi and his
golden sword to his son Rahul. He ordered, 'Channa, now you return.’ Parting
with Gautama was so, heart rending to Kanthaka that it died at once. Doleful
Channa returned to Kapilavastu. The prince left his house and royal happiness
and became an ascetic. Gautama started walking alone by the side of River
Anoma towards the deep forest. This renunciation of Siddhartha at the age of
twenty nine and at the hour (tithi) of Ashari full moon is known as the
Mahabhinikkamana in Buddhist literature.
Exercise Work
What were the conditions given to his father before Siddhartha left home?
Why Siddhartha’s son was named Rahul?
Lesson: 6
Attaining Buddhahood
Leaving the palace Gautama came to the lap of nature surrounded by river, forest
and hills. Spending a few days in the hermitage of the sages He reached Vesali.
Here he became a disciple of saint Alara Kalama and learnt philosophy from
him. He practised the seven stages of meditation (Samadhi). But his thirst for
knowledge remained unquenched even under him. He returned to Rajageha.
Here he remained in the cave of Ratnagiri hill for a few days. He tried to gather
knowledge from those saints. This cave was the abode of many saints. One day
while collecting alms, king Bimbisara felt attracted to this young ascetic. He
= called for him to the palace. He requested him to leave the hard ascetic life and
8

12 Buddhist religion and moral education
offered him high official post in the kingdom. But the person who has left the
throne, can the offer of higher post or wealth deviate him from his mission? He
has already abandoned the royal flamboyance.
He practised religion under the renowned contemporary religious teacher called
Ramaputra Rudraka. Time came when he gained equivalence with his teacher.
Simultaneously he realised that through the teachings of his master and the
method of worship is of higher level, it is not possible to earn the true knowledge
with it. He left the Rajageha taking leave of his master. Saint Alara Kalama's
three disciples' Kondanya, Vappa and Assawjit and master Ramaputra Rudraka's
two disciples Mahanama and Vaddiya joined him.
He walked far away from the Rajageha and reached Uruvela. The place was
surrounded with the beautiful scenery of nature. He came to a village called
Senani. There was deep forest beside. River Neranjana was flowing there.
Another name of this river is Falgu. Solitary nature was always a thing of
attraction to Gautama. So he liked the place very much. He decided that he
would be absorbed in divine contemplation right here to know the end of sufferings.
Six years have gone by in . Se: ; Pnsue
deep meditation. His “xX? TIA op ei CART ati
glamorous body turned lean Sais iid ae _ Cones ns eet
and thin. He became unable to esi) ie ae ay rs Bae "
: / aeNe. AE grep ol EX

walk or move because of his x7 eae Ne oat ee, = | a
physical weakness. He  «*A¥ CY oi, a 4 ES fh r= ID
became so weak that one day __}\ 5 GoW pr Sy hes
he could hardly get out of ‘\ Ane Ai Bae Z|
water after bathing in the shes Ay ZA i} | ij BAN 7
river. With lot of efforts he nab aid Gen GI Ae ser
caught hold of a branch ofa ss satel BJA \Il || A low 4 ea
big tree and managed to get > 8 er Uy i | Ah E.) Be
on to the shore. He could 2. “<igaysgeMeen AN” ah istic rs

. <4. Se PF RR
realize that ceaseless pe : ae
meditation would lead him to 3a), = od || =
death. He will not be able to eck wil i a NT fil Mir :%>
know the ways of redemption ~,l "it | | Mt |i | I a)
from sufferings. He felt that S22 || | I! WL La
the true way of meditation eS ee ee peas 4
would be to eat bit by bit and == = a BELTS ES
adopt the middle path. Neither s

Meditating Siddhartha Gautama

Life and Education of Gautama Buddha 13
laborious meditation nor life of luxury is favorable for redemption of sufferings.
For this reason, he adopted the middle path.
area f Soa, 3 a SESE CS Ripa’ Sas ATES. °
ee ARN oe
Feds eS a,
Bee (BA. NOG Sie
fe AU [feds cose Seta WEL ey | We.
exes! Del Pee
— Cae: ew 77 wt | Ew, My
ee ON ere EIS FED a Fe HAY a =
Sujata offering sweets (Payes) to the Buddha
The five disciples Kaundinnya, Vappa, Bhaddya, Mahanama, and Aswajit, left
the company of sramanera Gautama to see him eating food. One day he sat under
a large Banyan tree after having bath. Then a house wife named Sujata of the
village Senany offered him Payes. Gautama accepted the Payes of Sujata. That
day was the full moon day of Vesakha. Eating payes he again started meditation.
He committed to himself that he would not leave this sit before achieving
enlightenment.
In the sky, there is the full moon ofVesakha. Determined Gautama is engrossed
in deep meditation at the foot of the banyan tree. He is in a state of meditation in
search of ways of redemption from sufferings. The earth reverberated. Mara, the
symbol of evil force like covetousness, cravings and desires, fearfulness etc., got
afraid of such a row of him. To deviate him from his goal, Mara with his groups
~ made manifold efforts. There was a terrible fight between Buddha and Mara.
S Rati, Arati and Trishna-these three daughters of Mara attacked the meditating

14 Buddhist religion and moral education
Bodhisattva with pushpadhanu and pancashara. They made different gestures
and did fraudulent activities to break his meditation. Then He started a debate
with Mara. He declared in a firm voice, 'If the hills and poles displace, the whole
earth turns empty, if the whole stars fall down to earth with other heavenly
bodies and Indra, if all creatures on earth become unanimous and the great sea
dries up, he will not move a bit from this seat. In the battle, Mara was defeated
to Sakiya lion. Gaining Enlightenment, Siddhartha Gautama became Buddha.
Then He was thirty five.
While meditating, in the first quarter of the night, He knew His previous birth.
In the second quarter of the night, He obtained celestial eyes. In the third quarter
of the night, He was informed of the causes of birth, decay, illness and death. He
realized the four noble truths. He discovered the Eight Noble Paths, the way to
the ceasation of sufferings.

See et SIE MOR SS ERE SSK Sere

sae eae Lj, A are f if} hy

—— ee y SBR ae =

Gautama Buddha after attainment of Enlightenment.

The word 'bodhi' means supreme knowledge. He became Buddha after the
attainment of 'Bodhi' the name of the Banyan tree under which He received the
Buddhahood came to be known as 'Bodhi tree’. He is known as Gautama
Buddha to the world. The place at which he attained Buddhahood is known as_ x
"Buddha Gaya’. 8

Life and Education of Gautama Buddha 15
After attainment of Buddhahood, His life of Bodhisattva came to an end. He
obtained the wisdom of emancipation i.e. Nibbana. He noticed that lack of
knowledge is the root of all our sufferings. It is possible to destroy sorrows with
the destruction of ignorance.
After attainment of Buddhahood, the rays of light arose in his body, the world
reverberated with a joyful sound. Eradicating the craving, he won the sufferings;
he broke the tie between birth and death. The next seven days he sat down
cross-legged under the Bodhitree and felt happiness. In the second week, He
stood in the North East quarter and gazed with motionless eyes at the Bodhitree.
In the third week, He strolled around the Bodhitree. In the fourth week, He sat at
Ratanaghara Cetiya and felt happiness of emancipation. In the fifth week, He
remained meditating sitting in Padmasana (lotus seat) under the Ajapala Banyan
(Nagroda) tree. In the sixth week, He meditated under the Mucalinda or
Muckunda tree. In the seventh week, He passed his hours meditating under the
Rajayatana tree. Here he enjoyed the happiness of attaining Magga and
Maggaphala and happiness of emancipation. After seven weeks when Buddha's
meditation was broken, two traders named Tapassu and Bhallika were going by
that way. When they saw the enlightened greatman, absorbed in deep meditation
at the root of Rajayatana, they worshipped him with honey and cake. Buddha
whole heartedly received the traders! gift that are given with due respect. This
was his eating of food for the first time after forty nine days when he received
Sujata's porridge.
While approving their respectable offerings, Buddha preached them about his
new way of redemption from suffering. The traders were grateful and took
refuge in Buddha and his religion. Tapassu and Bhallika became fortunate to be
the first worshippers of Buddha. As there was no Sangha formed yet, they came
to be known as 'Dvi-vacika upasaka'. The seven places related to the memory of
the attainment of Buddhahood such as: Root of Bodhi ((Bodhipallanka),
Animesh Cetiya, Cankamana Cetiya, Ratanaghara Cetiya, Ajapala Banyan tree,
Root of Mucalinda, Rajayatana tree etc. are known as seven great places in the
» Buddhist Scripture. The Buddhists offer their heartfelt homage towards these
S seven great places with great respect.

16 Buddhist religion and moral education
Exercise
What was king Bimbishara’s offer to Siddhartha?
What do you mean by middle path?
Who were the ‘Dvi-vacika upasaka’?
Write the mame of the seven great places.
Lesson: 7
Preaching of Religion

After the attainment of Buddhahood, Buddha decided to preach his newly found
religion. For this, on the day of Ashari full-moon he arrived at Ishipatan Mriga
daba, of Saranath. At that time, His previous five disciples: Kondanya, Vappa,
Bhaddiya, Mahanama and Assvajita were staying there. He preached his new
religion to them. They were the first monks indoctrinated by Buddha. In the
Buddhist religious history they are known as the first five disciples (panca
Vaggiya Shisya). Through their initiation, the Bhikkhu Sangha was formed.
Buddha's first preachings were known as 'Dhamma Chakka Pavattana Sutta’.
Buddha instructed newly discovered four noble truths, eight noble paths, theory
of dependent origination (Paticca Samuppada), impermanence and non-soul etc.
The five disciples listened to the bewitching sermons of this new religion
throughout the night with rapt attention. Buddha started to observe rain-retreat
(vassavasa) in that Tapavana with his first five disciples. At that time, Yasa, son
of a richman (setthi) along with his four friends, getting annoyed with family life
took the pabbajja (initiation) to Buddha. Following them fifty more youths also
became (Bhikkhu) monks. After the end of rain-retreat (Vassavasa), Buddha sent
the group of monks to different directions to preach this peerless religion. He
said, 'Muttaham Bhikkhave sabbapashi, ye dibba ye ca manusa, tumhe pi
Bhikkha ve mutta sabbapasehi ye dibba ye ca manusa, carratha Bhikkhave
carikam bahu jana hitaya bahu kana sukhaya lokanukampaya, atthaya hitaya
sukhaya devamanussanam ma ekam dve agamittha, desatha Bhikkha ve
dhammam adi kalyanam, majjge kalyanam pariyosanamkalyanam.'

This means, 'O bhikkhus! I am free from all types of attachments including gods
and human beings. Monks! You also be free from all types of attachments
including gods and human beings. Go ye, O Bhikkhus and wander forth for the
gain of the many, for the welfare of the many. Do not go two together to the same
direction. Preach that religion at the beginning, middle and end of which there is
welfare.’ Directing them as such Buddha himself started for Senani village of x
Uruvela. R

Life and Education of Gautama Buddha 17
n33 + *)
yh a Wo MG eI OS REL sunt he
ASS Posen yo BY IN a Soe By ia 4
Noth p= Rig oH VA\Y ( ; Gi cai ‘
Buddha is preaching to the first five disciples at Saranatha
On the way to Uruvela, there was a deep forest. Buddha was taking midday rest
in that forest under the cool shadow of a large tree. At that time, a group of
youths came to him with a hue and cry and asked, "Master! Did you see any
woman going by this way?' The Buddha said, 'Youths! What is the use of a
woman to you?' The youths informed, "That woman is a harlot, came to enjoy
with us. We all lost ourselves in enjoyment. On this opportunity, the harlot fled
away with our valuable things. Now, we are looking for her.' He now asked the
youths, 'Boys! Think, which one is better on your part - searching for the harlot
or your own self?’ Searching for self? What is that!’ the boys asked in
astonishment. Buddha told them to sit down peacefully. Paying homage they
also sat in the front of Buddha. Then Buddha explained the youths about what
searching for self is. He preached them religious sermons. At this, the youths'
knowledge opened up. They took the initiation from Buddha.
On his way to Uruvela, he preached many people of this religion of welfare.
Among these, fire worshipper three Kassapa brothers are mentionable. As per
his promise, he went to the Rajageha and accepted the invitation ofking Bim-
bhisara. The king gifted him the Venuvana Vihara. In this Vihara, Sariputra
Forma-3, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

18 Buddhist religion and moral education
(Sariputta) and Moggallana took refuge in Buddha's religion along with fifty
disciples. Right here, Buddha introduced the Vinaya rules for the Bhikkhu
Sangha. From the Rajageha He went to Kapilavatthu. There He met with His
father Suddhodana and mother Mahapajapati Gautami. Then He preached to
Gopa Devi. That time the Sakya boys like Ananda, Devadatta, Aniruddha,
Bhigu, Kimbila, Bhaddiya and others took the initiation under Buddha. At the
same time, their companion barbar son Upali also took the initiation. Buddha
gave initiation (pabbajja) also to his step brother Sundamanda. He gave pabbajja
to his son Rahula and made heir of Buddhasasana (regime of Buddha). King
Suddhodan, out oflove for his son, requested to receive the leadership of the
kingdom. In reply, Buddha said to the king like this, "His highness’ fathomless
love for son is not unknown to me. But the tie of your love has now been broken.
Look to your subjects with that eye of love for your son. Love each of them as
your own son and love all human beings, even all creatures on earth. In that case
you will find innumerable sons like Siddhartha and in the long run you will be
endowed with the happiness of Nibbana.' Thus, the emancipated man
Lord-Buddha made aware His loving father of the duties to be an ideal and pious
leader to his subjects..

Once there was a conflict between the Sakya and Kalya regarding the water of
Rohini River. To settle the conflict, Buddha went to Kapilavatthu from Vesali.
At that time five hundred Sakya boys joined the Bhikkhu Sangha. Their wives,
under the leadership of Mahapajapati Gautami, came to Buddha and sought
permission to receive pabbajja to lead the life of a nun. But Buddha rejected
their request and went back to Vesali. Mahaprajapati and her attendants did not
give up, they cut their hair and wearing yellow rob followed Buddha upto
Vesali. They reached Vihara with their wounded legs and requested Buddha for
the second time. At the end, Ananda Thera prayed to Buddha to initiate them as
nun. At last, Buddha accepted their prayer and the desire of Mahaprajapati were
fulfilled. Then Bhikkhuni Sangha was esteblished with Gopa Devi and other
Sakya women under the leadership of Mahapajapati Gautami. Thus the women
became the member of the Bhikkhuni Sangha.

2
8

Life and Education of Gautama Buddha 19
Regarding the establishment of the Bhikkhu Sangha, Buddha said to his dear
disciple Ananda, 'O Ananda! like men, women also can be endowed with
Samannaphala (fruits of monkhood).' He also said, 'the women are capable of
being endowed with higher Samannaphala and if the number of nuns like
Khema, Uppalavanna, Dhammadinna and Bhaddakapilani are increased there
would be no ill omen other than goodness for my promulgated religion.’ He also
said, 'In the attainment of Maggaphala, women are equal to men, there is no
difference.'
Once Buddha was staying at Savatthi. The only baby son of a helpless woman
named Krisha Gautami died. She turned almost like a mad out of sorrows for her
son and came to Buddha and requested Him to bring her son back to life. Buddha
was well aware that a dead can not be brought back to life. But the sorrows of
that willful woman were to be mitigated. She was to be made understand the
reality. Buddha said to Krisha Gautami in a calm and slow voice, 'Bring me a
handful of mustard from a house where never a father, mother, brother, sister,
son, daughter or any body else died.' The wailing mother moved all day long
from door to door of Savatthi in search of a handful of mustard with her dead son
in her lap. But though she could find mustard, she could not find any house
where nobody died. Tired and exhausted Krisha Gautami realized at the end of
the day, all men are subject to death. Death is the inevitable end of man. Her son
is no exception. Then she returned to Buddha. Buddha said, ‘the person who is
attacked with death, he can in no way be saved. Every living human being is
liable to death. Hearing these words, sorrows of Krisha Gautami was appeased;
she came to understand the fact. She received the pabbaja and entered into the
Bhikkhuni Sangha. In this way Buddha helped the shelter seekers to realize the
truth through real experience.
At the time of Buddha, the system of racial antagonism reached to its severe
form. But Buddha opened up the entrance of people from all professions, race
and caste to his Bhikkhu Sangha. In Buddist religion there is no place of
discrimination among classes, races or colours. The religion of Buddha attained
« fulfillment through the assemblage of many like Brahmin Bharadvaja, Magadh's
S king Bimbisara, Kosal's king Prasenjit along with his courtiers, princes,

20 Buddhist religion and moral education
Amrapali, untouchable Sunit, Sresthi (richman) Anatha Pindika, slave Puma,
goldsmith son Chunda etc. They contributed a lot to the development of religion,
Sangha, Vinaya and Buddhasasana (religion of Buddha) not through their birth
but by dint of their activities. Buddhist religion invigorated with the ideology of
equality, friendship and pity, created a Renaissance to the then India stricken
with diverse discriminations. For long forty five years he preached religion in
different cities and localities. Among these Buddhagaya, Savatthi, Saranath,
Kosambi, Vesali, Rajageha, Vajji, Malla, Pava, Kusinara, Cunar, Kanauj. Mathu-
ra, Alavi etc, are noteworthy.
Exercise
Who are called fisrt five disciple of Buddha? Why is Venuvana Vihara
famous?
What advice did Buddha impart to king Suddhadana regarding the protection
of his subject ?
Lesson : 8
Mahaparinibbana

Gautama Buddha, for long forty five years, trode to different directions and
preached that religion at the beginning, middle and end of which there is
welfare. Then, on a Maghi full moon day, he was staying in a garden name
Capala Cetiya of Vesali. That day he annuanced in front of the Bhikkhu Sangha,
gods and people that in the next Vesaka full moon day he will leave the span of
his life. Gautama Buddha, the light of the world would attain Mahaparibibbana.
Then after three months, on the eve of the full moon of Vesaka he arrived at Kus-
inara with the group of monks. When He reached at a place called Pava of Kushi-
nara, He became the guest of goldsmith son Chunda. After eating meal, He felt
sick. Returning from Pava, Buddha lay down for rest under the twin shal tree in
the shal grove of Malla. In the sky there was the full moon of Vesaka. Attendant «
and dear disciple Ananda and the other monks were sitting around Buddha. &

Life and Education of Gautama Buddha 21
At the last hour of Buddha, Ananda became very anxious. Addressing Ananda,
Buddha said, 'Ananda! attadipa viharatha, atta sarana ananan sarana,
dhammadipa viharatha dhamma sarana annasarana.' This means 'O Ananda,
move, being a light of yourself, refuge in religion is the best refuge.' He also
said, 'O Ananda! In my absence it may seem to you that the advice of Master
(Buddha) has come to an end, we have no more Master. Ananda! Do not think
like this. Ananda! The religion and vinaya preached by the great that will be your
master in my absence.' Then, at the last moment He gave initiation to 'Subhadra'.
Buddha, for the last time, asked the Bhikkhu Sangha who were present there,
‘Does anybody of you have any doubt to Buddha, to religion, to Sangha, or about
the ways directed by me?' The Bhikkhus remained silent. At that time, He
delivered His last words of instruction, 'O monks, all beings are subject to decay.
Do carefully all your duties with the vigilance. The last sermons of Buddha have
been narrated in the 'Mahaparinibbana Sutta’. With the utterance of His last
words, Buddha absorbed in deep meditation' Passing the stages of meditation
one after another, He absorbed himself in Nirodha Samadhi and in the third
quarter of the night He attained the very peaceful Mahaparinibbana. Then He
was eighty.

WN oe

1¢ 7 N= &

\ A ta ual 4 NPS?

2 “Ala

20 = a a a ine
S Budda laid on the bed of Mahaparinibbana

22 Buddhist religion and moral education
His dead body was preserved for a week. Ven Mahakassapa set His funeral pyre
on fire. The Bramhin Drona divided his relics into eight parts. Ajatasattu,
Licchavis, Sakiyans, Buliyans, Koliyans, the inhabitants of Betadvipa, Mallas of
Pava, and the Mallas of Kusinara received a part of the relics. The relics of
Buddha are known as ‘Buddha Dhatu’. Still now the Buddhists offer their prayer
and homage towards the Buddha's relics.
Exercise
When and where did Buddha declare of His Mahaparinibbana?
What was the last advice of Buddha?
Who are the ones that received the relics of Buddha?
Exercise
Fill in the blanks
1. His life was soaked in the essence of 0.0.0...
2. The queen was overwhelmed with a ................. pleasure.
3. A... Will emerge in the Sakya clan.
4. The ..............+.. engrossed themselves in great festivity.
5. Through the world he is known 8 ..........:sseseeeteeeees
Short questions
1. Write in brief the happenings at the birth of Siddhartha.
2. Narrate the story of Saint Ashit.
3. What do you mean by Mahabhinikkamana?
4. Who are the fisrt five disciples (Panca Vaggiya Sisya)?
5. What was the last advice of Buddha?
S

Life and Education of Gautama Buddha 23
Essay type Questions
1. Describe what you know about Gautama Buddha’s preaching of religion.
2. Narrate about the childhood of Siddhartha.
3. Discuss the Mahaparinibbana of Gautama Buddha.
Multiple choice Questions
1. On which day of full moon the queen Mayadevi desired to go
to her father’s house?
a) Vesaka b) Ashari
c) Ashvini d) Kartika
2. The extraordinary talent of Siddhartha was revealed in His
boyhood through
i. The realization of Saint Ashits’ fore telling
ii. Moving the fallen tree on Rohini river.
iii. Clearing the flow of water.
Which one is correct below?
a) i b) iand iii
c) iiand iii d) i, ii and iii
Notice the chart below and answer question no. 3 and 4
and senile fellow gentle face
S

24 Buddhist religion and moral education
3. ‘2?’ marked place refers to what event?
a) Family life of Siddhartha
b) Life history of Siddhartha
c) Siddhartha saw a group of people carrying a dead body
d) Attainment of Buddhahood of Siddhartha .
4. In that event Siddhartha took a vow to-
i. Search for the ways of redemption of human being.
ii. Employ himself to the observance of ascetic life.
iii. Go on exile.
Which one below is correct?
a) iandii_b) iiand iii
c) iandiii d) i, ii and iii
Creative questions
1. Information chart
|SLNo.| Subject |_ Event |
a. Who arrowed the swan?
b. What was the fore telling of Saint Ashit? Explain.
c. To who does the given information chart apply? Explain.
d. The great man described in the information chart ‘was able to
attain knowledge after six years of meditation adopting the middle
path’. Do you agree with this statement? Show reason for your answer. 2
8

Life and Education of Gautama Buddha 25
2. Suvarthi is a beautiful girl of a philanthropist family. She completed her ed-
ucation at the right time. So her father wanted to get her married. All her
marital formalities were completed with a young man who is educated and
adept in horse riding and other things. The happiness of their conjugal life
did not last long. Rather, to fulfil the mental desire and to lead a ascetic life,
Suvarthi's husband went away and vowed to attain supreme knowledge.
a. In which full moon did the queen Mahamaya dream?
b. Why did the great saint kaldeval become happy at first and then
cried seeing the prince? Explain.
c. Which incident of the text has been companied with the incident
of Uddipak? Explain.
d. How did the husband of Suvarthi follow Gautama Buddha to fulfil
the desires of his mind? Analyse in the light of religion.
Forma-4, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

Chapter Two
Buddha and Bodhisattva

Buddha and Bodhisattva are the titles. The person who becomes the owner of
all-round knowledge attaining the highest perfection of his character is known as
Buddha. On the other side, the person who observes the regulations to attain
Buddhahood is called Bodhisattva. Buddha and Bodhisattva is the essence of
Buddhist religion. The whole Buddhist literature centers on these two beings
(Sattvas ). These two titles are not given by anybody. Nobody can award this
name to anybody. These two stages are to be attained through sincere meditation
and hard perseverance. These two are the most respectable states of human life.
We will study about Buddha and Bodhisattva in this chapter.
By the end of this chapter we will be able to -

* Describe the identity of Buddha and Badhisattva

* Narrate the types of Buddha and Bodhisattva

* Differentiate the qualities of Buddha and Bodhisattva.

Lesson: 1
Introduction to Buddha and Bodhisattva

Buddha and Bodhisattva are two proper names. One is complementary to the
other. It is obligatory for the followers of Buddhism to have knowledge about
Buddha and Bodhisattva. Here Buddha does not mean only Gautama Buddha.
According to the scripture, there had been many Buddhas before him. Their
ideals and characteristics had been similar. They were endowed with peerless
virtues. Like Buddhas, Bodhisattvas are also many in number. They are striving
to attain Buddhahood. The introduction to Buddha and Bodhisattva are
presented below
Introdution to Buddha
The word 'Bodhi' means supreme knowledge. The word 'Bodhi' evolved from the
word 'Bodh'. The person who attains fulfilment in knowledge, turns into a S
Buddha in the long run. So the plain meaning of the word Buddha is the wise one.

Buddha and Bodhisattva 27
But this wisdom is not the general wisdom or only the mundane wisdom. This
wisdom is the combination of a multidiscipline. Especially the wisdom attained
through the study of four noble truths. This wisdom may also be called absolute
or highest knowledge. The knowledge of one's previous births and knowledge of
understanding the mental motions of others are subject to it. The knowledge of
one's previous birth means the capability to commemorate one's previous birth
history and understanding the hearts of others means the capacity to foresee the
mental state of others. To attain such kind of super human knowledge is very
difficult. Prince Siddhartha Gautama's attainment of such wisdom is the
aftermath of His immense sacrifice and deep contemplation.
For this reason, He could achieve the name Buddha in this world. Buddha is a
kind of title meaning the best of human beings. One can attain this title only if
one can ensure fulfilment in the practice of perfect knowledge annihilating all
kinds of cravings. So, despite the general meaning of the word Buddha being a
wise man, its underlying meaning is much deeper. So, all the wise men of the
world are not the Buddhas. Buddha is the magnanimous man devoid of anger,
jealousy and greed. Buddha could foresee His own and others' past present and
future. He did know whom, when and how he should advise. The knowledge of
Buddhahood is matchless and extraordinary. This is expressed in one's
activities. He is the owner of infinite knowledge; the circumference of His
knowledge is also limitless. This is not measurable by the limited knowledge of
the general human beings.
The appearance of a Buddha in the world is very rare. Buddhahood can be
attained through the rapt meditation for life beyond life. The way to gain
Buddhahood is open to all. But, it is not possible for everybody to gain
Buddhahood. There is mentioned in the scripture that long after the passing
away of one Buddha; another Buddha will arrive in the world. Until the new
Buddha appears, the Buddists abide by the rules of the previous Buddha. For
example, now it is the reign of Gautama Buddha. He appeared in the 6th
Century B.C.
The practice for attaining Buddhahood is like a determination to reach a certain
x goal. This may also be called the cycle of the fulfilment of paraimi. The person
® who can completely realize the three symptoms i.e. impermanence, sorrows and

28 Buddhist religion and moral education
non-soul, goes forward to the attainment of Buddhahood. He abosrbes himself in
the meditation of eight noble paths realizing the four noble truths. Besides, one
is to complete the ten paraimies for the attainment of Buddhahood. Pammi
means fulfilment. Ten paraimies are charity (dana), precepts (sila), renunciation
(nekkhamma), forgiveness (khanti), vigour (viriya), truth (sacca), self
determination (adhittahana), loving-kindness (metta), upekkha (neither
attachment nor aversion) and wisdom (panna), These paraimies have been again
divided into thirty types in accordance with parami upa-parami perfection and
paramattha parami. It is not very easy to attain fulfilment in all these. To fulfil all
these perfections, the influence of too many good deeds of many births is
required. To attain this influence, one has to take so many births. Not only
among the human beings, may be he was to take birth in other creatures. In those
innumerable lives, he has to accumulate virtues and parami accomplishing good
deeds. Thus many Buddhas emerged and will emerge in the world after fulfiling
all parami in their various births.

Introduction to Bodhisattva

Bodhisattva means a being who is determined to search for the ways to
emancipation from sufferings. The words ‘Bodhisattva’ comprises of the two
words Bodhi and Sattva. Here Bodhi means knowledge or wisdom. And Sattva
means the person who is absorbed in attaining wisdom. He has been able to
dedicate himself to the way of attaining knowledge or in search of attaining
emancipation from sufferings. He always strives to attain this great aim. So ina
genaral sense, Bodhisattva means that wise sattva inspired to attain Budhahood,
or the Sattva that rears up Bodhi is called Bodhisattva.

The inspiration for consciousness of Bodhisattva grows from the spontaneous
willfulness of the ascetic. But the code of manners becomes determined. This is
not a matter of emotion or inquisitiveness. This is a matter of conscious exercise
based on thoughtful decision. According to Buddhsit religion and philosophy,
the consciousness for Bodhisattva does not arise if there is not accumulation of
good deeds of many births. The practice of Bodhisattva life is fulfilled through
the attainment of Buddhahood. So, Bodhisattva is called the sprout of Buddha &
(Buddhangkura). This kind of consciousness is very rare and hard-earned. “

Buddha and Bodhisattva 29
Exercise
How is the wisdom of Buddha?
What is the meaning of the word Bodhisattva?
Lesson: 2
The Virtues of Buddha

The virtues of Buddha are infinite. It is hardly possible to express this sea of

virtues at a time. If we classify these virtues, it can be divided into nine

categories. From that sense, it can be said that there are nine virtues of Buddha;
these nine virtues are as follows:
1. He is Arhata : a great man free from all enemies (Ori);
2: He is Sammaka Sambuddha : He is omniscient in all subjects;
3. He is Vijjacaranasampanna: endowed with knowledge of theory that
should be practised and proper behavioural manners;
4. He is Sugata: He has beautifully reached to a nicer place like Nibbana;
5. He is Lokhavidu: He has perfect knowledge about three worlds.
6. He is Anuttar: He occupies the higest place in the virtues of Sila
(precepts), Samadhi, and wisdom;
7: He is Purisadammasarathi : He is the Subduer of all evil powers.
8. He is Satthadevamanussanam : He is the teacher and guide of all Devas
(gods) and human beings;
9. He is Buddhabhagava : He is the Buddha attaining fulfilment in all kinds
of knowledge, He is the bhagavant in respect of that allout supreme
knowl edge.
It is not possible for the commoners to attain these virtues of Buddha. It is also
very difficult even to realize the importance of these sea of virtues. Only one,
Who can attain any one of the qualities of Buddha, is able to realize the
S importance of these virtues. For this reason, it is said that the Buddha's virtues
8 .

are unthinkable.

30 Buddhist religion and moral education
Each of the steps of the nine virtues described above is combined and enriched
with manifold aspects. For example, Arahat or being free from all kinds of ene-
mies means the upliftment to the eight fold Samadhicarya. These are to
exercise gradually, completely forsaking anger, jealousy, illusion and cravings.
The positive output attained at every step of this gradual method of practice
should be well preserved consciously. If one can keep steady the improved state
of mind caused by Sadhanacarya and Carya, he can practice for the next step.
Thus, through long practice it becomes possible to cross one step after another.
In Budhist literature, these are called the practice for the attainment of Magga or
Phala (result). These are: 1) Sotapatti Magga 2) Sotapattiphala
3) Sakkidagamimagga 4) Sakkidagamiphala 5) Anagami Magga 6) Anagami
phala, 7) Arahata Magga 8) Arahataphala. So, Arahata means the fulfilment of
the eight fold higher level methods of practice. The person who is uplifted to this
level he is a worshipper victorious over everything.
Sammaka Sambuddha means to be totally self-informed of noble truth at one's
own initiative. For this, one has to attain fulfilment in the three levels of wisdom.
These are: 1) He has attained knowledge on what is essential to know, such as
knowledge on noble truth; 2) He has thought what is worth thinking, according
to that he has attained knowledge by his ownself performing all the necessary
works by himself; and 3) He carefully forsakes what is to be abandoned. Thus
He has become a pure great man without any craving. In the same way, all the
levels of Buddha's virtues are highly significant. So, it is said that the virtues of
Buddha are indescribable, unthinkable.
Exercise
What are the nine virtues of Buddha?
Name the stages of practice for attainning Magga and Phala.
Lesson: 3
Types of Buddha

In Buddhsit religious books, there is mention of three kinds of Buddha. Viz:

1. Samma Sambuddha or Sammaka Sambuddha.

2. Pacceka Buddha or Protteka Buddha.

3. Savaka Buddha or Sravaka Buddha. eo
Now we will know about these three types of Buddha. 8

Buddha and Bodhisattva 31
Sammaka Sambuddha
Among the Buddhas, Sammaka Sambuddha is the best. Sammaka Sambuddha
means the person who attains Buddhahood by the ceaseless efforts and his own
ideals and activities, without the help of any master. He is endowed with the best
knowledge. The Sammaka Sambuddhas fulfil the ten parami by the practice of
several births. In his last birth, he takes birth in a suitable family of human
beings. As the influence of good deeds in several births before, he becomes the
Buddha in this birth attaining Arahataphala or ommiscience.
Sammaka Sambuddhas do not become Buddha only for their own sake. They
become the Buddha with the aim of opening the door of allout emancipation for
all beings of the world. So for the welfare of all creatures they preach the way of
emancipation from sorrows and means of attaining Nibbana.
According to Buddha, the arrival of Sammaka Sambuddha is very rare in this
world. No two Sammaka Sambuddha appear at a time in this world. Thousands
of years after a Sammaka Sambuddha's Parinibbana, another Sammaka
Sambuddha appears. According to that, there are twenty eight Buddha appaered
in this world till now.
From the study of the book 'Buddhavamsa', we can know about 28 Buddhas.
According to the description in this book, Gautama Buddha is the last Sammaka
Sambuddha. The followers of Buddhism have been practising this religion
preached by Gautama Buddha for more than 2500 years. The Buddhists worship
keeping in front of them the effigy or the portrait of Him. Because He showed
people the way to liberation from sufferings and relief from craving as the last
Sammaka Sambuddha and directed them the means of attaining Nibbana. He
foretold that there a Sammaka Buddha will emerge in this world in the name of
Arya Mitra. Thus, with the passage of time after completing the ten perfections,
there appears each Buddha with a gap of infinite periods.
Pacceka Buddha
The Pacceka Buddha is an emancipated great man who has attained fulfilment in
the practice of self liberation. Following the methods of practice instructed by
Sammaka Sambuddha, they destroy all kinds of cravings. Thus they become
Buddha attaining Arahataphala by dint of self efforts. The Pacceka Buddha
attains Nibbana after their death protecting rebirth. The wisdom of Peccka
« Buddha, acquired by meditation is confined to themselves only. They do not
S unveil the way to the emancipation for others.

32 Buddhist religion and moral education
Pacceka Buddhas are basically the followers of Sammaka Sambuddha.
Innumerable Pacceka Buddhas as such who acquired Arhataphala (fruits of
Arahantship) and on the way to Nibbana have been produced in this world and
will be produced in future. For this reason the Buddhists believe that the world
is not Arhataless or Buddhaless. Like the Sammak Buddhas, the Pacceka
Buddhas are not vocal. They meditate in silence and solitariness.
Savaka Buddha
Savaka Buddha is the virtuous man who is expert in practising the rules of
Sammaka Sambuddha. There are a lot of disciples of a Sammaka Sambuddha.
These disciples also have a lot of disciples. These disciples and sub-disciples
remain absorbed in meditation for emancipation following the way instructed by
Sammaka Sambuddha. Among them many gain Arhataphala. They will not
suffer taking birth any more. They are on the way to Nibbana. This kind of an
emancipated man is called Savaka Buddha.
The Savaka Buddhas stand in the highest position in the practice of religion and
philosophy of Sammaka Sambuddha. There are Savaka Buddhas in the
followers of each Sammaka Sambuddha. Many of the disciples of Gautama
Buddha were Savaka Buddha. Among them the name of Aggasavaka Sariputta
and Moggallana, Mahakassapa, Vinayadhara Upali, Dhamma Bhadarika
Ananda, Labhisetthi Sivali etc, are noteworthy. Moreover this, there had been
many Savak Buddha at the time of Buddha. They kept themselves involved in
the welfare of all beings of the world and helped others to attain Nibbana.
Exercise
Into which category does Gautama Buddha include among the three types
of Buddha ? Describe the qualities of a Pacceka Buddha.
Name some Savaka Buddha.
Lesson: 4
The Virtues of Bodhisattva

The supreme virtue of Bodhisattva is to be determined to fulfil the ten
perfections. This is the main factor of Bodhisattva to exercise. The practice of
these perfections naturally brings about a lot of changes in the life style of
Bodhisattva which make Bodhisattva matchless and extraordinary from other
people. These extraordinary characteristic features are the virtues of ~
Bodhisattva. &

Buddha and Bodhisattva 33
The virtue of Bodhisattva is not created all on a sudden. These virtues are
attained gradually, step by step, in the practice of Bodhisattvahood. For example,
the consciousness of Bodhisattva prevails in everybody's mind but everybody is
not termed as Bodhisattva. The person who has become determined to attain
Buddhahood and has been determined to meditate for the fulfilment of
perfections; he is a Bodhisattva in the real sense of the term. The characteristic
features that one earns with the intention of attaining fulfilment of perfections
are the virtues of Bodhisattva.

The practise of worship of Bodhisattva is a long term process. This is to be

practised life after life. One must earn some virtues for the attainment of the

Bodhisattva career. These cannot be attained through the efforts of one life. It

requires continuous efforts of many lives. One can be the owner of the virtues of

Bodhisattva through such ceaseless efforts. The virtues of Bodhisattva are as

follows:

1. Impermanence in everything - a Bodhisattva accepts this idea as the highest
truth of his life style.

2. The Bodhisattvas become the well wisher of all creatures accepting the
philosophy of Lord Buddha as the only way.

3. The Bodhisattvas accept the self doings as the companions of their many
births. So, the unselfish, greedless activities is the main characteristic of
Bodhisattva.

4. The only aim of Bodhisattva is the attainment of Buddhahood. They never
think of name and fame.

5. The Bodhisattvas can sacrifice their lives. But they never get derailed
from the practice of truth.

6. The Bodhisattvas, being inspired with the ideals of truth, justice and sacrifice,
get determined to practise the Sila (precepts), Samadhi and wisdom.

7. The Bodhisattvas always wish well of all creatures. They do not
discriminate between a close relation and a distant one.

8. The Bodhisattvas become the best followers of Metta (loving-kindness)
Karuna (compassion), Mudita (sympathy) and Upekkha (neither attachment
nor aversion).

9. The Bodhisattvas get determined to practise ten paramies.

Forma-5, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

34 Buddhist religion and moral education
10. The Budhisattvahood is a spontaneous practise. The Bodhisattvas become
able to control their minds being enforced with their own consciousness.

Only the noteable and the rarest virtues of Bodhisattva are mentioned above.
Exercise Work
Mention the qualities by which we can recognize the Bodhisattva.
Lesson: 5
Types of Bodhisattva
The practice of Bodhisattvahood is very difficult. This sort of practice requires
hard contemplation and extreme self sacrifice determined with firm
consciousness. Human beings cannot exercise the Bodhisattvahood easily.
Because, the instinct and the self interest lead the human beings towards easy
getting things. Human beings cannot think of supreme emancipation. According
to Buddhist religion, Bodhisattva is of three types. Such as:
a) Savaka Bodhisattva
b) Pacceka Bodhisattva
c) Sammmaka Sambodhisattva.
a. Savaka Bodhisattva : Here Savaka means listener, audience, disciple or the
one who has acquired the knowledge of Bodhi inspired with respect and desire.
As this practice is originated from listening, observing, and desire it is not
driven by emotion but out of firm determination. The disciples or semi disciples
of Gautama Buddha who were engaged in this sort of practice of the path of
knowledge (gyana marga) were called Savaka Bodhisattva. Through the
fulfilment of practice (Sadhana), the Savaka Bodhisattvas are uplifted to Savaka
Buddha. Savaka Bodhisattva Sariputta and Moggallayna etc. became the Savak-
abuddha during the period of Buddha.
b. Pacceka Bodhisattva : The worshipper who is involved in attaining perfect
knowledge in the way showed by Buddha, at his own initiative and
independently without being under any master, is called Pacceka Bodhisattva.
The Pacceka Bodhisattvas, though endowed with all the virtues of perfect
knowledge, can not influence other by the light of their own virtues. Many of the ~
disciples of Buddha belonged to this stage. S

Buddha and Bodhisattva 35
c. Sammaka Sambodhisattva : This is the best process to practise the
Bodhisattvahood. The followers of Bodhicitta-sadhana who are engaged to the
welfare of all creatures are called Sammaka Sambodhisattva. With the fulfilment
of their practise, they become Sammaka Sambuddha. For example, Gautama
Buddha is a Sammaka Sambuddha. The Sammaka Sambudhisattvas hope for the
liberation of his own self through the liberation of all creatures. In this way they
practise parami.
Again the Bodhisattva can be divided into three parts according to the method of
practice. The Bodhisattva can be divided into three parts on the basis of the
source of context or how the inspiration for the practise of Bodhisattvahood
arose. Viz:
1. Pannadhika Bodhisattva Proggyadhika Bodhisattva
2. Saddhadhika Bodhisattva
3. Viriyadhika Bodhisattva.
1) Proggyadhik Bodhisattva: The Bodhisattva that gives the highest
mportance to the practise of knowledge for attaining the desired goal is called
the Pannadhika Bodhisattvas. The Bodhisattvas of this stage control their own
mind through the practice of parami of wisdom and gradually attain fulfilment
of other parami.
Thus the Badhisattvas become analytical in all aspects. They assess and analyze
each matter in the light of their wisdom. They go forward to their self directions
according to the decision taken in the light of their attained knowledge and
experience.
2) Saddhadhika Bodhisattva: The Bodhisattva that renders highest
importance to Saddha (faith) for the attainment of a goal is called Saddhadhika
Bodhisattva. The Bodhisattvas of this stage faithfully and gradually fulfil the
paramies. The Saddhadhika Bodhisattvas are usually devout worshippers. They
are determined to make the practice perfect till their death if they once accept an
ideal with a faithful mind.
3) Viriyadhika Bodhisattva: The Bodhisattva that gives the highest
importance to the efforts of doing works for the attainment of the goal is called
the Viriyadhika Bodhisattva. The Bodhisattvas of this stage bring their minds in
x control through the practice of Viriya Parami (viriya Perfection) and gradually
S
x)

36 Buddhist religion and moral education
attains fulfilment of other perfections. The Viriyadhika Bodhisattvas love to
practise hard. They are involved in hard worship. They remain unmoved in their
practice being endowed with the influence of Viriya Parami.
Describe the characteristics of Savaka Bodhisattva.
Who is Pannadhika (Proggyadhika) Bodhisattva ?
Lesson: 6
Difference between Buddha and Bodhisattva
The person who strives to attain perfect knowledge (Bodhigyana) is called
Bodhisattva. Bodhisattva is not Buddha. They are called the future Buddha or
the sprout of Buddha. He will be a Buddha in some future birth. For becoming a
Buddha, he has to be born in different clans for innumerable times and he has to
fulfil ten upa-parami, ten parami and tenparamattha parami. It means that one
has to attain self purification through the practice of each three stages of ten
parami ( dasa parami) which is a continuation of the deeds of several hundred
births. The main aim of Bodhisattva is to liberate oneself from the desires of all
kinds.
Before attainment of Budhahood Gautama Buddha took many birth. This can be
known from the study of Buddhist religious texts. Though He was termed in
different names in those births, His main identity is Bodhisattva. As Bodhisattva
once He was blessed by the previous Buddha Dipankara. Dipankara Sammaka
Sambuddha appeared in this world innumerable years ago. At that time Gautama
Buddha was leading the life of Bodhisattva. Then He lived in the cityof | Am-
aravati in the name of Bodhisattva Sumedha Tapasa. Dipankara Buddha was
invited to this Amaravati city along with his disciples.
The city of Amaravati was not so developed in its communication system
though it repleted with wealth and paddy. It was rainy season then. The road was
muddy because of rainfall. The city dwellers were busy in repairing the road for
the communication of Buddha. Sumedha Tapasa also took part in this activity.
It was almost time for the arrival of Buddha. But the repair work was yet to be 2
finished. aq

Buddha and Bodhisattva 37
In the meantime Dipankara Buddha has almost reached to the incomplete road
along with His disciples. Only a few yards of repair works was yet to be
completed. If was almost time for the arrival of Buddha. The city dewellers
fell into a deep thought. Sumedha Tapasa found no other way. Throwing down
the spade from his hand, he lay down on the muddy road with deep respect. He
requested Dipankara Buddha very humbly to go on over his lain body.
Dipankara Buddha realized his mental consciousness. In Sumedha Tapasa he
foresaw a firmness to reach goal. Then Dipankara Buddha kept his request. To
cross the road, he put his legs on the lain body of Sumedha Tapasa. Just at that
time Sumedha Tapasa desired, with a respectful mind, the blessing of Dipankar
Buddha for the fulfilment of his expectation to be the future Sammaka
Sambuddha. Dipankara Buddha found all the symptoms of a future Buddha in
Sumedha Tapasa. Then he blessed Sumedha Tapasa for the fulfilment of his
prayer. His blessings enforced Sumedha Tapasa's desire for the practice of
Boddhisattvahood. He was able to fulfil all parami through the meditation of life
after life. As a result of this good deed, he took his birth in the house of king
Suddhadana in his last birth. At this time he was named Siddhartha. At a suitable
time, Siddhartha left home and attained Buddhahood through rapt meditation
and earned fame as 'Buddha’.
Buddha, before being born as Siddhattha, was engrossed in the practice of
odhisattva life in his innumerable births. His Bodhisattva life is described in
Jataka literature. According to the description of Jataka, Gautama Buddha was
born as Bodhisattva for 550 times. In the different stories of Jataka, there is
mention that he fulfilled the parami through the different activities like
bountifulness ( dana ), practice of religion and serving others etc. As a part of
fulfilment of these parami activities he took birth as human being, bird, and
various animal, In the most beautiful Jataka, it is seen that Bodhisattva was born
in Kusavati city as a king named Mahasudarshana. In Banarindra Jataka, he was
born as monkey. He was born as king Makhadeva in Makhadeva Jataka and as
king Mahajanaka in Mahajanaka Jataka. Moreover, Boddhisattva was also born
in different clans like Candal, Sudra, Khattiya, peacock, pegion, elephant etc ..
The only aim of those births was to attain Buddhahood by fulfilling the parami.
co From this discussion, it is clear that there is difference between Buddha and
§ Bodhisattva. Among these some differences are given below:

38 Buddhist religion and moral education
1.Buddha-a title regarding the fulfilment 1.Bodhisattva— a title for the practiser of
of overall knowledge and virtues. overall knowledge.

: 2.The practice of parami of Bodhisattva’s
2.Budhahood can be attained through the is expedited through the efforts of many
fulfilment of the ten parami. As the biths. Nobody can attain Nibbatw in the
Buddhas are liberated from craving of all tat sf B fl rf hood
kinds, they attain Parinibbana. State oF 80 . Sa ood.

.., | 3-The Bodhisattvas are not the foreseers of
3.The Buddhas are endowed with} Trial, They are more prompt to
knowledge of present past and future. So| consciously accomplish the good deeds in
they are called the foreseer of Trikala. the present birth.
4.The Buddhas are omniscient. They have) 4.The Bodhisattvas are the practiser of
knowledge about everything-mundane or] attaining omniscient knowledge. They are
beyond mundane. They can foretell the] ignorant of the present or after life of the
present life and after life of all creatures] creatures. It is impossible for them to
along with human beings. foretell in this regard.
5.The Buddhas possess steady mind. They| 5.There might be a restlessness of mind
stand above greed, jealously, passion, | among the Bodhisattvas. They are not the
antipathy, eulogy etc. They are} emancipated great men like the Buddhas.
emancipated greatman. 6.The Bodhisattvas cannot foretell about
6.The Buddhas can foreshadow the| any future Buddha or Boddhisattva.
appearance or fibure Budha, . 7.The Bodhisattvas themselves do not
7.The Buddhas preach the religion and) preach any philosophy. Always they are
philosophy realized by them. the followers of the religion and

philosophy preached by Buddha.

Exercise

Fill in the blanks

1. The simple meaning of the word Buddha is ................0+65

2. Only after the fulfilment of the meditation for ten parami ................ 1S

attained.

3. The person who meditates for the attainment of Bodhigyan is called ................

4. There are ......................... in the followers of each Sammak Sambuddha.

5. The Bodhisattvas get determined to practise ...............:00.. param.

6. According to the narration of Jataka, Gautama Buddha was born ..............

times as Bodhisattva. co

7. In the state of Bodhisattva, it is not possible for anybody to attain ............. 8

Buddha and Bodhisattva 39
Short questions
1. How many types of Buddhas are there and what are they?
2. How many types of Bodhisattvas are there and what are they?
3. Why are the virtues of Buddha unthinkable?
4. Where is the life story of Bodhisattva narrated?
Essay type questions
1. Describe the process of attaining Buddhahood.
2. Differentiate between Buddha and Bodhisattva.
3. Analyze the importance of the virtues of Buddha.
Multiple choice questions
1. What is the meaning of the word Bodhi?
a) Supreme knowledge b) The Knowledge about birth
c) General knowledge d) Knowledge about Brahma.
2. Which one is the main cause for calling Sammak Sambuddha the
best Buddha?
a) Having more than one disciple
b) Attaining fulfilment in the practice of self-emancipation.
c) Showing way to liberation from sufferings and decaying of
cravings.
d) For not coming in touch with the master.
Read the following passage and answer question no. 3 and 4
The king of Vessantara was kind to all creatures. He could not tolerate
the sufferings of anybody. With a view to liberating all creatures and with
the hope of fulfilling the Dana Parami, he dedicated his life giving away all
his wealth.
3. What kind of Bodhisattva is the king of Vessantara called?
~ a) Pacceka Bodhisattva b) Sammaka Sambodhisattva
a c) Savaka Bodhisattva d) Saddhadhik Bodhisattva.

40 Buddhist religion and moral education
4. With a view to liberating all creatures, the kind of knowledge the
king of Vessantara would attain of Buddha and Bodhisattva is —

i. Knowledge on noble truths
ii. Perfect knowledge
iii. Omniscient knowledge
Which one is correct below?
a) iandii b) ii and iii
c) iand iii d) i, ii and iii
Creative questions
Bijoy Barna was the follower of Tiratna. He was always involved in doing
good deeds. He always listened to the religious instructions of the monk with
great respect. He got to know that a monk who has attained Magga was going
to meditate in the deep jungle. Knowing this he reached there before the
monk and cleaned the jungle with lot of hardship. He managed a nice seat for
the purpose and going far away to the locality made the opportunity for

Pindacarana.

a) What is Jatisvaragyana (knowledge about birth)?

b) Briefly explain why practice of Bodhisattva life is very difficult.

c) With the characteristics of which worshipper there is a hint of
Bijoy Borua’s characteristics — explain.

d) ‘Bijoy Barua is worthy of being a Savaka Buddha in any of his
birth’— do you agree with this statement? Give reasons in support
of your answer.

2. Read the following and answer the questions below
perfections through self practice follower of Sammaka
is speedy Sambuddha
Chart-1 Chart-2 Chart-3

a) Whose appearance in the world is very rare?

b) Why is the virtue of Buddha unthinkable? Explain in brief.

c) Whose characteristics do chart one hint? Explain.

d) Differentiate and analyze the comparative activities of those x

directed in chart 1 and 2. 8

Chapter Three
Tipitaka

The Tipitaka is the holy religious book of the Buddhists. The main basis of the
Tipitaka is the religion and philosophy of Buddha. The Tipitaka is written in Pali
language. Though it is a religious book, it contains important information about
the religion, philosophy, society, culture, arts and literature, politics, economics,
Geography, archaeology etc. of ancient Indian sub-continent. For this reason, the
Tipitaka is also called the storehouse of historical information of the Indian
Subcontinent. As the contents of Tipitaka enrich the religious knowledge, so
does it develop the moral and humanistic qualities of the human beings. In this
chapter we will study about the holy religious book the Tipitaka.
By the end of this chapter we will be able to —

* Give idea about the Tipitaka along with its background

* Narrate the subject matter along with the names of the books included in

Tipataka
* Explain the necessity of the study of the Tipitaka.
Lesson: 1
Background of the Tipitaka

Buddha did not give any religious instruction in written form. His disciples
memorised and preached the religious instructions given by Him on different
occasions in different places. The disciples of Buddha were endowed with sharp
memory. They could preserve the words of Buddha easily in their memory. Each
of the disciples of Buddha was endowed with individual qualities. Some of them
were expert in Vinaya, some in Sutta, some in explaining the religious words of
Forma-1, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

42 Buddhist religion and moral education
Buddha, some in philosophy, and some in preaching religion. For this reason, the
disciples of Buddha were endowed in different titles. such as, Vinayadhara,
Sutradhara, Abhidharmadhara, Dharmakathika, Aggsavaka, Mahasavaka etc.
The monk Upali was Vinayadhara. He was efficient in the preservation,
observance and explanation of Buddhist Vinaya. In the same way Ananda was
Sutradhara. He used to preserve the suttas preached by Buddha. For this reason,
he was called Dharmabhandarika (storehouse of Dhamma). Mahakaccayana,
Sariputta, Mahakotthita Thera were foremost in the explanation of Buddha's
religion and philosophy. Buddha had innumerable disciples. Endowed with
sharp memory, these disciples were very careful in preserving, observance, and
preaching the words of Buddha. Then none of them thought of writing down
these precious words.

The disciples of Buddha did not always stay in one place. They used to go to
different place to preach the words of Buddha. During the life time of Buddha,
he used to solve any kind of problems created in the Sangha, sometimes the
leading disciples of Buddha solved such problems with Buddha's permission. As
a result, there was no serious problem during the life time of Buddha. But in the
attainment of Mahaparinibbana of Buddha, some immodest Bhikkhu felt
delighted because they would not have to abide by the rules of Vina ya anymore.
After Buddha's Mahaparinibbana, the disciples of Buddha began to cry. Then
Subhadra, the last disciple of Buddha, forbade the Bhikkhus to mourn and said,
‘At the death of Mahasamanera we have become free from all sorts of
disturbances and now we are at our own will.' The disciples of Buddha became
worried about the loss and distortion of the words of Buddha realizing the
speech of Subhadra and the attitude of the immodest disciple. They
apprehended, if the words of Buddha remain unwritten, at any time there might
be a distortion to it. Then the disciples of Buddha led by Mahakassapa Thera
arranged for the councils for the first time. They took initiative to collect the
words of Buddha. After three months of the great passing away of Buddha, this
council was held in the Saptapanni cave of Rajageha under the patronisation of
king Ajatattu. In the council 500 Arhant Bhikkhu were present. In the council,
Upali and Ananda, the foremost disciples of Buddha, recited dhamma-vinaya
respectively. Their recitation of dhamma-vinaya was approved as the words of
Buddha by the Bhikkhu Sangha present there.

=
Rg

Tipitaka 43
This council lasted for long seven months. Thus, with the heartfelt efforts of the
Bhikkhu Sangha, the words of Buddha were given a written form in two parts -
Dhammma and Vinaya in the first council.
The disciples of Buddha preserved and preached memorising the dhamma and
Vinaya collected in the first council. But after hundred years of the great passing
away of Buddha, the monks from Vajji clans (Vajjaputtriya) introduced ten rules
which had no connection with the Vinaya created division in the Sangha and there
arose a debate regarding the words of Buddha. Then, to get relief from this
debate, the second council was arranged. The second council was held at the
Balukarama ofVesali with the leadership of Yasha Thera and patomization of king
Kalashoka. This council lasted for eight months. Seven hundred Arhant Bhikkhus
attended this council.
In the second council the present Bhikkhus assessed and analysed the rules and
regulations introduced by the monks of Vajji clans and gave their verdict against
it as unlawful and after the re-recitation approved the dhamma and Vinaya
collected in the first council as the true words of Buddha. The Bhikkhus went on
preserving and preaching after getting it by heart. But during the time of Emperor
Ashoka, Buddhism gained royal patronisation and the benefit and respect
towards the Buddhist monks incraesed. As a result, the Tirthaks (ascetic) of other
religion started to enter into the Buddhist Sangha in the guise of monks. They
started preaching non-religion as religion and religion as non-religion. So, it
created a chaos in Sangha and a doubt about the real words of Buddha. To solve
this problem, it was decided to hold the third council. Then, at the patronization
of Emperor Ashoka and under the presidentship of Moggaliputta Tissa Thera the
third council was held at Ashokarama Vihara of Patliputra. This council lasted for
nine months. Imitating the first and second council, the words of Buddha were
collected again in this council after re-recitation. In this council, the philosophical
words of Buddha were collected separately giving a name Abhidhamma. The
Buddhists believe that Abhidhamma was included in Dhamma. So, the words of
Buddha were divided as only dhamma and vinaya in the first and second council.
In the third council, the words of Buddha were divided into three parts and were
collected as Sutra, Vinaya and Abhidhamma which are recognised as the Tipitaka.

2

R

44 Buddhist religion and moral education
After the third council the words of Buddha were spread over outside India by
the patronisation Emperor Asoka. Mahinda Thera, son of Emperor Asoka, mem-
orised Tipitaka along with some of his companions and carried it to Ceylon (Sin-
hal). There it was preached orally. Because of warfare, famine, and other
reasons, there arose an apprehension of loss of Buddhasasana (the religion of
Buddha) in Ceylon. To save the words of Buddha from distorfron and extinction,
initiatives were taken to give it a written form. Then in the first century B.C, at
the patronisation of the king of Ceylon Vattagamani, Tipitaka was written on the
palm leaf and thus the words of Buddha were given a permanent form. In course
of time, to give the Tipitaka a more permanent form it was engraved on the stone
from palm leaf, written on paper and contained and preserved in tape recorder.
To give it the form of a book, the Pali Text Society of London played an
important role. Moreover this, different organisations of different countries like
Thailand, Sri Lanka, and Myanmar played important role in the publication of
the words of Buddha as book. Thus, the words of Buddha took the form of the
Tipitaka overcoming a lot of topsy-turvy.
Exercise
Why and where were the words of Buddha collected first?
When were the words of Buddha compiled in the form of the Tipitaka?
Where and when did the words of Buddha take the written form?
Lesson: 2
Introduction to the Tipitaka

‘The Tipitaka' is the collection of invaluable words uttered by the great Buddha.
The word Tipitaka is the combination of the words 'ti' and 'Pitaka'. 'Ti' means
‘three' and 'Pitaka' means container, pot, basket, etc. The words of Buddha are
divided into three streams based on its nature and kind and preserved in three
Pitika or baskets. So, it is called Tipitaka. Three Pitakas are: 1) Sutta Pitaka, 2)
Vinaya Pitaka and 3) Abhidhamma Pitaka. The part that contains the religious
works of Buddha as sutra is called sutta or sutra Pitaka. Suttapitaka is divided
into five main parts. Such as: Digha Nikaya, Majjhima Nikaya, Samyutta 2
Nikaya, Anguttara Nikaya, and Khuddaka Nikaya. The word Nikaya means &

Tipitaka 45
group, part, community etc. The long discourses uttered by Buddha are collected
in Digha Nikaya. So, this is called Digha Nikaya. The Nikaya or the part in
which the discourses of middle length are collected is known as Majjhima
Nikaya. The Nikaya which is smaller in comparison to the previous two and the
Nikaya in which the discourses related to the subject matters of multifarious
affairs is collected is called Samyutta Nikaya. The Nikaya which arranges the
suttas in the gradual development of numbers is called Anguttara Nikaya. In this
Nikaya the subject matters are collected as Eknipata ( one nipata), Dukanipata
(two nipata), tikanipata (three nipata) analysing into such gradual development
of numbers. The word Khuddhka means small or little. The Nikaya in which the
smaller discourses preached by Buddha are collected is called Khuddaka
Nikaya. There are sixteen books in Khuddhaka Nikaya. Viz: Khuddaka Patha,
Dhammapada, Udana, Itivuttaka, Suttanipata, Vimanavatthu, Petavatthu,
Thera-gatha, Theri-gatha, Jataka, Mahaniddesa, Cullaniddesa, and Cariya
Pitaka.
The word Vinaya means rules, ethics, discipline or regulations. The Pitaka
which contains the regulations instructed by Buddha is called Vinaya Pitaka.
Buddha promulgated these Vinayas or regulations with a view to leading the
Bhikkhu Sangha in a disciplined, righteous, mutual understanding and proper
manner. Vinaya Pitaka is mainly divided into three parts. Viz: 1) Sutta Vibhanga
2) Khandaka and 3) Parivara. Suttavibhanga is again divided into two:
Mahavibhanga and Khuddak Vibhanga. In Mahavibhanga there are rules and
regulations to be observed by the monks along with Parajika and Sanghadisesa.
So, it is called Parajikakanda or Bhikkhu Vibhanga. In Khuddakvibhanga there
are regulations to be observed by the nuns (bhikkhuni). It is also called Pacittiya
or Bhikkhunivibhanga. The rules and regulations mentioned in the two books of
Suttavibhanga are combinedly called Patimokkha. Khandaka is divided into two
parts. Viz: Mahavagga and Cullavagga. In the book Mahavagga there is the
continuous history of the life story of Buddha starting from the attainment of
Buddhahood to the establishment of Sangha. In the book Cullavagga, there is the
description of the first and second councils held after the great demise of
Buddha along with the different rules of the Bhikkhu Sangha.
Abhidamma is the minutest analysis of the philosophy of Buddha. Buddhist
philosophy is the main point of discussion in the Abhidamma Pitaka.
= Abhidamma Pitaka is divided into seven parts. Such as: 1) Dhammasangani, 2)
“ Vibhanga, 3) Dhatukatha, 4) Puggalapannatti, 5) Kathavatthu, 6) Yamaka, 7) Patthana.

46 Buddhist religion and moral education
The decision of the Tipitaka is shown in the chart below :
Sutta Vinaya Avidamma
Pitaka pitaka Pitaka
1. Digha Nikaya 1. Sutta Vibhanga : 1. Dhammangni
2. Mijjima Nikaya Mahavibhanga & 2. Vivanga
3. Sangjukta Nikaya Khuddaka vibhanga 3. Dhatukatha
4. Anguttar Nikaya 2. Khandaka : Mahavagga 4. Paggalapannatti
5. Kuddaka Nikaya & Cullvagga 5. Kathavatthu
3. Parivara or Parivara Patha 6. Yamaka
7. Patthana
fa 3 3
3 P= 3 3 g g Ey a |
El ell | 2/2 | lal /glelleliSiSelelal =
5 £I|- a ea | cal ZI|s 4
3 5 E S/S Ele lslles 2i|s a
BSW SVSH EUAN IIT I S21 Nels! @
g |/4 |}? | | a alli (6/2 |/3] 2
& m1d5
Exercise
In how many parts is Sutta Pitaka divided?
Name the books of Khuddaka Nikaya.
In how many parts is the Suttavibhanga
divided and what are they? Name the books 20
of the Abhidhamma Pitaka. 8

Tipitaka 47
Lesson: 3
Sutta Pitaka
Sutta Pitaka is divided into five parts. Such as: Digha Nikaya, Majjhima Nikaya, Samyutta
Nikaya, Anguttara Nikaya and Khuddaka Nikaya.
The Nikayas are described below:
a) Digha Nikaya: Digha Nikaya is the first book of Sutta Pitaka. In Digha
Nikaya there are 34 suttas in total. The Suttas are divided into three Vaggas. Viz:
Silakhandavagga, Mahavagga, and Patikavagga. There are 13 Suttas in the first
Vagga. The Suttas are composed in prose. There are 10 Suttas in the second
Vaggas and 11 Suttas in the third. Many suttas of the second and third vaggas are
composed in prose and poetry. The main subjects of discussion in this book are:
dana ( charity), sila (precepts), samadhi (meditation), panna (wisdom), jhana
(contemplation), salvation, impermanence, sorrow, non-soul (anatma), mind,
psychic factors and Nibbana etc. But relevantly, important discussion about
philosophy, politics, economics, geography, society, culture etc. of ancient
Indian subcontinent are also found in this Nikaya. Especially there is in Digha
Nikaya discussion about 62 types of religious and philosophical tenet and racial
system, and it delineates a clear cut conception about the ancient Indian
religious and social conditions of Buddha's contemporary period. Besides this,
there is a charming description of the biography of Buddha in the
Mahaparinibbana Sutta of Nikaya. In Digha Nikaya more importance is given to
build up moral and humanitarian life rather than religious philosophy.
b) Majjhima Nikaya: This is the second chapter of Sutta Pitaka. Majjhima
Nikaya is the best among the five Nikayas. Only the medium type Suttas have
been placed in this Nikaya. There are 152 Suttas here. The Suttas are divided
into three Vaggas. Such as: Mula Pannasaka, Majjhima Pannasaka Vagga and
Sela Pannasaka Vagga. There are 50 Suttas in the first and second Vaggas and 52
Suttas in the third. The main points of discussion in this Nikaya are: four noble
truths, eight noble paths, patiecasamuppada (dependent origination)
meaninglessness of the enjoyment of mundane happiness, absolut truth, nibbana
etc. This book also contains important information about the religious
philosophy of six Tirthika Sangha of Buddha's time. Moreover this, description
of the life styles of the Bhikkhus, the relationship between the laities, royal
x courtiers and the Bhikkhu Sangha; the social, economic, educational, and
“religious condition of India during the time of Buddha are also found here. This

48 Buddhist religion and moral education
book especially reflects the quintessential behavioral aspect of day to day life
and simple analysis of the same. So, Majjhima Nikaya is considered to be best
among the five Nikayas. Famous Acariya Buddhaghosa entitled Majjhima as the
best book among the books included in the Tipitaka.

c) Samyutta Nikaya: There are 56 Samyuttas or chapters in Samyutta Nikaya.
These are divided into five vaggas. There are 11 chapters in Sagatha vagga, 12
chapters in Nidana, 13 chapters in Khanda, 10 chapters Salayatana, and 12
chapters in Mahavagga. The totall number of suttas in five vaggas is 2889. The
suttas are composed in the combination of subjects related to morality,
psychology, philosophy etc. Though the suttas in Majjhima Nikaya are smaller in
comparison to the Digha and Majjhima Nikaya, these are very significant. The
subject matters are presented here dividing into three streams: 1) religion and
philosophy, 2) incidents related to god, human beings etc. and 3) religious
personalities. In the first Vagga importance is given to observance of precepts,
rites and rituals, leading ideal life and to build up moral character. The other
Vaggas are enriched in the discussion of religion, philosophy and miscellaneous.
In this Nikaya, there are some smaller poetry the literacy or philosophic value of
which is immense. These poems are composed in the form of conversation.
Besides, there are excellent description about King Prasenjit of Kosala,
Mahapajapati Gautami, defeat of Mars, instructions to the Brahmas by Buddha,
the conversation between Buddha and yakkha, taking refuge in Buddha, matters
of hospitality and gains, five aggregates, three kinds of feelings (vedana) etc. It
can be said that Samyutta Nikaya is very much enriched with the description of
spiritual, ethical and philosophical issues.

d) Anguttar Nikaya: There are 2308 suttas in Anguttar Nikaya. The suttas are
composed of prose and poetry and are divided into 11 nipat or chapters. The
nipatas or chapters are named after the number of discussion points. Viz: in Eka-
nipata or chapter one, only one topic is discussed; similarly, in Dukanipat two
topics are discussed. Each nipata or chapter is divided into some vaggas. There
are suttas of both types: small and large. In this Nikaya topics of manifold impor-
tance are included. Like the other Nikayas, in Anguttar Nikaya there is descrip-
tion about sila (precepts), samadhi (meditation), panna (wisdom), saddha
(respect), viriya (vigour) and vinaya. Besides, valuable description, about how to
control the restless mind, forsaking sin, three types of people, awareness about 2
three things : controlling the sense organs, eating food, vigilance; consequence %

Tipitaka 49
of Devadatta, Character of men and women, relationship between husband and
wife, duties and responsibilities etiquettes and manners of Buddhist devotees,
upasotha and the necessity of upasotha, sorrows and happiness, Sotapatti
Magga and Phala (results), Sakkidagami Magga and Phala, Anagami Magga
and Phala and Arhant Magga and Phala etc. are found here.
There is a fine description about the conviction system, geographical, social,
and religious conditions of ancient India in Anguttar Nikaya. Additionaly
important information about the kings and Maharajas of that time, the monks
and nuns, male and female devotees etc. it found. So, the historical value of
Anguttar Nikaya is immense.
e) Khuddaka Nikaya: Khuddaka Nikaya is the last part of Sutta Pitaka. The
subject matters of this Nikaya have been presented dividing it into sixteen parts.
In other words, Khuddaka Nikaya consists of 16 books. The subject matters of
each of the books are different from each other. There is no continuation among
the themes of the books. In Khuddhak Nikaya the diversities of topics are
noticed. So, Khuddak Nikaya is also called Pakinnaka Sangaha (collection of
miscellious). Though the books are small in size, the importance of the subject
matter is boundless. The newly initiated Bhikkhu Samaneras learn the books of
Khuddak Nikaya before learning the other books. The books included under
Khuddak Nikaya : 1) Khuddak Patha, 2) Dhammapada, 3) Udana, 4) Itivuttaka,
5) Sattanipata, 6) Vimanvatthu, 7) Petavatthu 8) Theragatha, 9) Therigatha, 10)
Jataka, 11) Mahaniddesa, 12) Cullaniddesa, 13) Patisambhidamagga, 14) Apad-
ana, 15) Buddhavamgsa, 16) Cariya Pitaka.
Exercise
Show the books of the Tipitaka in a chart.
How are the subject matters arranged in Anguttara Nikaya?
Make a list of the books included in Khuddaka Nikaya.
Forma-7, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

50 Buddhist religion and moral education
Lesson: 4
Vinaya Pitaka

Vinaya is called the life of Buddhasasana. Because, without Vinaya the stability
of Buddhasasana is unimaginable. The stability of Buddhasasana depends on
the stability of Vinaya. It is said that if Vinaya Pitaka is exercised with great
caress, deep respect and pride, the Buddha's religion will never be perished even
if the Sutta and Abhidhamma are lost. Vinaya was collected first in the first
council held after three months of the great demise of Buddha realising the
importance of Vinaya. The other name of Vinaya is ‘rule’, ‘ethics' or ‘discipline
etc. In simple meaning Vinaya is called 'Sila’. Everything in this world is led by
tules and discipline. Planets, stars everything rotate by rule.
The matchless beauty of the world, accumulation rainbow colours, sunrays,
everything is tied by the rule of cause and effect. The need for rules and
discipline in our daily life is most essential. Immodesty, laziness, cheer-monger,
immorality, spend thriftness, greed, jealousy, passion, lack of good manners are
against the development of all kinds. On the other hand, rules, discipline,
modesty, strength of character, precepts, meditation, enthusiasm, inspiration,
efforts, punctuality, self sacrifice, respect, satisfaction, wisdom and good deeds
are the key to all kinds of development. Buddha promulgated the rules of
Vinaya for the development of the Bhikkhu Sangha. The rules ofVinaya are a
must for leading the day to day life and for the development of spiritual life. So
Buddha said:

Satavassopi pabbajja sikkhanto pitakattayam

Ovadam nanuvattante nirayam so uppaijjati.

Meaning: ‘If any Bhikkhu does not observe the precepts completely even
after studying the Tipitaka for hundred years he is to go to the hell after death’
Moreover he said:

tassapasadhikang hoti pattacivaram dharanam

Pabbajja saphala tassa yassa sila sunimmalam.

=
Rg

Tipitaka Sl
Meaning: He, whose character is stainless, is worthy of civara and bowls. The
life of a pious man is the happiest.
Understanding the theme of the above mentioned gathas, any wise man should
be well educated at Vinaya and should behave in a modest way. Vinaya is the
basis of all good deeds. Though Vinaya is the compulsory rule to be observed by
the bhikkhu samaneras, here there are beautiful directions about leading a pious
family life. The practice of Vina ya arises the ethical and humane virtues. So, the
practice of Vinaya is most essential.
Vinaya Pitaka is divided mainly into three parts. Viz:

a) Sutta vibhanga : It is divided into Bhikkhu Vibhanga and Bhikkhuni

Vibhanga.

b) Khandaka: It is divided into Mahavagga and Cullavagga

c) Parivara or Parivara Patha.
a) Sutta Vibhanga: The first book ofViraya Pitaka is sutta vibhanga. The
meaning of the word sutts is sutra, and Vibhanga means to ‘break down' which
means to break into the minutest parts to explain gist. So, the word 'Sutta
Vibhanga’ means to ‘explanation of the sutta’ which means the detailed
explanation of the rules or basic teachings of Vinaya. In Sutta Vibhanga there is
found detailed explanation of 22 Patimokkha Sila. The main theme of Sutta
Vibhanga is the minutest analysis of how and where was Buddha assigned the
rules? Who is the breacher of precepts? How to determine the crimes regarding
the purification of the precepts? What ways of punishment can redeem the
objected Bhikkhu from the objection of breaching the precepts? According to
the importance, the rules of Sutta Vibhanga are divided into eight categories.
Viz: Parajika, Sanghadisesa, Aniyata, Nisaggiya, Pacittiya, Patidesaniya, Sekhi-
ya, and Adhikarana Samatha. These principles are collected into two books
Bhikkhu Vibhanga and Bhikkhuni Vibhanga. In these books there is explanation
of what crime is committed by breach of what principle and what is its panacea.
So, Sutta Vibhanga is also called scripture of law or principles.

2
Rg

52 Buddhist religion and moral education
1. Bhikkhu Vibhanga: It is the first book of Vinaya pitaka. In this book the rules
related to Vinaya of the Bhikkhus are written. Here it is mentioned where, how,
to whom did Buddha address or directed this rules and principles, fault of the
breaker of precepts and the ways to redeem from it. The rules to be observed by
the Bhikkhus are narrated dividing it into eight parts. Such as, Parajika,
Sanghadisesa, Aniyata, Nissaggiya, Pacittiya, Patidesaniya, Sekhiya and Adhi-
karana Samatha. There are explanations of 227 Silas (precepts) in total.
2. Bhikkhuni Vibhanga: The rules to be observed by the nuns are written in this
book. This is composed as complementary to Bhikkhu Vibhanga. In this book,
the rules to be observed by the Bhikkhunis are narrated dividing it into eight
parts. Viz: Parajika, Sanghadisesa, Aniyata, Nissaggiya, Pacittiya, Patidesania
Sekhiya and Adhikarana Samatha. The numbers of precepts for the nuns is 311.
It may be mentioned that number of precepts for the nuns is 84 more than that of
the monks.
The books Bhikkhu Vibhanga and Bhikkhuni Vibhanga included in Sutta
Vibhanga are also known as Parajika and Pacittiya.
b) Khanddaka:
Khanddaka is the name of the second book of Vinaya Pitaka. Here the incidents
after the attainment of sambodhi of Buddha are mentioned. The Especiality of
khandaka is that here the rules and regulations of vinaya are given importance.
Khandaka is enriched with the information like the religion society, culture, poli-
tics, economics, geography, traveling, construction and development and many
such historical information and theory of ancient India. Khandaka is divided into
two parts : Mahavagga and Cullavagga.
1. Mahavagga:
The book Mahavagga is divided into ten chapters or Khandas. Viz: 1.
Mahakhanda 2. Upasath 3. Vaisupanayika 4. Pavarana 5. Camma 6. Vesajja 7.
Kathina 8. Civara 9. Campeyya and 10. Kosambika. The book is called
Mahavagga because each of the chapters is bigger in size. In this book, there is
description about incidents after the attainment of Sambodhi of Gautama Buddha. SI
N

Tipitaka 53
Especially, the different stories of the life of Buddha starting from the attainment
of Buddhahood to the establishment of the Sangha have been discussed in
Mahavagga. The value of this book is great because of the sequential
composition of the life of Buddha. Here is the sequential history of the code of
Vinaya introduced by Buddha during the period starting from the
attainment of Buddhahood to the establishment of the Sangha. In the book there
is description about many historical incidents of Buddha's time. The book
repletes with many important historical imformation like the history of
preaching of religion by Buddha, origin and development of Buddhist Sangha,
Dhammacakkapavattana, initiation of first five disciples, the travelling of rich
Yasa to meet with Buddha, meeting of Buddha with king Bimbisara, etc. Besides
the method of teaching, the relationship between master and disciple and proper
instructions about building up an ideal life are found.
2. Cullavagga
There are 12 chapters or khandas in Cullavagga. They are.: 1. Kammma khanda,
2. Parivasika khanda 3. Samuccaya khanda, 4. Samatha khanda, 5.
Khuddavatthu khanda 6. Sayanaseana khanda 7. Sanghabhedakakhanda 8. Brata
khanda 9. Pratimokkha khanda 10. Bhikkhuni khanda 11. Pancasatika khanda
and 12. Saptasatika khanda. The word 'Culla’ mean 'small'. From the very tittle,
it is understood that the khandas or chapters of the book are small. As the
chapters are smaller than that of Mahavaggas the book is named as Cullvagga.
From chapter one to ten there is description about the purposes for which Buddha
introduced rules and regulations at different stages of His life. In chapter eleven
there is description about t8e first Buddhist council. In chapter twelve there is
complete description about the 2™ council. In Chullavagga, there is also
description about the entrance of womenfolk in the sangha; the initiation of
Mahapajapati Gautami along with others; the rules and regulations for the nuns;
on what conditions Buddha consented to the establishment of Bhikkhuni sangha
etc.

x

&

54 Buddhist religion and moral education
c) Parivara or Parivara Patha
This is the last book of Vinaya Pitaka. This book describes the objectionable
behavioural aspects of the Bhikkhus and Bhikkhunis during Buddha's time.
Especially, the complex and abstruse aspects are analysed in this book very
minutely through the answers to questions. The book is very important for the
new trainee Bhikkhus as tool of learning Vinaya. Including big and small there
are 21 chapters in total. These are composed in prose and poetry. Each of the
chapters is replete with the explanation of the vinaya rules. So, this book is
called the gist of the Vinaya Pitaka.
Exercise
Why Vinaya is called the life of Buddhasasana?
Why is Sutta Vibhanga also considered the scripture of law and principle?
Why Parivara book is called the summary of Vinaya Pitaka?
Lesson : 5
Abhidhamma Pitaka
The third or the final part of the Tripitaka is Abhidhamma Pitaka. The book
repletes with the enriched discussion of Buddhist Religion and philosophy. The
philosophical or ethical facts which are instructed to follow in Sutta Pitaka, that
facts are presented in Abhidhamma Pitaka explaining in a detailed and minute
way. The main point of discussion in the book is Buddhist philosophy and
Paramartha truth. Viz. :khanda, Ayatana, Dhatu, Cuti, Patisandhi, bala (vigour),
Nibbana and Pannatti etc. In Abhidhamma Pitaka there is an extreme
development of Buddhist mindfulness. Nobody can render better religious
instructions without having sufficient knowledge in the subject of Abhidhamma.
There is no scope of introducing any imaginary matter. Its main speciality is to
analyse the main theme determining the cause and effect relationship. The main
theme of Abhidhamma is the psychological instruction of Buddha. Particularly
citta (mind), cetasika (psychic factors), rupa (form) and nibbana etc. have been
analysed in Abhidhamma Pitaka very minutely. So, Abhidhamma is also called _
higher religion. $

Tipitaka 55
Abhidhamma Pitaka is divided into seven parts. They are. :
1. Dhammasangani, 2. Vibhanga, 3. Dhatukatha, 4. Puggalapannatti,5. Kath-
avatthu, 6. Yamaka and 7. Patthana.
1. Dhammasangani : Dhammasangani is the first book of Abhidhamma Pitaka.
Dhammasangani means explanation or classification of religion. The book is so
titled because religion as well as worldly and transcendental affairs are
explained by classification here. Dhammasangani is called the main pillar of
Abhidhamma Pitaka. All the factors, especially all smaller and bigger matters
relating to the internal and external world are expressed through citta (mind),
cetasika (psychic factors) and material things. Namarupa (name and form) has been
classified according to the principle of cause and effect as bad-good and Avyakata
dhamma has been discussed in this book. The subject matter of Dhammasangani can
be analysed dividing it into four parts. These are :
a. Introduction to citta and cetasika (mind and psychic factors).
b. Introduction to rupa (material substance).
c. Summary or Nikkhepa of matters mentioned earlier.
d. Atthudara or Avyakatha dhamma.
In Citta and cetasika there is discussion about Kamavacara, Rupavacara,
Arupavacara and Lokattara citta -these four kinds of citta, five aggregates (panca
khanda) Jivitendriya etc. In Rupa Paricaya part, there is explanation of Kamloka
(hell), world of human beings or God etc. The word Nikkhepa means Summary.
In this division, there is a summary of the things discussed in the earlier part
related to mind and psychic factors. The word Atthudara means analysis.
Finding real meaning or discovery of truth is Atthudara. In this part the causes of
wholesome and unwholesome deeds are discovered. Besides, there is also
discussion about unexplained things.
2. Vibhanga: The name of the second book of Abhidhamma Pitaka is
"Vibhanga'. The word Vibhanga means detailed explanation. In this book higher
or detailed explanation of the matters of Dhammasangani is found. There are
eighteen chapters in this book. In the chapters, there is discussion about five
~ aggregates (panca khanda), twelve Ayatana, eighteen kinds of Dhatu, four noble
Ss
aq

56 Buddhist religion and moral education
truths, twenty two sense organs, dependent origination, cari smritiprasthana, cari
sammaka pradhana, Saptaboddhyanga eigth noble paths, Meditation, four
immeasurable, vinaya rules, four patisambhida, gyana-vibhanga, Khuddavatthu
Vibhanga etc.
3. Dhatukatha: This is the third book of Abhidhamma Pitaka. The word
'‘Dhatukatha' means discussion about 'dhatu'. The book is replete with the
discussion about mind and psychic matters. The main points of discussion of this
book are : five agregates (Rupa, vedana, sanna, samkara, vinnana), twelve Ayata-
na (Cakkhu, srotara, ghrana, jibha, Kaya, Rupa, sabda (sound), Gandha, Rasa,
phassa, mana and dhamma), eighteen types of Dhatu (Chakhu, Srotra, Ghrana,
Jibha, Kaya, Rupa, Sabda, Gandha, Rasa, Phassa, Cakkhu-vinna, srtotra-vinna,
Ghrana-vinna, jibha-vinna, kaya-vinna, Mana-vinna Dhamma), four types of
meditation (first stage, second stage, third stage and fourth stage of meditation),
pancabala (saddha, viriya, smiriti, samadhi and panna), eight noble paths (right
understanding, right thought. right speech, right action, right —_ livelihood, right
effort, right mindfullness, right concentration) etc.
4. Puggala Pannatti : The word ‘puggal' means person, entity or soul. 'Pannatti'
means point out, conception, introduction or ascertain something to be right. So
‘Puggalapannatti' means the book which introduces the ‘puggal' or certain
person. The book is divided into ten chapters. In these ten chapters there is
description about different puggals or persons. The puggal is divided into
different parts to show the nature and development of a puggal or individual.
Such as : Sammaka Sambuddha, Pecceka Buddha, Ariya puggal and their
classifications, Sotapanna, Sakkidagami, Anagami, sakkya and asakkya and
laities who are endowed with greed, antipathy and dellusion etc. The six
conceptions mentioned first in the book. Then, there is the explanation of
Ekbhidhapuggala, Divibidha puggala, Tividha puggala, Catuvidha puggala,
Pancavidha puggala, Saravidha puggala, Saptavidha puggala, Atthavidha
puggala, Nabavidha puggala and Dasavidha puggala. The language and
presentation of subject matters of this book are different from the other books of
Abhidhamma Pitaka.

S

Tipitaka 57
5. Katha Vatthu: 'Kathavatthu' is the most valuable book of Abhidhamma
Pitaka. Only the name of the compiler of the book Kathavatthu is found among
all the books included in the Tripitaka. The book was composed by Moggaliputta
Tissa Th era at the end of the third great Buddhsit council held during the reign
of emperor Ashoka. There are twenty three chapters in this book. In each chapter
of this book there are answers to eight to twelve questionnaires. In this question
and answer session, an insight into the life styles of ancient India, in other words,
mind and the thoughtfulness of the people of that time is found. This book was
compiled by Moggaliputta Tissa Thera at the time of the third council held during
the period of the great emperor Ashoka. This is called the Book of Debate (Tarka
Sastra) related to Buddhist religion and philosophy. In this book there is reply
and counter reply to various complex philosophical theories. In this book the
difficult and inscrutable philosophical matters of Abhidhamma are simply
presented with logic. In this book the other philosophical theories are refuted
through the quotation of the words of Buddha and the book is included into Tip-
itaka because it reflects the gist of the Buddhist religion and philosophy.

6. Yamaka or Yammka Pakarana : The word "Yamaka' is used to mean couple
or double or joint. "Yamaka' means to introduce two questions on same subject.
In this two questions effort is made to find out the cause from the cause or the
truth of the cause from the cause. The book is divided into ten parts. The main
points of discussion in the book are : Mula yamaka, khamda yamaka, ayatana
aamaka, dhatu yamaka, sacca yamaka, samkara yamaka, anusaya yamaka, citta
yamaka, dhamma yamaka, indria yamaka etc. In Mula Yamaka, there is
discussion about the good and bad and their root. In khanda Yamaka there is
description about five khandas. In Dhatu Jamaka, there is description about the
forgotten meaning of eighteen types of Dhatu. In Sacca Yamaka, there is
description of four noble truths. In Samkara Yamaka the discussion about three
types of samkara is found (kaya samkara, vaca samkara and mana samkara). In
Anusaya Yamaka, the philosophical judgement (wartoneness, anger, doubt,
conciet, ingorance etc) about different types of Anusaya are found.

In Citta Yamka a conception about mind and psychic factors is found. In
Dhamma Yamaka, there is a detailed analysis of the wholesome and
unwholesome phenomenon. In Indriya Yamaka, there is introduction to 22 types
of sense organs.

Forma-8, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

58 Buddhist religion and moral education
7. Patthana : This is the last book of Abhidhamma Pitaka. The word 'Patthana’
means 'close connection’, cause or main cause, real cause, because etc. The
causes of 'namarupa’, the theory of dependent origination is also discussed in
the book. There are four divisions in the book. such as: Anuloma Patthana,
Paccaniya Patthana, Anuloma Paccaniya Patthana, and Paccaniya Anuloma
Patthana. Four divisions are again presented through 24 types of Paccaya.
"Paccaya’ means cause ‘nidana’, 'because' etc. Paccaya is something through
which any work is accomplished. The 24 types of paccayas mention in the book
of Patthana are : Hetu, Arammana, Adhipati, Anantara, Samantara, Sahajata,
Annamanna, Nissaya, Upanissaya, Purejata, Pacchajata, Asevana, Kamma,
vipaka, Ahara, Indriya, jhana, Magga, Samprayutta, viprayuttatta, Atthi, Natthi,
Bigata, Abigata paccaya.
Exercise
What are the main points of discussion in Dhammasangani ?
Why is the book Kathavatthu included into the Tipitaka ?
Lesson : 6
Necessity of the Study of the Tipitaka
The main theme of Tipitaka is the religious philosophy of Buddha. But in the
Tipitaka relevantly discusses, about the condition of society, culture, religion,
philosophy, politics, geography, economics etc. of Buddha's time. So, there is a
great importance of the Tipitaka to know the ancient history of India. Each of the
words of the Tipitaka inspires human beings to develop the ethical and
humanistic qualities. It motivates to refrain from the bad activities. It inspires to
lead a life ofreligious avioding all kinds of sin. It leads human beings to the path
of sorrow free Nibbana. Through the study of the Tipitaka one can know about
good or bad activities, the real nature of minds characteristics of human beings,
verious conditions of mental world, sorrows, causes of sufferings, ways to
emancipation from sufferings, impermanence, non-soul, ways to attain Nibbana,
the real nature of the world, observance of precepts, meditation, wisdom etc.
Besides, many important incidents of the life of Buddha are mentioned in the
Tipitaka. The invaluable words of Tipitaka play a role to create good relations &
among man and man, heartfelt feelings and unity among human beings »

Tipitaka 59
removing the anger, jealousy and passion. The words of Buddha played
important roles to eradicate the prevalent atrocities in the name of racial and
colour discrimination in India. Buddha preached His religion with the dream of
establishing a society without racial or colour discrimination. His every word
inspires to protect all creatures both great and small. With a view to developing
that ideals he established the Bhikkhu and Bhikkhuni Sangha. The Sangha that
He established had entranc to all irrespective of race, colour and caste. In this
way He spread the ideal of the principle of equality in the society and among his
followers. Following the rules and regulation as directed by Buddha, human
beings become modest, observer of precepts and endowed with good character.
As a result, the life of an individual, a family or a society becomes happy. So, it
can be said that the necessity of the study of the Tipitaka is immense.
Exercise
Fill in the blanks
1. During the life time of Buddha nobody kept his words of religion in ..........
form.
2. Diving the reign of Ceylonese king Vattagamini ............. was written in the
form of a book.
3. Sutta Pitaka is mainly divided into ................ nikaya or part.
4. In Khuddaka Nikaya there are ............ independent books.
5. eesessseseeeeeeeeeeee 1S the first book of Abhidamma.
Short Questions
1. What does the word Tipitaka mean ?
2. How many books are there in Sutta Pitaka and what are they ?
3. What is the lesson of Vinaya Pitaka ?
4. What do you mean by Abhidhamma ?
2
Rg

60 Buddhist religion and moral education
Essay type Questions
1. Discuss the background of composition of the Tipitaka.
2. Give an idea about Sutta Pitaka.
3. What do you mean by Vinaya? How many books are there in Vinaya
Pitaka ? Give berief idea of them.
Multiple Choice Questions
1. What is the name of the main book of Abhidhamma Pitaka ?
a) Vibhanga b) Dhammsangani
c) Dhatukatha d) Kathavatthu
2. Through the practice and exercise of Vanaya the Bhikkhus will —
a) acquire sense of ethics
b) attain meditation
c) attain higher life style
Which one below is correct ?
a) i b) iand ii
c) ii and iii d) i, ii and iii
Read the passage below and answer to the question no. 3 and 4
Reverend Bodhimitra Bhikkhu after attaining new Upasampada studied a
book at the library to know about the rules, pimciples and discipline of the
life of monkhood. In the book the complex and obscure aspects of Vinaya
are explained in a simple and beautiful manner.
3. Which book of Vinaya did Reverned Bodhimitra Vikkhu study ?
a) Sutta Vibhanga b) Khandaka
c) Mahavagga d) Parivara Patha
4. What of Vinaya Pitaka is that book called ?
a) Summary b) = Gist %
c) Perfect code of life d) Important book S

Tipitaka 61

Creative Questions

1. Chart-1 Chart-2

There are 34 Suttas Dhatukatha
in Nikaya
There are 56 clusters Kathavatthu
(Guccha) in Nikaya
There are 2038 Suttas Yamaka
in Nikaya
a. What is the other name of Cullavarga ?
b. Explain the necessity of studying the Tipitaka
c. Explain in the light of the textbook which Pitaka the hints in the 1S¢ chart
directs.
d. In the Pitaka mentioned in the 24 chart ‘Buddhist Philosophy and
ultimate truth have been enalysed’ Do you agree with this statement ?
Give reasons.

2. Dharmankura Vihara is perfectly led combinedly by reverend Bhikkhu
Sangha, Vihara management committee and the male and female devotees.
Everybody tries sincerely to observe the precepts through the practice of
instructions and advice rendered by Buddha. On the special day, while the
male and the female worshipper observe Upasatha Sila, remembering the part
of Buddha's quotation the principal of the Vihara Joys, ‘If any Bhikkhus, after
studying The Tipitaka for hundred years does not observe the precepts
properly then he is to go to hell after death.

a. In which language is the Tipitaka composed ?
b. Briefly explain the background of the Tipitaka.
Cc. In which pitaka of the Tipitaka the statement of Uddipaka is found?
Explain.
29 d. That pitaka is like the life of Buddhasasana' - give your opinion from
& the religious point of view.

Chapter Four
Sutta and Moral Verses
The suttas and the moral verses are chanted by Lord Buddha Himself. Buddha
preached all these to his disciples and devotees in different places in different
occasions. These are available in the various books of Suttapitaka included in
the Tipitaka. The suttas and the moral verses contain the basics of Buddha's
teaching and philosophy. These perform welfare in this life alongside the
development of moral and spiritual life. These are chanted in different
occasions. These are chanted generally to be protected from the bad effects of
natural calamities, accident, diseases, grief, and ghosts, evil spirits, yakkas etc.
and to wish for all types of blessings. Each sutta is recited for the specific
purpose. For example, the Ratana Sutta is recited to be saved from famine and
epidemic, The Karaniya Metta Sutta is to be saved from the disturbance of ghost
and yakkas, Su-pbbanha Sutta to protect from the bad effect of the misfortune,
the Bhojjanga Sutta is recited to recover from all diseases, and the Angulimala
Sutta is recited to recover from the labour pain. There are many more suttas in
Tipitaka by reciting those we can be saved from different kinds of dangers. We
shall read the Ratana Sutta and the Karaniya Metta Sutta in this Chapter.
By the end of this chapter we shall be able to-
* Describe the background of the Ratana Sutta and the Karaniya Metta Sutta
* Explain the subject matter of the Ratana Sutta and the Karaniya Metta Sutta.
——— 5 —
BeAG as eee
= | RO ——SS— SSS Ss
= y A) = a “s. 3c Se =
il ta eae om,
\ Me, Ves eR
TE oe aa),
The devotees are listening the chanting of suttas from the Bhikkhus &

Sutta and Moral Verses 63
Lesson: 1
The Background of the Ratana Sutta
Vesali was a democratic state of the Licchavies in India. It is now known as
Besar. At the time of Lord Buddha Vesali was a very prosperous city. The king,
prince, richman (sestthi), chief of Army, farmers, merchants etc. people from
different classes and caste lived there. Vesali was enriched with many kinds of
food. The dwellers lived there with great happiness.
Once upon a time there was a severe draught in Vesali. All the fields, ponds,
agricultural lands dried out. The farming and the production of crops were
stopped. As a result there was a famine in the state. Large numbers of people
died of starving. The corpses were thrown out to the outskirts of the city. Many
inhuman demons entered in the city attracted by the bad smell. Many more
people died by the disturbing demons. An epidemic started due to air pollution.
Huge people and animals died also for this.
At last the inhabitants of Vesali being tormented by the three kinds of
disturbances, such as famine, demons and epidemic, went to the king and prayed
to him, 'O king! Three kinds of fears have developed in the city. Such adversities
never happened before at the time of the reign of the seven dynasties. The royal
astrologer was invited to find whether these adversities happened due to any
irreligious actions by the king. The astrologer found by consulting horoscope
that the king had no fault. Then all were thinking about how they could be the
adversities be driven out. All of them decided after thinking that only the arrival
of Lord Buddha, well wisher to everyone, merciful to all, accomplished with
super power could drive the adversities. Therefore the king invited Lord Buddha
to Vesali for the welfare of the subjects. The king thought, the adversities of the
people of Vesali would be passed away, the lives would be saved, would get
back the mental strength and all the fears and misfortune would be passed away
if the Buddha come.
Buddha was living in Rajgeha. The king of Vesali then sent messenger to bring
Lord Buddha. Two princes of Licchavies went to bring Buddha with the armed
forces and gifts. The princes of Licchavies reached to the Buddha and after
showing respect to him said, ‘Bhante! There three kinds of fear created in our
city. If your kindness Lord Buddha would visit Vesali only for once then that
would cause great welfare for us.' Feeling pity for the people of Vesali Buddha
accepted the invitation and decided to go to Vesali. The king and his ministers
with the residence of Vesali received Buddha with offerings and service in a
so grand style. When Buddha reached Vesali, Devaraja Indra came to receive him.
& After coming of the devas (gods) the demons fled away.

64 Buddhist religion and moral education
Then Buddha asked Ananda to learn the Ratana Sutta and said, ' recite this sutta
moving around the cities of Vesali with the Licchavies. The famine, epidemic,
and fear will go away from Vesali by the impact of the Sutta.' According to the
instruction of Buddha Ananda started to recite the Ratana sutta and sprinkled
water from the begging bowl of Buddha. The three kinds of fear, the fear of
disease, the fear of demons, the fear of famine, drove away by the recitation of
the Ratana sutta. It rained heavily. The fields were filled with corps again. The
peace returned to the life of Vesali. The people of the city were happy. All of
them were praising Buddha. All of them expressed gratitude to Buddha. This is
the background of the Ratana sutta. This sutta is found in the book Khuddaka
Patha included in Khuddaka Nikaya of Sutta Pitaka.
Exercise
How was the country Vesali?
How many kinds of disturbances were there in Vesali? What were those?
What did TheraAnanda do according to the instruction of Buddha?
Lesson: 2
Ratana Suttam (Pali)

1. ‘atialia a samagatant 5. Yambuddhasettho parivannayi sucim
bhummani va yani. va antalikiche samadhimananta rikafifamahu
sabbe va bhata sumana bhavantu samadhina tena samo na vijjati
atho pi sakkacca sunantu bhasitam. idampi dl © ratanam panita
2.tasma hi bhuta nisametha sabbe etena saccena suvatthi hotu.
mettam karotha manusiya pajaya
diva ca ratto ca haranti ye balim 6. Ye puggala attha satampasattha
tasma hi ne rakkhatha appamatta. cattari etani yugani honti
3.yam kifici vittam idha va huram va tedakkhineyya sugatassa savaka
saggesu va yam ratanam panitarh etesu dinnani mahapphalani
na no samam atthi tathdgatena idampi sanghe ratanam panitam
idampi buddhe ratanam panitam etena saccena suvatthi hotu.
etena iniiiinae suvatthi hotu. 7. Ye suppayuttd manasa dalhena
4. Khayam viragam amatam panitam  nikkamino gotamasasanamhi
yadajjhaga sakyamuni samahito te pattipatta amatam vigayha
na tena dhammena samatthi kifici laddhd mudha nibbutim bhufijamana
idampi dhamme ratanam panitam idampi sanghe ratanam panitam x
etena saccena suvatthi hotu. etena saccena suvatthi hotu. N

Sutta and Moral Verses 65
8. Yathindakhilo pathavim sito siya 13. Varo varafifii, varado varaharo
catubbhi vatebhi asampakampiyo anuttare ahi avaram adesayi
tathipamam sappurisam vadami ‘ 2 : -
id a een ° F idampi buddhe ratanam panitam

yo ariyasaccani avecca passati :
idampi sanghe ratanam panitam etena saccena suvatthi hotu.
etena saccena suvatthi hotu. 14. Khinam puranam navam natthi
9. Ye ariya saccini vibhavayanti sambhavam
gamnbhirapanhena Sudesitani _ virattacitta yatike bhavasmim

incapi te honti MsapypAamiatta, te khinabija aviralhichanda
na te bhavam atthamam 4Adiyanti : ae _ di
idampi sanghe ratanam panitam nibbanti hits yathayam pac ipo
etena saccena suvatthi hotu. idampi saighe ratanam panitam
10. sahd vassa dassanasampadaya etena saccena suvatthi hotu.
tayassu dhamma jahita bhavanti _. __, 8,
sakkayaditthi vicikicchitafica 15. Yanidha bhitani samagatani
silabbatam va pi yadatthi kifici bhumméani va yani va antalikkhe
catthapayehi ca vippamutto tathagatam devamanussaptjitam
cha cabhithanani abhabbo katum buddham namassama suvatthi hotu.
idampi sanghe ratanam panitam
etena saccena suvatthi hotu. 16. YanIdha bhitini samagatani
11. Kificapi so kammam karoti bhummini va yani va antalikkhe
papakam kayena vaca uda cetasa va tathagatam devamanussapijitam
abhabbo so tassa paticchadaya dh: ‘moeesions stout ioin
abhabbata ditthapadassa vutta ° °
idampi sanghe ratanam panitam 17. Yanidha bhutani samagatani
etena saccena suvatthi hotu. bh: Ani va yani va antalikkhe
12. Vanappagumbe yatha phussitagge tathagatam devamanussapiijitam
gimhanamase pathamasmim gimhe sangham namassama suvatthi hotu.
tathipamam dhammavaram adesayi
nibbanagamim paramamhitaya
idampi buddhe ratanam panitam
etena saccena suvatthi hotu.

Exercise
Read Ratan Sutta with correct pronunciation in group work.

Forma-9, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

66 Buddhist religion and moral education
Lesson: 3

Ratana Sutra (English)
1. "Whatever beings (non-humans) are assembled here, terrestrial or celestial,
may they all have peace of mind, and may they listen attentively to these words."
2. "O beings, listen attentively. May you all radiate loving-kindness to those
human beings who, by day and night, bring offerings to you ( offer merit to you).
Wherefore, protect them with diligence."
3. "Whatever treasure there be either here or in the world beyond, whatever
precious jewel there be in the heavenly worlds, there is nought comparable to the
Tathagata (the perfect One). This precious jewel is the Buddha. By this
( asseveration of the) truth may there be happiness."
4. "That Cessation, that Detachment that Deathlessness (Nibbana) supreme, the
calm and collected Sakya Sage (the Buddha) had realized. There is nought
comparable to this (Nibbana) Dhamma. This precious jewel is the Dhamma. By
this ( asseveration of the) truth may there be happiness."
5. "The Supreme Buddha extolled a path of purity (the Noble Eightfold Path)
calling it the path which unfailingly brings concentration. There is nought
comparable to this concentration. This precious jewel is the Dhamma. By this
(asseveration of the) truth may there be happiness."
6. "The eight persons extolled by virtuous men constitute four pairs. They are the
disciples of the Buddha and are worthy of offerings. Gifts given to them yield
rich results. This precious jewel is the Sangha. By this (asseveration of the) truth
may there be happiness."
7. "With a steadfast mind, and applying themselves well in the dispensation of
the Buddha Gautama, free from (defilements), they have attained to that which
should be attained ( arahantship) encountering the Deathless. They enjoy the
Peace of Nibbana freely obtained. This precious jewel is the Sangha. By this
(asseveration of the) truth may there be happiness."
8. "As a post deep-planted in the earth stands unshaken by the winds from the
four quarters, so, too, I declare is the righteous man who comprehends with
wisdom the Noble Truths. This precious jewel is the Sangha. By this
(asseveration of the) truth may there be happiness."
9. "Those who realized the Noble Truths well taught by him who is profound in
wisdom (the Buddha), even though they may be exceedingly heedless, they will
not take an eighth existence (in the realm of sense spheres). This precious jewel FS
is the Sangha. By this ( asseveration of the) truth may there be happiness." ES

Sutta and Moral Verses 67
10. “With his gaining of insight he abandons three states of mind, namely
self-illusion, doubt, and indulgence in meaningless rites and rituals, should
there be any. He is also fully freed from the four states of woe, and therefore,
incapable of committing the six major wrongdoings. This precious jewel is the
Sangha. By this (asseveration of the) truth may there be happiness."

11. "Any evil action he may still do by deed, word or thought, he is incapable of

concealing it; since it has been proclaimed that such concealing is impossible

for one who has seen the Path (ofNibbana). This precious jewel is the Sangha.

By this (asseveration of the) truth may there be happiness.”

12. "As the woodland groves though in the early heat of the summer month are

crowned with blossoming flowers even so is the sublime Dhamma leading to the

(calm) of Nibbana which is taught (by the Buddha) for the highest good. This

precious jewel is the Buddha. By this ( asseveration of the) truth may there be

happiness."

13. "The Peerless Excellent one (the Buddha) the Knower (of Nibbana), the

Giver (of Nibbana), the Bringer ( of the Noble Path), taught the excellent

Dhamma. This precious jewel is the Buddha. By this (asseveration of the) truth

may there be happiness."

14. "Their past (kamma) is spent, their new (kamma) no more arises, their mind

to future becoming is unattached. Their germ ( of rebirth-consciousness) has

died; they have no more desire for re-living. Those wise men fade out ( of
existence) as the flame of this lamp ( which has just faded away). This precious
jewel is the Sangha. By this (asseveration of the) truth may there be happiness."

15. "Whatever beings (non-human) are assembled here, terrestrial or celestial,

come let us salute the Buddha, the Tathagata (the perfect One), honoured by

gods and men. May there be happiness. The perfect Dhamma, honoured by gods
and men. May there be happiness."

16. "Whatever beings are assembled here, terrestrial or celestial, come let us

salute the perfect Dhamma, honoured by gods and men. May there be

happiness."

17. "Whatever beings are assembled here, terrestrial or celestial, come let us
co salute the perfect Sangha, honoured by gods and men. May there be happiness."
S
x)

68 Buddhist religion and moral education
Word meaning
Samagatani- assembled; bhumméani- terrestrial; antalikkhe- on sky; sumana-
happy; sakkacca-with attension; nisametha-listen; manusiya pajaya-for the
human being; huram- next life; amatm- nectar; parivannayi- described;
samadhimanantarikafifiamahu- the result of samadhi what can be got
immediately; Passattha- admire; dakkhineyya- worthy of offerings;
suppayutta- truly appoinpoed; dalhena- stead fastly; nikkdmino- nishkam;
patipatta-best achievement; Yathindakhilo- a post deep planted in the earth;
ariyasaccani- four noble truths; bhusappamatta- nonvegilent;
dassanasampadaya- right view; vicikicchitafica- doubt; vippamutto- free;
ditthapadassa- having right view; varafifii- aware of nibbana; varado- the
giver of happiness(nibbana); varaharo- the person who attained the best
path or nibbana.
Lesson: 4
Background of Karaniya Mettasutta
Once upon a time Lord Buddha was living in Savatthi. The rainy season was
coming. The Bhikkhus used to search the suitable place inside the mountain cave
or in the forest for the Vassavasa. Thus the five hundred Bhikkhus started to live
in the forest near the Himalayas. They used to practise meditation with great
pleasure after eating the collectied the food from the neibouring villages. Their
health and mind became fresh by the pollution free climate and good food.
There were many tree-being in that forest. They were afraid of the pious life and
the power of sila of the Bhikkhus. The tree-gods were fleeing away from the
trees with their families for a not being able to bear the influence of sila. They
were only thinking about when these Bhikkhus would leave this place. As soon
as the Bhikkhus would leave the place they could come back to their dwelling
place. But the tree-gods found that the Bhikkhus would not leave the place
before the end of Vassavasa.
One night the tree-gods frightened the Bhikkhus appearing before them with a
fearcing terrible look to drive them away. To this the Bhikkhus were terrified.
Therefore they could not concentrate on meditation. Gradually they became very
thin and weak. Later the tree-gods started to spread bad smells. To this the
Bhikkhus suffered from severe headache. Oneday after discussing between them
they went away to Lord Buddha in Savatthi leaving Vassavasa. To see the
Bhikkhus Buddha reminded them that he instructed not to travel during
Vassavasa. Then the Bhikkhus narrated all the facts about leaving the place of 3
the Vassavasa. “

Sutta and Moral Verses 69
On hearing everything Buddha said, '0 Bhikkhus go back to that place again. I
am saying you the way of protecting from the tree-gods. Be friendly to the
tree- gods or the demons, don't be hostile to them. Show friendship and pity to
them with patience. Saying this Buddha preached the Karaniya Metta Sutta to
them and said, learn this sutta and go back to the forest. At the eighth day of
upasatha in every month recite this sutta loudly. Discuss about religion, ask each
other about the topic, and recommend them. Then the demons will never frighten
you. They will be beneficiary and well wisher of you.
According to the advice of Buddha the bhikkhus went back to that place and
involved in reciting Karaniya Metta Sutta and absorbed in the mettabhavana.
The disturbance of the tree-gods was stopped by the impact of Karaniya
Mettasuttam. Due to the influence of the friendship and pity the tree-gods did not
harm the Bhikkhus any more, moreover they engaged in serving them with
content. Finally the Bhikkhus were able to complete their Vassavasa. In this
sutta, there is a guidline for the people who are wishing Nibbana to practise
mettabhavana as their duties. So, it is called the 'Karaniya Metta Sutta’. The
name of this sutta in Pali is 'Karaniya Mettasutta’.
Exercise
Why were the tree-gods afraid?
Why did the Bhikkhus leave the Vassavasa?
What did Buddha say after listening to the Bhikkhus?
Lesson: 5
Karaniya Mettasuttam (Pali)

1. Karaniyamatthakusalena yan tam santam padam abhisamecca:

Sakko ujii ca stjii ca suvaco c'assa mudu anatimani.
2. Santussako ca subharo ca appakicco ca sallahukavutti

santidriyo ca nipako ca appagabbho kulesu ananugiddho.
3. Na ca khuddam samacare kifici yena vififil pare upavadeyyum

Sukhino va khemino hontu sabbe satta bhavantu sukhitatta.

co 4. Ye keci panabhitatthi tas va thavara va anavasesa
&  Digha va ye mahanta va majjhima rassaka anukathula.

70 Buddhist religion and moral education
5. Dittha va ye va addittha ye ca dire vasanti avidire
Bhitii va sambhavesI va sabbe satta bhavantu sukhitatta
6. Na paro param nikubbetha natimafifietha katthaci nam kafici
Vyarosana patighasafifia nafifiamafifiassa dukkham iccheyya
7. mata yathd niyam puttam ayusa ekaputtamnurakkhe
Evam pi sabbabhitesu manasam bhavaye aparimanam
8. Mettafi ca sabbalokasmim Manasam bhavaye aparimanam
Uddham adho ca tiriyafi ca asambadham averam asapattam
9. Tittham caram nisinno va sayano va yavat' assa vigatamiddho
Etam satim adhittheyya brahmam etam viharam idhamahu
10. Dittifica anupagamma silava dassanena sampanno
Kamesu vineyya gedham nahijatu gabbhaseyyam punaretiti
Exercise work
Recite the ‘Karaniya Mettasuttam’ in correct pronunciation. (Group work)
Lesson: 6
Karanya Metta Sutta (English)

1. This is what ought to be done by one skilled in the good having understood
the path to peace able- straight forward and straight up, polite, they should
be mild and not arrogant.

2. Contented and frugal, with few responsibilities and easy going, grounded,
and not impulsive; not chasing status.

3. And not doing the slightest thing which is denounced by the wise
May they have happiness and peace; May all beings be happy in
themselves.

4. Whatever living beings there are fearful or fearless, huge, large, medium,
small. fine or coarse.

5. Seen or unseen, remote or living nearby, born or seeking birth: May all
beings be happy in themselves. S

Sutta and Moral Verses 71
6. Not humiliating or despising anyone anywhere though anger or
experiencing repugnance: [they] should not wish suffering for another.

7. Like a mother's own child, [ she will] protect that only child with her life

thus for all beings should the heart become infinite.

8. And friendliness for all the world, [should] the heart become infinite in all
the directions of space, unobstructed, peaceable, without enmity.

9. Standing, walking, sitting or lying down, as far as possible without
sluggishness this mindfulness should be undertaken; It is like dwelling with
god here and now.

10. Not falling into views, ethical and with perfect vision Having given up greed
for sensory pleasures, freed without doubt from birth.

Word meaning: santam -quiet; sakko-able; abhisamocca-to know fully; uju-
straight; siiji ca-very straight; Santussako-satisfied person; subharo-easy to
care; appakicco-easily satisfied; sallahukavutti-the person who is satisfied in
few and who can fill the necessity easily if any; Santindriyo-one who can
control his senses; nipako-wise; appagabbho- humble; not proud,
conscientious, well behaved; ananugiddho-indifferent; upavadeyyum-to speak
ill; khemino-the person who enjoys safety or peace; panabhit' atthi-the
animals of the world; thavara-steady; anavasesa completely; tiriyafi ca-curved;
asambadham-devoid of division; averam-absence of enemy; asapattam-
absence of hostility; Tittham- to stand; vigatamiddho- until sleeping;
adhittheyya- taking possession; nikubbetha-deprive; manasam bhavase-to be
friendly.
Exercise
Write the English translation of the Karaniya Metta Sutta (group work)
Lesson: 7
The Importance of the Ratana Sutta and the Karanya Metta Sutta
The impact of Ratana Sutta on human beings and gods is infinite. There are praises
S about Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, three jwells, in the Ratana Sutra. These three
‘“  jwells together called Dharma are Triratana. One can keep away his mind from

72 Buddhist religion and moral education
any unwholesome deeds by recalling Tiratana. Mind can be controlled by this.
There is description about the internal force inside the four noble truths in the
Ratana Sutta. One who is able to realize the four noble truths he or she can save
himself or herself from all the passion, desire, greed, jealousy and ignorance of
the ocean like worldly life. The person free from passion and desire or craving
can be compared with the post deeply rooted on the ground. As the post
(Indrakhila) never shakes by the powerful wind so the person rightly aware of
four noble truths does not shake or attach with greed or craving. He always
remains determind in his goal. Therefore it is said the Ratana Sutta by keeping
us away from all the unwholesome deeds or actions inspire us to perform good
deeds and guides us to the right path of true religion. The person guided to the
true religion can attain Nibbana by ending all the sufferings.

The moral teaching of the Karaniya Metta Sutta is, to nurture the friendly
attitude for every living being, not to neglect any one, not to wish bad for any
one. Every one should show kindness for all the beings always whether sleeping,
awakening, and meditating as the meditation on metta (mettabhavana) makes
the mind peaceful and controls the speech, body and mind. It drives the enemity,
awakes love. It teaches us to be friendly with all the living being by comparing
other's life with that of own. This sutta inspires us to be sympathetic and to wish
good for all the living beings moving or still, long or large, middle or short, small
or big, seen-unseen, near-far, born or un born; refrains from deprivation and
disregard. Helps to give up violence and control anger. Inspire to follow the
eight noble paths appropriately. The person who follows eight noble paths never
does any sin by body, mind or speech. As a result it is not possible to do any
unwholesome deed by him. Therefore he and the people live with him can lead
life peacefully without any disturbance. Thus person who meditates on metta is
able to achieve Nibbana and stop rebirth by controlling craving. So it can be said
that, the importance of the Ratana Sutta and the Karaniya metta sutta is infinite
to practise true religion.

Exercise
Present the teachings of Ratana sutta (group work)
g

Sutta and Moral Verses B
Exercise
Fill in the gaps
1. Once upon a time there was a severe ------- in Vesali.
2. Etena saccena ------ hotu.
3. There were many ------- in that forest.
4, ------- yatha niyam puttam
ayusa ekaputtam anurakkhe
5. The impact of ------- on human being and gods is infinite.
Short Questions
1. Where was Buddha living during the draught in Vesali?
2. What happened when Buddha stepped in Vesali?
3. Why did the tree-gods escape away with their family?
4. What are the moral teachings of Karaniya metta sutta?
5. How did the Bhikkhus finish the Vassavasa?
Essay type questions
1. Explain the background of Ratana Sutta and Karaniya Metta Sutta.
2. Write the English translation of the Karaniya Metta Sutta.
Multiple choice questions
1. Reciting which sutta one can save from the bad effects?
a. Bhojjhanga Sutra b. Su-pubbanha Sutta
c. Angulimala Sutta d. Karaniya Metta Sutta
Forma-1, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

74 Buddhist religion and moral education
2. Every one should practise mettabhavana for all the living beings always
whether sleeping, awakening, and contemplating, because through this-
i. body- mind- speech are controlled
ii. drives away the enmity
iii. protected from danger
Which one is correct below?
a. iand ii b. ii and iii
c. iand ili d. i, ii and iii
Read the passage below and answer questions 3 and 4
Venerable Bhikkhu Dharmasri realized the four noble truths in the right
way through meditation. After achieving perfect knowledge the three types
of wrong concept, sakkaya ditthi, doubt, and the disregard to Tiratana
immediately have driven away.
3. To which Venerable Bhikkhu Dharmasri is compared with?
a. Pillar b. Dharma ratana
c. Sangha ratana d. Samadhi
4. due to driven away the three types of wrong concepts the Bhikkhu-
i will be free from three kinds of hell
ii will be restrained from matricide, patricide, and the murder of Arhant
iii will born again and again
Which one below is correct ?
a i b. i and ii
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
S

Sutta and Moral Verses 15
Creative questions
1. The Problems of the city of Vartika
a. What is the moral teaching of Karaniya Metta Sutta?
b. Why did the Bhikkhus leave the Vassavasa? Explain.
c. To which sutta of Buddha the problems described in the tables are
connected? Explain.
d. Analyse the impact of that sutta to solve the problems of the city of
Vartika from the religious point of view.
2. Paramita Barna is the brilliant student of class ten. She is the only child of her
parents. She suddenly died of a road accident. Then various bad signs were visi-
ble in their house.
a. By which name Vesali is known at present?
b. Explain the aims of reciting Sutta.
c. To which sutta the subjectmatter of the event above is related?
Explain.
d. ‘This is not possible to settle the situation without the recitation of
the above mentioned sutta’-discuss.
2
R

Chapter Five
Buddhist Kammavada

Kamma controls the world. So, it is called that the power ofkamma is
worldwide. The basic foundation of Buddhism is 'Kammavada'. Human beings
get result according to their deeds. If he does good deeds, he will enjoy good
result and if he does bad deeds, he is bound to undergo bad result. Not only are
human beings, all creatures are subject to their kammas. His origin lies in his
kamma, his recognition comes through his kamma, kamma is his friend, and
kamma is his shelter. It is through one's kamma by which one can attain either a
higher life or a lower life. In this chapter we will discuss about Buddhist
kammavada.
By the end of this chapter we will be able to -

* Tell about the idea of kamma

* Explain Baddhist kammavada according to Buddist religion

* Differentiate wholesome and unwholesome deeds

* Give an idea about Buddhist kammavada in the light of Cullakamma

Vibhanga Sutta
Lesson: 1
Notion of the word kamma

‘Kamma' means to hold a ceremony, to construct or accomplish etc. In Buddhism
auspicious-inauspicious, good-bad will or tendencies are called kamma, In other
words, what can be thought of, what can be uttered in sentences and what can be
accomplished by the body is kamma. Kamma is accomplished by three doors :
body, utterence and mind.
Thoughts, utterances and doing (physical) everything is subject to kamma. The
unconscious activities of mind are not called kamma. In the book named
Anguttar Nikaya, Buddha says-
' Cetanaham Bhikkhave kammam vadami. Cetayitta kammam karoti kayena,
vacaya manasa'pi'.
Meaning : 0 Bhikkhus! I call consciousness (intention) the kamma, because it is
by consciousness that an individual accomplishes kamma by body, utterence and ,,
mind. S

Buddhist Kammavada Th
Mind or sense is the origin of Kamma. Consciousness is the natural instinct of
mind. The realization originated from the mind is consciousness. A
consciousness of a moment is able to impart happiness or sorrow. Kamma, both
physical or vocal, everything is controlled by mind. According to Buddhism,
everybody has to encounter the outcome of his deeds. Every Kamma has its own
aftermath. Like the outcomes of a tree, result of Kamma follows the Kamma of
human beings. if the Kamma is good or bad, the result would also be good or
bad.

Classifications of Kamma

Kamma is of four types based on how it is done.

a. Janaka Kamma b. Upastambhaka Kamma c. Utpiraka or Upapiraka Kamma
and d. Upaghataka Kamma.

a. Janaka Kamma: The Kamma causes rebirth, produces khanda and
Kammajarupa during life time and is consciousness of goodness or badness is
Janaka Kamma. Janaka Kamma is the aftermath of the past deeds.

b. Upastambhaka Kamma: The Kamma which helps the Janaka Kamma is
Upastambhaka Kamma. Upastambhaka Kamma helps the Janaka Kamma to
impart a result. The birth is caused by the influence of Janaka Kamma and one
life by the influence of Upastambhaka Kamma.

c. Utpiraka or Upapiraka Kamma: This kind of Kamma weakens or obstructs
the disorders of Janaka Kamma or Upastambhaka Kamma. The good Utpiraka
Kamma hinders or weakens the bad Upastambhaka Kamma, the bad Utpiraka
Kamma hinders or weakens the good Upastambhaka Kamma.

d. Upaghataka Kamma: The function of this kamma is to impede. This kind of
kamma not only obstructs but also expands its own dominance completely
destroying the Janaka Kamma. Its main function is to produce result.

Exercise
What did Buddha say in Anguttar Nikaya?
According to materialisation how many types of Kammas are there and tell
x
&

78 Buddhist religion and moral education
Lesson: 2
The Conception of Kammavada
'Kammavada' comprises of two meaningful words 'Kamma' and 'vada'. 'Kamma'
means the deed or action accomplished by body, utterance or mind. 'Vada' means
the 'Theory' or the belief of a conception. So, Kammavada means the deep belief
in the result of deeds.
There are differences among human beings in age, colours, enjoyment, riches,
wisdom and pride. The main reason behind it is Kamma. All creatures are
subject to their own Kammas. It is Kamma which makes diverse division like
bad, good or high low among the creatures. As, in the world the behaviours and
manners of all human beings are not the same, in the same way again the habits
or characters are not the same. In the book named "Milinda Panha" during the
conversation between Bhikkhu Nagasena and Greek King Milinda, Nagasena
Thera said, "All men are not the same because their deeds are not same. In
human beings various differences are noticed because there are differences in
the result of doings of the men."
He also said, "All trees do not bear same fruits. Some are sour, some saline,
some are sweet and juicy. This variation is because of the variation of seeds."
Thus because of the diversity of deeds, all men are not same because all
creatures are subject of Kamma. The main cause of this kind of variation is
Kamma.
It is Kamma which divides creatures in different ways. There is nobody who is
responsible for the happiness or sorrows of the creatures. These are the creations
of Kamma. In the book named 'Suttanipat' Buddha said
“na jacca brahmino hoti, na jacca hoti abrahmino
Kammuna brahmono hoti kammuna hoti abrahmono."
Meaning: “Nobody is Brahmin by born, nobody is non-Brahmin by born, Brahmin
is by Kamma non Brahmin is by Kamma.”
Kassako kammuna hoti, sippiko hoti kammuna
Banijo kammuna hoti, pessiko hoti kammuna.
Meaning: “Somebody is farmer by his deeds somebody is artisan by his deeds, it
is by Kamma by which one becomes a businessman, and by Kamma one becomes servant.”
Kammuna vattati loko, kammuna vattati paja 6
Kamma nibandhan satta, rathssaniva yayato. s

Buddhist Kammavada a
Meaning: The whole world is active through the Kamma. The creation of the
brith of human beings is through Kamma. As the carriage runs depending on its
wheels so do all creatures depend on its own Kammas.
Human life has been tied up through the code of Kamma. Present life is
determined by the past deeds. Again, the present Kamma determines the future
life. In other words, as the present life depends on past, again future life depends
on present deeds.
In Jataka there is a story of Dighayukumara. King of Varanasi murdered
Dighayukumara's parents. After long days, once Dighayukumara got a chance to
kill the king. He expressed his identity to the king and being influenced by his
wholesome deeds he told without killing the king. "Your Majesty! I will not do
any harm to you. Rather you kill me as you did my parents. Otherwise, your
enemy will live on earth." Then the king also said to Dighayukumara," I also will
not do harm to you" Thus they two became friends. Through this, it is
understood that though there was scope of performing bad deed, it is because of
good thinking that it did not occur. Here, there was influence of the result of
good fate on both of them.
Exercise
What did Nagasena Thera say to the Grecian king Milinda about Kamma?
Lesson: 3
Explanation of the result of Kamma
According to Kammavada every human being has to undergo the result of his
own deeds. As one will do, so will he enjoy the result of his deeds. If the Kamma
is good or bad, the result will also be good or bad. As you will sow seeds, so will
you reap. If anybody sows the seeds of paddy, he will get paddy, not wheat. If
anybody sows the bad paddy seeds, he will get bad paddy, not good paddy. The
same rule is applicable throughout the whole world. Buddha never said it
nowhere : I will help you to emancipate. The deeds of the present moment give
result at the next moment. This is the natural rule of the world. Man can change
his own fate. In the book named 'Dhamma pada' under sutta pitaka it is seen:
S Atta hi attano natho kohi natho paro siya
N Attanahi sudantena natham labhati dullabham.

Bo Buddhist religion and moral education
Meaning: You yourself are your saviour or master, There is no other saviour or
master. If you can moderate youself well, it is possible to attain anything rare.
If one does not be self dependent no kind of success comes to him. So, self
establishing is the basis of all great deeds. Man undergoes happiness or sorrow
as result of his good or bad deeds. Kamma begets result, result directs cause.
Seeds give fruits and fruits describe the seeds. Here seed and fruit both are
interrelated. In the same way, Kamma and result of Kamma are deeply
interrelated. The result exists from before in Kamma as sprout. In the "Sangiti
Sutta" the code of Kamma is especially divided into four parts considering the
result of Kamma.
a. Akusala or sorrow giving sinful deeds: These are the deeds accomplished in
greed, jealousy and delusioned mind. Regarding the result of such Kamma in the
book named Dhammapada it is said:

Diso disam yam tam kayira veri va pana verinam

Micchapanihitam cittam papiyo nam tato kare.
Meaning: The amount of harm a jealous person can do to another jealous person
or an enemy, the mind led to the path of falsehood can do more harm than that.
In the book named Dhammapada, it is also said:

Idha socati pecca socati papakari ubhayattha socati

So socati no vinnati disva kammakilitthamattano.
Meaning: A sinner repents in both the worlds present world and after world.
Seeing his own sinful activites and its result, he starts repenting deeply.
b. Kusala or happiness giving virtuous deeds: Observance of precepts,
practice of donating, doing well to others etc. wholesome deeds are good or
happiness giving. Virtuous deeds beget happy result. Regrding the result of such
Kammas, it is said in Dhammapada-

na tam mata pita kayira anne va pi ca nataka

samma panihitam cittam seyyaso nam tato kare.
Meaning: The kind of help which the parents, kith and kin, friends can not do,
the heart led to the right way can do more help.
c. Good or Bad result giving sinful or virtuous deeds: The kamma that is
accomplished in good- bad mixed mind becomes sinful or virtuous and its result
becomes full of joy or sorrow. An example of such Kamma is given below-A 3%
man earns maney through mean ways like stealing, roguery, deception etc. »

Buddhist Kammavada 81
If anybody asks for money from him, he donates in free hand. He always plays
the pioneering role to remove the sorrows of the sufferers. In case of attaining
result, as a consequence of his graciousness, generosity, and doing good to
others, he can take birth as a rich man in the next life. But because of the
misdeeds like stealing, roguery, and deception etc. he may face slanders. Despite
having a lot of wealth, he may be deprived of enjoying it. His life comes to an
end through different pains- mental and physical.

d. The kamma that destroys all kinds of kamma by which emancipation is
possible:

When human beings are attracted to greed, antipathy and dilusion, then there
creates different kinds of desires and passions in him. It is possible to control
these through the control of eye, ear, and nose, tongue skin and mind. For that it
requires rapt meditation, through which it is possible to attain supreme
emancipation. Buddha said in "Samiddhi Sutta" of Samyutta Nikaya, "None
should do any sinful deed in body, utterence or mind. Everybody should forsake
desires and passions and should refrain from accepting sufferings
unnecessarily.”

Good deeds or the result of good deeds lead individual to the holding of virtuous
deeds. Angulimal was a murderer dacoit. He murdered 999 persons with his own
hand. But that Angulimal himself became the arhant in his last birth being free
from all sinful deeds of the past. Alavaka Yakkha being subdued by Buddha
forsook animal killing. Next time, he was able to attain Sotapatti by his efforts
of Kamma. The harlot Amrapali attained Arhattaphala following the path
showed by Buddha. Emperor Ashoka being deluded with the expansion of his
kingdom became known as Candashoka. Later on Candashoka earned fame as
Dhammashoka and accomplished many philanthropic activities.

The patricide king Ajatasattu has been famous still today because of his religious
feelings and respect to Buddha. But because of the deed of patricidal sin, he
underwent the sufferings of hell after death. Despite being the son of a Brahmin,
many cannot be the owner of Brahmin-like behaviour. On the other hand taking
birth in Sudra clan, many people can earn a lot of name and fame because of
physical beauty. The person who believes in the result of Buddhist kKammaphala
or the result of deed of Buddha, he does not hate even the worst criminal.
Because he knows that that man may become great if he finds any opportunity.
Again, he can enjoy the fruits of his own deeds in this world by his good deeds.
Forma-11, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

82 Buddhist religion and moral education
Exercise
In how many parts can the code of Kamma be divided in consideration of the
result of Kamma?
Lesson: 4
Wholesome and Unwholesome Deeds
The synonyms of the word 'Kusal' are perfect, auspicious, virtuous, honest,
pious, faultless, sinless, praiseworthy, qualitative, welfare, welbeing etc. The
Kamma accomplished by consciousness without greed, antipathy and delusion
are called Kusal Kamma or wholesome deeds. There is not touch of sinfulness in
this type of activities. Bounty, silabhavana (thinking about precepts), service,
donation of virtue, religiosity etc. are good deeds. To do wholesome deeds it
requires good mind. It is possible to get good results by doing good deeds in this
way. In Buddhism, importance is given to wholesome or good deeds. The result
of good deeds is good. Khema was born in the city of Hamsavati during the
period of Padumuttar Buddha. She was a maid-servant by profession. One day
she gifted three sweet cakes to Sujata Bhikkhu. Because of this good deed,
Khema earned virtues and was born in the human world at the time of Vipassi
Buddha. At the time of Kuksandha Buddha she was born in the house of a
richman and donated a beautiful garden to Buddha Promukho Bhikkhu Sangha.
At the time of Konagamana Buddha also she held such kind of bounteous cere-
mony. At the time of Kassapa Buddha she was born as the eldest daughter of king
Kikira and built accommodation for the Sangha. Finally, at the time of Gauta-
ma Buddha she became the wife of king Bimbisara.
In this context another example of wholesome deed is given below:
Once upon a time Bodhisattva was born in a poor family. At that time he used to
work for others to earn his livelihood. One day he went out in search of work and
found it in the family of a richman (Sestthi) of Rajageha. He started working
very sincerely. One day he returned home in the evening after his whole day's
work in the field and saw that everybody was fasting on the eve of that full moon
day. In other words, they were observed Atthangiko Uposath Sila. He said to the 2
richman (Setthi), ‘Master! I have made a mistake. I did not know that today is the §

Buddhist Kammavada 83
day of Uposath. So, I could not observe Upasath in the morning. I want to
observe it now'. According to the instruction of the richman he fasted the whole
night with Silanusritibhavana. Unfortunately, because of the hard labour of the
whole day and fasting of the whole night, he died the next day. He was engrossed
in good thoughts and meditation till the period before his death. As an influence
of that good deeds and thoughts, he was born as a prince after death. It is the
result of good deeds.
The meanings of the word 'Akusala' are sin, fault, flaw, dishonest work, crime,
inauspicious work, imperfect, unwelcome deed, non-virtuous work, unjust,
unsuitable, against principle, unrighteous, worse etc. Greed, antipathy and
delusion prevail in unwholesome deeds. The result of unwholesome deeds is
always bad. Man gets mortified in the society because of unwholesome deeds.
There occurs loss of honour and respect. In the whole slander is spread
everywhere against him. Everybody has to face the result of unwholesome
deeds. Moggallana had to tolerate redicule physically in his last age.
Moggallana was an Arhart. In his previous birth he caused sufferings to his
loving mother. As a result of that suffering he had to stand slanders despite being
an Arhart. Through this it is understood that one has to suffer the result of
unwholesome deeds in many lives.
Devadatta once tried to murder Buddha. At that time he tried to murder Buddha
throwing stones from the hill. That time there was bleeding from the body of the
great wise man like Buddha. Because of this unwholesome deed, Devadatta had
to suffer the pains of hell.
It is mentioned in ‘Mahavaccha sutta' of Majjhima Nikaya - Once Buddha said
while telling about the wholesome and unwholesome deeds to Paribrajaka (trav-
ellor) Vaccchagotta 'Greed is bad and non-greed is good. Antipathy is bad; sym-
pathy (Audes) is good. Delusion is bad, anti delusion is good.’ He also said,
‘Jealousy is bad, refraining from jealousy is good. Stealing is bad, refraining
from stealing is good. Sensuality is bad, refraining from sensuality is good.
Words of jealousy is bad, refraining from words of jealousy is good. Harsh
words are bad; refraining from telling harsh words is good. Telling useless
words are bad, refraining from uttering useless words is good. Greed is bad, non
greed is good. pitilessness is bad, pitifulness is good. Wrong conception is bad,
true conception is good.' Here Buddha has called these ten kinds of dhammas as
= Akusala and refraining from ten types of dhammas (behaviours) as Kusala as
\ well.

84 Buddhist religion and moral education
The works done maybe good or bad but at the time of death it gives special
result. Despite having the dominance of good deeds throughout one's life, one's
destination becomes downward if there arises the thought of bad deeds at the
time of death. On the other side, despite the amount of bad deeds having more,
one's destination becomes upward because of the creation of good heart at the
time of death. One's direction becomes honest and happy if there originates the
thought of good deed at the time of death. So, one should produce good
thoughts.
Exercise
Differentiate between wholesome and unwholesome deeds.
Lesson: 5
English Translation of Cullakamma Vibhanga Sutta
Culla Kamma Vibhanga Sutta or Khudra Kamma Vibhanga Sutta is 135 number
of Sutta of Majjhima Nikaya. In it, there is detailed description of Kamma and
result of Kamma. It is mentioned below:
I have heard like this that once Lord Buddha lived in monastery of Ana-
thapindika at Jetavana. At that time, Subha Manavaka, son ofTodeya Brahmin,
appeared before Buddha and sat down beside him after a joyful discussion with
him. Then Subha Manavaka, son of Todeya, said to Buddha, 'O0 Gautama! why
among human beings of the world some are seen low and some better, some live
a short life and some long, some are patient and some without any disease, some
are ugly and some beautiful, some are poor and some rich, some are lesspower-
ful and some with massive power, some are born in lower caste and some higher,
some are wise and some unwise? 0 Gautama! what is the cause of human being'
being such meanest and the best?’ Then Buddha said in reply, '0 Manavaka ! In
this world all beings are subject to their deeds. Kamma is the only friend of all
creatures. Kamma is their only shelter. Kamma is the only protector of all
beings. It is Kamma which divides the beings as the meanest and the best.'
Subha Manavaka said, 'O Gautama! I could not well understand the thing you
instructed. You are omniscient. So, give me detailed instruction about Kamma
so that I can understand easily.' 3
N

Buddhist Kammavada 85
Then Buddha said, '0 Subha Manavaka! Then listen. Try to understand
mindfully.' Subha Manavaka said, 'Yes Lord, please tell.'
Then Buddha said, 'O Manavaka ! Some women and men in this world become
greedy and killers of creatures. They always stain their hands with the blood of
creatures. Thus they behave cruelly with the creatures either killing or
wounding it. Because of such kind of behaviour they obtain Apaya Duggati, go
to Asuraloka or hell. If they take birth among human beings, they live a short
life."
‘0 Manavaka! The main cause of geting a short life is showing cruelty to the
creatures and being cruel to the dead or wounded beings.’
‘0 Manabak! Some women or men refrain from killing any creature. They
throw away the weapons; feel ashamed to kill any creature. They lead life
showing mercy to all creatures. Thus they do good deeds and they lead their life
through good livelihood. For this reason, they go to heaven after death. Instead
of going to heaven, if they take birth again as human beings, they get a long life.
For being pitiful and helpful to the creatures and for refraining from killing of
beings they get a long life."
‘0 Manavaka! Some women or men in this world unleash torture on animals.
They unleash torture on creatures through stones, sticks or arms. No one should
torture the creatures in such a way. For giving such pains they obtain Apaya
Duggati, take birth in Asuraloka or hell. And if they take birth among human
beings they are always attacked with difficult diseases."
‘0 Manavaka! Some women or men in this world are quick-tempered. They
become angry for a simple word. Utter foul words. They nurture anger, malice
for a long time in their minds and later they again express it. For this kind of
deeds, they obtain Apaya Duggati, take birth in Asuralok or hell. And if they take
birth among human beings, their complexion become very ugly. It is this which
is the cause of their being ugly.’
‘0 Manavaka! There are some women or men in the world who are without any
anger. They do not get angry even if they are told hundreds of things; they do not
spring up or utter loud words. For this reason, they go to heaven after death.
Instead of going to heaven ever if they take birth as human beings, they get a
long life. They get a long life for refraining from killing of beings and being
« Pitiful and helpful to the creatures. ‘O Manavaka! It is the main cause of their
S_ being beautiful.

86 Buddhist religion and moral education
‘0 Manavaka! Some women or men become envious. They are envious of the
people who attain fame, pride, honour, respect, and worship. They make them
guilty. For such kind of deeds, they obtain Apaya, Duggati, take birthin  Asu-
raloka or hell. Even they are born among human beings, they take birth in a poor
family. 0 Manavaka! It is this which is the cause of their birth in a poor family.'
‘0 Manavaka! Some women or men do not become envious. They do not be
envious of the poeple who attain fame, pride, hunour, respect, and worship. They
do not express their anger to anybody out of malice. They do not make them
guilty. For this they go to heaven. If they take birth as human beings, they are
born in great families. This is the cause of getting birth in great families.'

'0 Manavaka! Some women or men in this world do not become bounteous.
They do not donate food, water, clothes, nothing to a Samanera and Brahmin.
For such kind of deeds they obtain Apaya, Duggati, take birth in Asuraloka or
hell. And even if they take birth among human beings, they become very poor
This is the cause of their being poor.

‘0 Manavaka! Some women or men in this world become Uppish. They do not
salute the man worthy of being saluted. They do not honour the man worthy of
standing ovation. They do not give seat to the person worthy of getting a seat.
They do not worship the person worthy of being worshipped. They do not obey
the person worthy of being obeyed. For such deeds, they obtain Apaya, Duggati,
take birth in Asuraloka or hell. And if they take birth among human beings, they
are born in lower caste. This is the cause of their getting birth in lower caste.’

‘0 Manavaka! Some women or men in this world do not become proud. Salute
the person worthy of being saluted. Besides, who honour the person worthy of
being honoured, assign seat to the person worthy of getting seat, worship the
person worthy of being worshipped, obey the person to be obeyed. For this, they
go to heaven. And if they take birth among human beings, they are born in high
clans. This is the cause of being born in high clans.'

‘0 Manavaka! There are some women and men in this world who appear before
Samanera or Brahmin and ask, 'Bhante, what is good? What is bad? What is not
a fault? What should be served? What should not be served? What deeds of mine
will cause me harm and suffering for a long time and what deeds of mine will
bring about happiness for me for a long time? For deeds of such kinds they
obtain Apaya, Durgati, born in Asuraloka or hell. And even if they are born
among human beings they become unwise. This is the cause of being born as 3
unwise.'

Buddhist Kammavada oF

‘0 Manavaka! There are some women or men in this world who appearing

before Samanera or Brahmin ask, 'What is good? What is bad? What are not

faults? Of what should be served? Of what should not be served? Which works

will cause pains, sufferings and sorrows for a long time? What deeds of mine

will bring about happiness for me for a long time? For deeds of such kind, they

go to heaven? And if they take birth as human beings, they are born with great

wisdom. This is the cause of being born with great wisdom.'

‘0 Manavaka! thus different poeple with short life, long life, attacked with

severe diseases, diseaseless, ugly, beautiful, unhappy family, happy family, poor,

rich, less powerful, greatly powerful, high caste, low caste, unwise, greatly wise

are seen.'

‘0 Manavaka! It is Kamma which is the companion of beings. All beings are

subject to Kamma. It is Kamma for which human beings are born in different

clans. In other words, they obtain Apaya Duggati, take birth in Asuraloka hell or

among human beings. It is Kamma which is friend. It is Kamma which is

Pratikarana. So, it is Kamma which leads human beings to lower caste. It is

Kamma again which takes human beings to higher clan. helps to take birth in

higher clan, makes them great.

When Buddha explained Kammavada in this way, Subha Manavaka, son of

Toddeya, told Buddha, 'very good, very beautiful, and very excellent’. He

discovered the physical entity of a covered thing; showed path to the pathless

people. Thus, there is no end of the religious instructions that Buddha imparted.

'‘O Buddha! Now, I am taking refuge in you, the religion introduced by you and

the Sangha established by you. From today think me as a devotee who took

refuge in you.’

Exercise
Write down the key theme of Cullakamma Vibhanga Sutta.
Lesson : 6
Importance of Kammavada

Kammavada is an important matter in Buddhism. According to Buddhist

Kammavada Citta (mind) itself is the source of wholesome and unwholesome
x deeds. According to this Kammavada even thinking bad is a sin. Good deeds are
& accomplished through good thinking. By the inevitable process of the principle

88 Buddhist religion and moral education
of cause and effect present life is formed of the result of deeds done in the past
life, future life is formed of the result of deeds done at the present life. From
heaven to the lowest hell all creatures are tied by the law of Kamma. All are
controlled by the same rule of Kamma. If a Kamma is done once, it continues to
give result for an infinite period. Thus the result of Kamma is indivisible.
Everybody must have to undergo it. So, for doing good deeds it requires the
controlling of mind. Regarding this it is found in Dhammapada:
Manopubbamgama dhamma manosettha manomaya

Manasa ce pasannena_bhasati va karoti va

Tato nam sukhamanveti chaya'va anapayini.
Meaning: Mind is fast among all dhammas. All dhammas are founded on Mind.
If anybody peforms a task with a gracious heart, then happiness follows him like
a shadow.
There are three doors of Kamma. Viz: body door, speech door, and mind door.
Everyday deeds are accomplished through these three doors. In some Kamma all
the three doors remain together. Some deeds are accomplished by two doors and
some by only one. The deeds we are doing through these three doors, some of
them are honest, some dishonest, again some are neutral. Whether a Kamma is
honest or dishonest is judged by the result of the Kamma. The Kamma whose
result is bountiful and pleasure giving to the doer himself and to the world of
beings around him is called honest deed. The Kamma that is harmful or brings
sorrows to the doer himself and to the world of beings around him is dishonest
deed. The Kamma which though accomplished, but is not result oriented is
neutral deed. By Kamma the position of men in the society becomes absolutely
firm or it is possible to be established, which is not possible by birth. If one
beautifully accomplishes ones everyday's work, his life becomes happy, but it
requires having a good thinking in the accomplished deeds. If deeds are done in
this way, good result is a must.
For this reason, importance is given to Buddhsit Kammavada. A man can beauti-
fully construct his life through Kamma only. It is Kamma which places a man to
the highest seat. The good result of Kamma flows in all directions. It is Kamma
which is the driving force of human beings. Man himself bears the fruits of his
own deeds. He does not leave it behind. As per Buddhist Kammavada, there are
rules for not killing any creature, not stealing, not being involved in fornication,
not telling lies, not taking things like drugs along with not to speak useless or
harsh words. To earn the livelihood in a fair manner, no one should do any unjust
or unsocial deed; everybody neglects them in the society. Look with a hateful
eye. So, everybody should do beneficent deed keeping in mind the Kammavada
of Buddha. The result that is earned through the accomplishment of good deeds,
even flood can never destroy that. Such deeds are to be accomplished through &
which family, society and on the whole the good will of state increases. &

Buddhist Kammavada 89
Exercise
Fill in the gaps
1. Man undergoes ................ according to his own Kamma.
2. Because of the diversity of .................... all men are not equal.
3. In Buddhist religion importance is given OM ...........:cceeeeee
4. sssssseeeeee divides the beings as the meanest and the best.
5. Future life is formed on the .................... of present life.
Short questions
1. What do you mean by Kammavada?
2. Who are subject to Kamma?
3. What do you mean by wholesome deeds?
4. What do you mean by unwholesome deeds?
5. How many door of Kamma are there and what are they?
Essay type Questions
1. Write a short eassy on Buddhist Kammavada.
2 Write what you know about wholesome and unwholesome deeds.
3. Write a summary of Cullakamma Vibhanga Sutta.
Multiple Choce Question
1. During the time of which Buddha, Khema was born in the city of
Hamsavati?
a. Kukusandha b. Kssapa
c. Konagamana d. Padumuttara
2. What does Kammavada mean?
a. belief of an idea.
b. the deep belief of the result of Kamma.
c. the belief in the previous birth.
d. The belief in the result of Kamma of the present life.
Forma-12, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

90 Buddhist religion and moral education
Read the passage below and answer to the question no. 3 and 4:
Conversation between a devotee and Bhikkhu
Devotee : Going to Vihara, after completion of the praise of Tiratana and.
adoring the Bhikkhu, devotee sat beside Bhikkhu and asked, 'Why do
poeple become rich or poor, beautiful or ugly?’
Bhikkhu : Quoting Buddha in his instruction, Bhikkhu said, ‘All living beings are
subject to Kamma. Kamma is the only friend of life. Kamma is their only shelter.
It is Kamma which divides the creatures as the meanest and the best.’
3. To whom of the textbook does the matter of questioning of Devotee apply?
a. To Subhadra b. To Brahmin
c. To Subha Manavaka d. to Upali.
4. Of what is expressed in the quotation of Buddha in Bhikkhus’s instruction?
a. Of Dhammapada b. Of Materialism
c. Of Kammavada d. Idealism.
Creative Question
1. Two neighbours ofNatunpara stay side by side. Among them the family
members of Dipannita Chakma are quiet and gentle. They do not envy the people
who get fame, pride, honour, respect, and worship. Rather they invite the
Bhikkhus to the Vihara or their house and donate them food water, daily
necessities according to their ability. So, the members of the other family cause
their annoyance through their expression of jealousy or utterence of wrathful
words.
2
Rg

Buddhist Kammavada a

a. In ‘Sangiti Sutta’ how many parts is the code of Kamma divided in
consideration of the result of Kamma?

b. Why had Devadatta to undergo the sufferings of hell? Describe beriefly.

c. With what sutta do you find similarity with the activities of the family of
Dipannita Chakma? Explain.

d. In the stem what would be the impact of the behaviour of the two families
from familial or social point? Assess and analyse from the religious point of
view?

2 Chart-1 Chart-2

, Karma. | Listening [Greed |
sae en Greed Kamma Kamma

a. What does the word ‘Vada’ mean?

b. What is Utpiraka Kamma? Explain.

c. Which deed does chart-1 hint? Explain.

d. What might be the difference between the result of Kamma described in chart-1

and chart-2? Analyse in the light of religion.
2
R

Chapter Six
Atthakatha

To explain the subject-matter of the Tipitaka in a simple and easy way a kind of
literary work is composed in Pali language which in the annals of Pali literature
is known as Atthakatha. Though Atthakatha is written on the basis of the sub-
ject~matter of Tipitaka, it is not included in the Pali Tipitaka. It is recognised as
a literary work of an independent stream. Atthakatha literature explains the
religion and philosophy of Buddha, side by side, it also relevantly discusses the
different things like religion, philosophy, society, literature, culture, politics,
economics, geography etc. of ancient India and Sri Lanka. For this reason,
Atthakatha literature is considered as a great source of history of ancient India
and Sri Lanka. In this chapter we will study about Atthakatha.
By the end of this chapter we will be able to —

* Describe the idea of Atthakatha and the backgound of its composition

* Explain the subject-matter of Atthakatha

* Give an idea about the life and works of the writers of Atthakatha

* Narrate the importance and teachings of Atthakatha.

Lesson: 1
Idea of Atthakatha and Background of Its Composition

Pali 'Atthakatha' is formed with the combination of the two words 'Attha' and
‘Katha’ the word 'Attha' indicates 'meaning'’, 'Katha' means utterence,
description, explanation etc. Atthakatha is called 'Arthakatha’ in Sanskrit and
‘Commentary’ in English. So, generally, Atthakatha comes to mean Arthakatha,
commentary, description of meaning, semantics, explanation etc. The book that
describes or explains the meanings of words is called Atthakatha. In the book
named 'Saratthadipani’, it said about Atthakatha as such: 'Attho Kathiyati Etayati
Atthakatha’ which means it is Atthakatha because it describes the meaning.
In the Tipitaka, there are so many complex, inscrutable, equivocal anad silent
terms or things which are not easily comprehensible to the readers of all classes.
That very terms or things are presented in Atthakatha in a simple and easy way
with the help of using synonym, examples, similar stories, explanations etc.
Thus, the literary work which is composed in Pali language and explanatory to FS
the religion and philosophy of Buddha is called Atthakatha. N

Atthakatha 93
In response to the call of amiable words of Buddha for the emancipation of
sufferings, innumerable people from different races, different clans, and
different classes from all over India took refuge in Buddha Sangha that day. As
in Buddha Sangha there were wise Bhikkhus and Bhikkhunis so also was there
less wise people. So, it was not possible for all to understand properly the
religious instructions of Buddha. As a result, it required to explain the meanings
of many things of religious instructions of Buddha during his life time. It
required explanation and direction of various matters for different reasons in the
Sangha. For example, if anybody spoke ill of Buddha, his religion or Sangha,
broke the codes of Sangha, misexplained the words of Buddha, made indecent
behavior in the Sangha, discussed anything being mad with anger, if there raised
doubt or debate regarding any matters of religion and philosophy, if anything of
the words of Buddha became incomprehensible then the Bhikkhu Sangha
gathered together to try to find a solution to the matter. In this case, sometimes
Buddha and sometimes his leading desciples used to solve this kind of problems
giving proper explanations.
In the Tipitaka, a lot of examples are found in this regard. Viz. once there was a
conversation going on between Supriya, a wandering religious mendicant and a
young disciple of Buddha on the matters of Buddha, his religion and sangha. On
the one side the wandering religious mendicant Supriya was criticizing Buddha,
his religion and sangha. On the other hand the young disciple was praising
highly of Buddha. At this the Bhikkhus felt hesitated and Buddha gave
explanations of the do's and don't in this regard of which mention is found in
Silakkhandhavagga of Digha Nikaya. In the same way, once the young
wandering religious mendicant Potaliputta wrongly explained the words of
Buddha to Bhikkhu Sammiddhi, a young Bhikkhu: Friend Samiddhi! I heard
thus from Samana Gautama: " Kamma either by way of deed, or by way of word
is no Kamma at all, the real Kamma being by way of thought or volition only.
For there is an attainment after having reached which one feels nothing." Then
Bhikkhu Samiddhi told wanderer Potaliputa, "Friend Potaliputta! Don't tell like
that. It is not good to criticize Lord, Lord will never tell like that.' After telling
like this the wanderer Potaliputta went away and Bhikkhu Sammiddhi informed
the matter to Ananda Thera. Ananda Thera informed the same to Buddha. With
a view to clarifying the matter, Buddha gave the minutest explanation of Kamma
« along with examples and meanings which are mentioned in the
S$ Mahakammavibhanga Sutta.

94 Buddhist religion and moral education
Thus at the primary stage of the formation of Buddhist Sangha, Buddha himself
used to solve the problems giving explanations and decisions. But in course of
time, the Buddhist Sangha spread and it was not possible for him to solve all the
problems. From the study of history, it is known that within few years of the
start of Buddha's preaching in the important localities or towns of ancient India
viz. Saranatha, Rajageha, Vesali, Nalanda, Paca, Ujjayani, Campa, Mathura,
Avanti etc. regions, Buddhist Sangha was formed and that places became the
great centres for the practice of Buddist religion and philosophy. It was not
possible for Buddha to always live in these places, so, these centres began to run
by the leadership of one leading disciples of Buddha. Among them the
mentionable names were: Ananda, Mahakassapa, Mahakaccayana,
Mahakotthita, Sariputta and Moggallana. In absence of Buddha, they used to
solve all the problems regarding the activities of Sangha along with the
explanation of Buddha's religion and philosophy.

The leading disciples used to make the Bhikkhus understand the instructions of
Buddha explaining the meanings of the same. Buddha felt that many of his
leading disciples are able to properly explain his religious instructions, in other
words religious philosophy. In this case, Mahakaccayana, Sariputta and
Mahakotthita Thera were in the front line. Mahakaccayana was an expert in
presenting the brief instructions of Buddha in a clear, simple and easy way to the
audience. He earned a great fame in explaining the religious philosophy and
Buddha places Mahakaccayana above all in explaining the religious philosophy.
Besides, there had been discussion among the Bhikkhus of the centres on
various matters including religion and philosophy. The directions or the
explanations that the leading disciples gave in the context of their discussions
were informed to Buddha in due time. Of leading disciples' explanations and
directions Buddha approved the ones which he thought right and instructed the
Bhikkhus to accept, contain and observe that. At the time of collection of the
words of Buddha, these explanations also received approval in the first council
which is found in the different books of the Tipitaka. These explanations of
Buddha and the disciples of Buddha can be recognized as the beginning of
Atthakatha, which later getting development prepared the background for the
composition of Atthakatha. S

Atthakatha 95
The literary work that was composed as the time befitting, simple, easy and
meaningful explanations of the words of Buddha came to be known as
Atthakatha. Generally, Atthakatha or commentary means providing the new,
time befitting, and comprehensible meaning and explanations of the main texts
according to one's wisdom and point of view which properly contains the proper
meaning and theme of the main texts. In the first century B.C., under the patron-
ization of the Ceylonese king Battagamini, the Atthakathas were preserved writ-
ing it down on palm leaf in Ceylonese language. For this reason it can be said,
Atthakatha literature attained fulfillment even before the first century B.C.
The Atthakathas written on palm leaf were preserved in the Mahavihara of Anu-
radhpura in Cyelone. In the course of time that became known as Sihalatthakatha
(Ceylonese Atthakatha). The Sihalatthakathas were known as Maha-atthakatha,
Mahapaccari-attakatha, Kurundi-ttakatha, Andhaka-attakatha, Samkhepa-at-
takatha etc. Though the composition of Atthakatha started in India, it was not
found in India. As a result, the Indians and the people of other countries could
not understand the words of Buddha easily. For that reason, in around 5" century
B.C. the scholars like Buddhaghosa, § Buddhadatta, Dhammapala, Mahanama
and Upasena etc. composed the Attakathas of the present time in Pali language
taken from Sihalatthakatha preserved in Ceylon in Ceylonese language. Thus,
passing through the different stages of evolution, the Atthakathas took the form
of the present time.

At first the Atthakathas were composed with the subject-matter of the Tipitaka
or the religion and philosophy of Buddha, but later on, different types of
Atthakathas are also composed with diverse aspects like the religion and philos-
ophy, poetry, grammar, geography and politics etc. of ancient India and Sri
Lanka. So, Atthakatha took the form of a vast and diverse storehouse of
literature.

Exercise
What do you mean by Atthakatha?
Make a list of the names of the leading disciples of Buddha.
Tell the names of some disciples of Buddha who are expert in explaining religion
and philosophy. In what names were the Sihalatthakathas known? Who and on
what basis composed the Pali Atthakathas of the present time?
2
8

96 Buddhist religion and moral education
Lesson: 2

Introduction to Atthakatha
The detail meaning and explanations of Buddha's scriptures are known as
Atthakatha in the history of Buddhist literature. The Various words of Buddha,
different rules and principles, contemporary critical objects are tried to be
explained and solved by Buddha himself and his leading disciples during
Buddha's life. Those explanations given by Buddha and his disciples are
considered as the starting and the background of writing Atthakatha Literary
work. Acariya Buddhaghosa, Acariya Buddhadatta, Acariya Dharmapala, Acari-
ya Upasen, Acariya Mahanama, etc. are some of the writers of Atthakatha. A
brief description of the subject matters of Atthakatha of various Pitakas are
given below-
Atthakathas of Sutta Pitaka
Sutta Pitaka is divided into five parts. such as Digha Nikaya, Majjhima, Nikaya.
Samyutta Nikaya, Anguttar Nikaya and khuddaka Nikaya. Atthaakathas are
written independently on each Nikaya. There are sixteen books in Khuddaka
Nikaya. Though the Atthakathas of the first four Nikayas are known by various
names, the Atthakathas of the many books of Khuddaka Nikaya are called by the
same name. viz; Udana, Itivuttaka, Vimanvatthu, Petavatthu, Theragatha,
Therigatha and Criya Pitaka the Atthakatha of these seven books are known as
Paramatthadipani, On the other side, the Atthakatha of the books on
Mahaniddesa and Cullaniddes is known as Daddammapajjotika.
Acariya Upasena composed the Saddammapaijjotika as the Atthakatha of the two
books mahaniddesa and Cullaniddesa. So, the names and introduction of the
Atthakathas of the first four Nikayas are differently mentioned here :

Atthakatha a
Atthakatha of Vinaya Pitaka
Vinaya pitaka is divided mainly into three parts. Viz. Sutta- Vibhanga,
Khandhaka and Parivara or Parivara Patha. Two Atthakathas are composed on
the subject- matter of Vinaya Pitaka. Viz : Samantapasadika and Kankhavitarani.
Samantapasadika is known as the Atthakatha of tha whole Vinaya Pitaka. The
codes of Vinaya for the Bhikkhus and Bhikkunis described in the book
Sutta Vibhanga are known as 'Patimokkha'. The Atthakatha composed in the
light of Patimokkha is called Kankhavitarani.
Atthakatha of Abhidhamma Pitaka
Abhidhamma Pitaka is divided into seven parts. Viz: Dhammasangani,
Vibhanga, Dhatukatha, Pugalapannatti, Kathavatthu, Yamaka and Patthan.
Atthakatha has been composed for each of the books of Abhidhamma Pitaka.
Excepting the Atthakatha of Dhammasangani and Vibhanga, the Atthakatha of
the other five boks of Abhidhammapitaka is known as Panayakarana Atthakatha.
Abhidhamma is known as the Buddhist Philosophy. The Subject-matter of the
Abhidhamma Pitaka is complex. In the Atthakatha of Abhidhamma Pitaka, the
deep philosophical matters of Buddhism are presented in a simple and lucid
language. Mentioned below are the names and identity of the Atthakathas of
Abhidhamma Pitaka :
Exercise
What book is the Paramatthadipani the Atthakatha of ?
Make a list of the Atthakathas of Suttapitaka composed by Buddhaghosa.
Forma-13, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

98 Buddhist religion and moral education
Lesson: 3

Atthakathacariya Buddhadatta
Among the contemporary of Buddhaghosa another time winning composer of
Atthakatha is Buddhadatta. But this time winning writer did not express himself
in his immortal literary works. Besides, though the biography of Buddhaghosa is
available, the biography of Buddhadatta is not found. So, the birth, chilhood,
initiation, education, and life style, etc. of this great writer are covered with mist.
In this passage we will study about Buddhadatta, the famous Atthakatha writer.
Birthplace and time:
In the book Gandhavamsa, Buddhadatta is termed as the Acariya of India. In the
books Vinayavinicchaya and Uttaravinicchaya, he has been mentioned as the
inhabitant of Uragapura. Mention is found that he composed the book
Vinaya-vinicchaya during the time of king Acchuta at the monastery of
Vishnudasa of the village Bhutamangala of the kingdom of Cola. According to
the book Abhidhammavatara, Uragapura was located on the bank of the river
Kaveri. The scholars are unanimous that Uragapura was the ancient name of the
place Urayura near to Tricinapoli of South India of the present time. He was born
between the periods from the last part of 4th century B.C. to the first part of 5th
century B.C. According to the books Buddhaghosuppatti and Vinayavinicchaya
Tika, Buddhaghosa and Buddhadatta were contemporary. It is known from the
book Buddhaghosuppatti that the day on which Buddhadatta started to return to
Jambudipa from Ceylone, that day Buddhaghosa also started for Ceylone to
compose Atthakatha.
The ships of both stopped on the midway because of a collision. Then
Buddhadatta addressed Buddhaghosa as 'Avuso' and asked where and on what
purpose he was going. In reply Buddhaghosa said, 'I am going to translate the
words of Buddha from Ceylonese to Magadhi language.’ Buddhadatta said, 'I
also went to Ceylone to write down the words of Buddha in Magadhi language. I
have just finished writing Jinalangkara, Dantavamsa, Dhatuvamsa, and
Bodhivamsa. I could not yet compose the Atthakatha and Tika
(sub-commentary). If you are willing to translate the words of Buddha from
Ceylonese to Magadhi language, then you will compose the Atthakatha and Tika
first' Telling thus, he inspired Buddhaghosa. Some scholars think that
Buddhadatta’ was senior as he addressed Buddhaghosa as ‘Avuso’.
Buddhaghosuppatti and Vinayavinicchaya were composed much after 3
Buddhadatta. Besides, the scholars doubt about the meeting of both as nothing of “

Atthakatha 9
their meeting is found in the books of Buddhaghosa and Buddhadatta. Yet, in
respect of time we can assume that Buddhadatta and Buddhaghosa were
contemporary.
Initiation into Buddhist Religion or Pabbajja:
No detail is known about the initiation of Buddhadatta. It is known from the
books Abhidhammavatara and Ruparupavibhaga that, he received initiation to a
Bhikkhu who was the follower of Mahavihara Nikaya of Ceylone. According to
the rules of Mahavihara Nikaya, he attained efficiency in learning Dhamma and
Vinaya from the Bhikkhus.
He was a life long follower of this Nikaya. But nothing is known about his
preceptor and vihara, the place of his initiation.
Poet and other Reputations :
The main identity of Buddhadatta was that he was a Buddhist monk and
composer of Atthakatha or a commentator. His fame as an Acariya spread far and
wide. He was treated with special reverence by the contemporary scholars. The
scholars used to accept a lot of quotations from the books composed by him. He
was also an expert in Samatha and Vipassana. Besides the expertise of Buddhism
and its philosophy, this great man was also known as a poet.
Most of the books of Buddhadatta were composed in verse. For instance, the
book Vinayavinicchaya was composed in 3183 verses, the book Uttarvinicchaya
in 969 verses, and the book Abhidhammavatara in 1415 verses. If he was not
endowed with an infinite poetic power, he would not have been able to explain
the religion and philosophy of Buddha in poetry or verses in an easy and simple
way. He also used to be called by the name Great Commentator.
Literary works:
The writers of the ancient time would not mention their names and did not write
anything about them in their books. Buddhadatta also did the same. So, there is a
debate among the scholars regarding the literary works of Buddhadatta.
According to the tradition, Buddhadatta composed the following books:
1. Madhuratthavilasini (Buddhavamsa-atthakatha)
2. Vinayavinicchaya
3h Uttarvinicchaya

20

S 4. Abhidhammavatara

100 Buddhist religion and moral education

5s Ruparupvibhaga

6. Jinalankara

7. Dantavamsa or Dathavamsa

8. Dhatuvamsa

9. Bodhivamsa.

Among the books mentioned above, the scholars recognize Vinayavinicchaya,

Uttarvinicchaya, Abhidhammavatara, and Madhuratthavilasini as the real com

position of Buddhadatta.

There is doubt among the scholars regarding the remaining books. It is known

that he composed the books Vinayavinicchaya, Madhuratthavilasini,

Abhidhammavatara at Cola State of south India.

Death:

Not that much is known about the death of Buddhaghosa. It is mentioned in the

book Bhuddhaghosuppati that he died a few years after his return from Ceylone.

But nothing is known about the cause or place of his death. As he was the

inhabitant of South India and composed his books there, it is assumed that it is

South India where he died.

Exercise
Where is the birthplace of Buddhadatta?
Assess Buddhadatta as a poet.
Identify the true compositions of Buddhadatta making a list of the books composed by
him according to tradition.
Lesson: 4
Atthakathacariya Dhammapala

Dhammapala was a very famous Atthakathacariya. His place is next to

Buddhaghosa. He has enriched the storehouse of Pali literature by writing

commentary, sub-commentary and annotation. Still now, the Buddhists

remember him with due reverence for his composition of immortal literary

works. But, very little is known about the biography of this great writer endowed

with an infinite talents.
oo
3
N

Atthakatha TOL
Birthplace and time:
In the book Gandhavamsa, Dhammapala has been mentioned as the Acariya of
Jambudvipa or India. There is no specific mention of his birthplace in this book.
According to the book Sasanavamsa, he was the inhabitant of Padaratittha of the
kingdom of Damila near Ceylone. According to the Atthakatha of the book
Nettipakarana, he was the inhabitant of Badarittha Vihara. The scholars think
that 'Padartittha’ and "Badarittha’ are one and the same place. According to Hiuen
Tsang, Dhammapala was born in Kancipura. This place locates at 43 miles south
from the Madraj town of South India and is marked as the Kanjevaran town of
the present time. On the other side, the scholars opine that the place 'Padartittha’
or 'Badarittha' locates at Nagapattana of South India. Nagapattana is situated at
the Tenjore district of South India and he was a Tamil by birth.
Though mention is found about different places, he was born in 'Padartittha' or
‘Badarittha'. Because, the books he composed support this fact. The names of
the places, which were mentioned as his birth place, were all located in south
India. Perhaps, the place was known in different names in different times. So,
the names of different places have been mentioned as his birth place. The
scholars are unanimous that it was south India which was the birth place of
Dhammapala. He was born in the last part of sixth century B.C.
Chilhood and Initiation
Nothing is known about the childhood or initiation of Dhammapala. In the
travelogue of Hiuen Tsang, such description about his childhood is found:
Dhammapala was born in Kancipura. He had been endowed with a nice and
honest habit since his childhood which played a vital role to build up a
developed and higher life. When he got matured, it was finalised that he would
be married to the princess of that kingdom. There arose a feeling of sadness in
his mind on the night before his marriage. When he prayed for emancipation in
front of the effigy of Buddhas, his prayer was accepted. A god came and took
him away from there to a distant hilly Vihara. In that Vihara, the Bhikkhus
initiated him. No mention is found of this matter in the book of Dhammapala or
other books. So, a kind of doubt arose regarding how far is the matter true. It is
known from the book Nettipakarana composed by him that he used to live in
'Padartittha' or 'Badarittha' Vihara of South India. As a result, it is assumed that
he was initiated or took pabbajja in south India. But the name of his preceptor is
not known. He composed his books on the basis of the materials of Mahavihara
3 Nikaya. So, it is thought that he was the follower of Mahavihara Nikaya or a
“follower of Theravada.

102 Buddhist religion and moral education
Acariya Buddhaghosa and Acariya Dhammapala
The writing style of both Buddhaghosa and Dhammapala was similar. Both of
them followed the same principle in the application of words and resemblances,
in planning and presentation of the theme and in the use of diction. Both of them
explained the religion and philosophy of Buddha almost in the same way. So, it
is thought that they studied in the same school. Buddhaghosa composed
Atthakatha on the first four Nikayas of Sutta Pitaka. On the otherside,
Dhammapala composed Atthakatha on the fifth Nikaya or Khuddaka Nikaya. As
the Atthakathas of the first four Nikayas of Sutta Pitaka were composed earlier
so he composed the Atthakatha of the last Nikaya. So, it is thought that
Buddhaghosa preceeded Dhammapala.
Though it is mentioned in the text named Gandhavamsa 14 books were
composed by Dhammapala, the scholars are divided in their opinion in this
respect. Among the Atthakathas  Itivuttakatthakatha, Udanatthakatha,
Cariyapitakatthakatha, heragathatthakatha, Therigathatthakatha, Vimalavilasini
(Atthakatha of Vimanavatthu) and Vimalavilasini (Atthakatha of Petavatthu)-in
other words in the introduction of these seven books known as
Paramatthadipani, it is mentioned that Dhammapala composed these books. As a
result, the scholars recognise these seven books as the composition of
Dhammapala. But in Sasanavamsa, though it is recognised that the Atthakathas
are composed by Dhammapala, it is not recognised that Dhammapala composed
the sub-commentaries.
Death of Dhammapala:
Nothing is known about the death of Dhammapala. As he was the inhabitant of
South India, it is natural that he died in South India. So, it is deemed that he died
in South India.
Exercise
When and where was Atthakathacariya Dhnammapala born?
Make a list of the books composed by Atthakathacariya Dhammapala. 2
N

Atthakatha 103
Lesson: 5
Importance of Atthakatha
Though the main point of Atthakatha literature is the theme of the Tipitaka, here
the religion and philosophy, society, literature, culture, economics, politics,
geography etc. of ancient India and Sri Lanka, have been relevantly discussed.
So, Atthakatha is considered as an important source for the composition of
ancient history. It is the theme of the Tipitaka which is generally explained in
Atthakathas. So, the words of Buddha can be easily and properly understood
through Atthakatha. Besides, whether with the evolution of time or for any other
causes any addition, subtraction or change-development occured to the subject
matter of the Tipitaka or not can be easily identified. Atthakatha is also very
important in case of translating the Tipitaka.
There are so many incomprehensible and complex matters in the Tipitaka which
cause problem in case of translation. Along with the change of time, many words
of the Tipitaka took an obscure form. But in Atthakatha, we find the proper
explanation of that complex and unintelligible words. For this reason, the
Tipitaka and Pali literature can be properly translated with the help of
Atthakatha.
In Atthakatha, mention is found about the names of a lot of books composed
after the Tipitaka. So, the debate that is noticed in Pali literature about the
composition period of the books can be solved with the help of Atthakatha.
Through the study of Atthakatha, important information is found about the
political history of ancient India and Sri Lanka starting from the time of Buddha
to the 5th century B.C. Through it, the prevalent debate or the problems
regarding the period of reigns of the ancient kings and their ideology can be
solved. In the post Atthakatha period, a lot of books have been composed
regarding the biography of Buddha, religion and philosophy, spread and
development of Buddhism, and the history of Buddhist Sangha.
Through Atthakatha the historicity of the information narrated in that books can
be determined. Quoting sentences is a fundamental characteristic of modem
dictionaries. In Atthakatha a lot of word meanings along with quotations are
found. With the help of the word meanings of Atthakatha, it is possible to
ce compose a modem dictionary. Atthakatha literature is composed in Pali
& language. Pali is a kind of Prakrit which originates from the Middle Indo

104 Buddhist religion and moral education
Ariyan language. Through the composition of the Tipitaka, Pali language
achieves the status of the language of literature. Pali language contains the
history of more than two thousands years. The diction used in Atthakatha is rich.
Accepting the language of Atthakatha literature as a model and through
philological analysis, the nature and form of language and literary style of other
Pali literature can be determined. Besides, it is also possible to know the history
of the evolution of Pali language. For this reason, it can be said that, in linguistic
research the importance of Atthakatha literature is immense.
In literature of Atthakatha important information is found about different
religious sangha and religious tenet prevalent during the time of Buddha which
provides an idea about the form of religious opinion prevalent during Buddha's
time. In Atthakatha literature, important information is also found about the
anthropological aspects of ancient India. Particularly, the description that is
given about the origin of races like Sakiya, Koliya, Malla, Licchhavi etc. with
the help of folktales is very enchanting. In Atthakatha literature, a lot of
information is found about the political condition of ancient India and Sri Lanka
which is very essential to the composition of political history of the ancient
time. The importance of Atthakatha literature is boundless to know the history
of religion and philosophy, society, literature, culture, politics, economics,
geography etc. of ancient India and Sri Lanka.
Why is Atthakatha considered as an important source for the compisition of ancient history?
Of which countries information is found in Atthakatha?
How were the villages or roads named in ancient time?
Exercise
Fill in the gaps
1. The literary work that is composed in Pali language as explanatory to religion and
philosophyof Buddha is called .......... eee
2. The Atthakatha of Samyutta Nikaya is «0.0.0...
3. He was a subject of respect to the contemporary ............eee
4. Inthe book Gandhavamsa, Buddhadatta is entitled as the .................... Of India. 20
5. Dhammapala was born ino... eeseeceeeees &

Atthakatha 105
Short Questions
1. Tell the meaning of the word ‘Atthakatha’.
2. In to how many parts is the Atthakatha divided and what are they?
3. Write down the names of the Atthakatha of Panca Nikaya and the composers of
Atthakatha.

4. Write down the names of the Atthakatha of Abhidhamma Pitaka.
5. Where was Dhammapala born?
Essay type Question
1. Explain the background for the composition of Atthakatha.
2. Give aclear cut conception about the Atthakatha of Sutta and Abhidhamma Pitaka.
3. Write what do you know about the life and works of Atthakathacariya Buddhadatta.
4. Write a short essay on the life and works of Atthakathacariya Dhammapala.
Multiple Choice Questions
1. What is the Bengali of the word ‘Attha’?

a. Past b. Meaning

c. Asta d.  Athai
2. The custom of racial discrimination is not noticed among the Buddhist

Bhikkhus, because -

i. Observance of religion was open for all

ii. Access to their Sangha was open for all.

iii. For all the advantages and opportunities were same.

Which one below is correct?

a. iandii b. ii and iii

c. iand iii d. i, ii and iii.
Read the following passage and answer to question no. 3 and 4:
Reading a book on the Tipitaka, Ramesh Talukder came to know the explanations of
the Silas (precepts.) to be observed by the Buddhist monks. In it the rules for the
Bhikkhus starting from maintaining the daily life to construction of moral character
were incorporated.
Forma-14, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

106 Buddhist religion and moral education

3. In which book were the matters that Ramesh Talukder read
incorporated?

a. Parivara Patha b. Khandhaka
c. Sutta Vibhanga d. Bhikkhuni Vibhanga.
4. Reading that book one can know —
i. Rules and Regulation for the Bhikkhus and the Bhikkhunis.
ii. Regular life styles of the Bhikkhus.
iii. Introduction to Tipitaka.
Which one below is correct?
a 1 b. iand ii
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii

Creative Questions

1.

n@ps

Uragpura Buddhist Bhikkhu

a. In how many parts is Atthakatha divided according to the assessment of
Guru?

b. What is meant by Atthakatha? Explain.

c. Which Atthakathacariya of the textbook does the ‘?’ marked place apply
to? Explain.

d. ‘That Acariya was able to put an immense contribution to the literary
works of Buddhist religion’ — do you agree with this statement? Analyse
with logical arguments. 2

Rg

Atthakatha 107
2. Amal Chakma was a book writer. He has earned a lot of fame in his
personal life through the composition of books. The contribution of his
literary woks is unthinkable. But he was indifferent to the observance of
family life and accepted the monastic life with deep meditation.
a. Who composed the book ‘Kankhavitarani’?
b. Briefly explain the importance of Atthakatha in Buddhism.
c. With whose activities of the textbook hint is found of the literary
activities of Amal Chakma? Explain.
d. Assess the story of religious intitiation of that Acariya in the light of
religion.
2
Rg

Chapter Seven
Nibbana
The life of beings is confined to the chain of birth and death and closely tied to
the relationship of cause and effect. Where there is a relation of birth and death
or cause and effect, sorrows affect over there again and again. Nibbana is free
from the chain of birth and death, and a flowless state of the cause and effect and
a pleasing state liberated from pains. Nibbana is a transcendental condition
which is difficult to express in language. As Nibbana, does not come out of a
cause it is indestructible. After the attainment of Nibbana nobody has to take
birth any more. As a result, he does not have to suffer from pains. So, the
supreme aim of the Buddhists is to attain Nibbana. Nibbana is the best theory
invented by Lord Buddha. This theory of Buddha created a massive commotion
in the society of the scholars and the philosophers. The way a lamp drives out the
darkness and illuminates all directions, in the same way, the theory of Nibbana
of Lord Buddha has been enlightening innumerable people with the light of
knowledge driving out the darkness of their minds for years. It has been
quenching the cravings of innumerable people and has been eradicating
sufferings.
So, it may be said that the importance of Nibbana is unlimited. In this chapter we
will study about Nibbana.
By the end of this chapter we will be able to
* Explain the idea of Nibbana and its classification
* Explain the necessity of Nibbana Sadhana.
™ NS NA
, . | /
i, cl . \
Rs - \ of,
~ ~ Sat bay 1
_ : 7 - ae: ( ; ae ~ .
> ra
_ eee \ AS yN
Sou \ eS ONS
A lighted lamp is driving out darkness 5

Nibbana 109
Lesson: 1
Conception of Nibbana
The word Nibbana means ‘to extinguish’. The word ‘Nibbana’ consists of the
word 'Bana' with the prefix ‘Ni’. The prefix 'Ni' is used to denote want, negation,
decay, end etc. The dictionary meaning of the word 'Bana' is the arrow of a bow.
In Buddhist scriptures, the word ‘Bana’ is used to mean craving. So, Nibbana
means decay or extinction of craving. The cause of the origin of harmful
inclinations in our mind such as anger, jealoursy, delusion, greed etc. is craving
or desire. It is craving for which human beings suffer from pains taking birth
again and again. The person who obtains ‘Nibbana’ becomes free from craving.
The fire of his loning, antipathy and delusion that originated from craving get
extinguished, the flow of his birth and death is stopped. As a result he becomes
free from all types of sufferings. So, the religion embracing which craving is
destroyed, the fire of anger, antipathy and delusion is extinguished, the flow of
birth and death or the cause and effect are stopped and all kinds of suffering are
ceased is called Nibbana. In short, the ceasation of all kinds of sufferings is
called Nibbana. So, it is called, 'Nibbanam Paramam Sukham' which means
‘Nibbana is the highest bliss.’
Nibbana is an experience beyond human senses. It is not possible to understand
the ‘highest bliss' the achievement of Nibbana, with a common feeling or
language. If, a person has never taken 'sweetmeat' in his life is it possible to make
him realize the taste of 'sweetmeat' only through description? In the same way,
the real state of Nibbana is difficult for the commoners to understand. It is
possible for an individual to climb the Himalayas on his own efforts but it is
impossible to bring the Himalayas to show it to others. In the same way, it is
possible to meet the highest achievement Nibbana following through meditation
the way directed by Buddha, but it is not possible to make the commoners
understand it. It is mentioned in the scripture that the true nature of Nibbana
cannot be known if one does not attain at least Sotapattiphala.
Though Nibbana is not easily understandable, Buddha has shown the way to
attain Nibbana. He has explained the significance of Nibbana through the
religious instructions to his disciples at different times. He said,
co Vififianassa nirodheya tanhakkhaya vimuttino
S Pajjotassa nibbanam vimokkha hoti cetaso

10 Buddhist religion and moral education
Meaning: There is decay of craving like the extinction of a burning fire. With
the ceasation of consciousness of an emancipated man, his mind attains the
feelings of emancipation. For this the rebirth of that emancipated man ceased
completely. In Mahaparinibbana Sutta, Buddha also said,

yo imasmim dhamma vinaye appamatto vihessati

pahaya jati samsaram dukkhassantam karissati, ti.
Meaning: He, who will wander with vigilance in dhamma-vinaya admonished
by Buddha, will be able to seek the end of suffering passing beyond the birth and
life circle.
A simple example is given here for the realization of the Nibbana: A
lamp requires the ingredients like oil, wax, wick etc. to bum. As long as the
supply of the ingredients continues so long will the lamp go on _ burning. One
lamp to another lamp, thus innumerable lamps may be lit up. But, if the
ingredients of burning the lamp perish or run
out, the lamp will be extinguished. In the same way, human life can be
compared to a lamp. Human being takes birth repeatadly because of the
propensities originated from craving like greed, antipathy, delusion, desire,
longing, anger, passion and illusion. If these elements can be perished it is
possible, to cease the birth, the cause of sufferings and to attain Nibbana.

Exercise
What does the word Nibbana mean?
Who can attain Nibbana?
Lesson: 2
Types and description of Nibbana
Types of Nibbana:
Nibbana is of two types,
1. Sopadisesa Nibbana eo
2. Anupadisesa Nibbana. §

Nibbana 11
1. Sopadisesa Nibbana: Rupa (form), Vedana (feeling), Sangha (sence),
Samkhara (volitional formations) and Viggana (consciousness) - these five
elements, according to Buddhist terminology, are called panca khandha (five
agregates). Ifa meditating man feels the knowledge of Nibbana destroying
the sorrows amidst the existence of five aggregates, it is called sopadisesa
Nibbana. A living Arhant attains the Sopadisesa Nibbana. He visualizes
Nibbana, becomes free from craving, but as he remains alive, he is not free
from decrepitude, disease, pleasure and pain. But the present birth is his last
birth. He has properly realized the four noble truths, and attained Maggaphala
follwoing the eight noble paths and through practising jhana and samadhi.
For example, it may be mentioned that the knowledge of Nibbana that Gautama
Buddha attained perishing the sorrows and craving after hard meditation of six
years at the foot of Bo-tree at Gaya is Sopadisesa Nibbana.
2. Anupadisesa Nibbana: The man, who obtained Nibbana and emancipated,
attains Parinibbana destroying the five aggregates, then it is termed as = An-
upadisesa Nibbana. This Nibbana means to be completely extinguished. The
person who has attained this kind ofNibbana will not be lit-up again which
means he will not be born again. He has been entirely redeemed from the chain
of birth and death. There is no aftermath of this kind of Nibbana, this state is
beyond description. It mitigates the feeling of happiness or sufferings. The miti-
gation of happiness and sufferings itself is the highest bliss.
The unlimited flow of life circle ends up here. That is why Buddha declared;
‘Nibbanam Paramam Sukham' which means Nibbana is the highest bliss.
Acarya Nagarjuna has explained Nibbana in the following way:
apratitam asamprattam anicchinnam ashashvatam
aniruddham anutpannam eva nibbanam ucyate.
Meaning: The condition of the mind falls in after the cessation of
highest Viggana (conciousness) is beyond ascertainment. It is obtainable in
no way. It is not an eviction of an eternal thing. Or, it is not the achievement
of the feeling of perputuity in a vulnerable state. It has no annihilation as it is
so not born. The state having these symptoms is called Anupadisesa Nibbana.
S
aq

112 Buddhist religion and moral education
For example, after attainment of Buddhahood Gautama Buddha preached for
long 45 years, then at the age of eighty he attained this Anupadisesa Nibbana at
Kusinara at the foot of the Yamaka Sal (twin-Sal) tree.
Description of Nibbana:
If one wants to understand the nature of the Nibbana, it requires having a clear
conception about all kinds of living and non-living things in the entire
universe because, every living and non-living things display different qualities.
Again, these qualities are not motionless or eternal, they are continually
changing. The vicissitude is never blissful, rather full of sufferings. Human body
or mind-nothing is everlasting. For this the eternal existence of soul can not be
confessed. Hence Buddha has said, 'the earthly life is temporary, full of
sufferings and anatta (no soul or non-self)'. So he advised to control the fickle
and diverted mind from this sorrowful wheel of life. How is it possible? The
main path for controlling the mind is the practice of eight noble path,
Brahmachariya ( chastity), and meditation as directed by Buddha. About the
nature of Nibbana it is mentioned in the book Milinda Panhna' that Nibbana is
unexpressable, matchless. Nibbana is not identifiable with location, time,
object, argument, evidence or resemblance. Nibbana is calm and blissful. In the
book Dhammapada, it is mentioned about Nibbana as such:

arogya parama labha santutthi paramam dhanam

vissasa paramafiati, nibbanam paramam sukham.
Meaning: Cure is the highest gain, contentment is the greatest wealth, trust is
the best kinsman and Nibbana is the supremme bliss.
This supreme bliss described in the verses is the expectation of all human
beings. But suffering must be uprooted to gain the bliss. What is the way to
uproot suffering? It is the attainment of Nibbana which is its only way.
Because, in Nibbana suffering is entirely annihilated, brings liberty. It is for
this emancipation for which Siddhartha Gautama meditated austerity. After
meditation he attained the success and obtained Nibbana.
Now, we will try to understand the meaning of the sentence ‘nibbanam
paramam sukham or Nibbana is the highst bliss’ narrated by Gautama Buddha.
Buddha advised his disciples in the 'Ariya pariyesana sutta' of Majjhima
Nikaya, 'I myself have felt the bad consequences of birth, decrepitude, disease,
lamentation etc. From this J have learned birthlessness, diseaselessness, death
lessness, grieflessness and painlessness etc. and attained Nibbana." It means, he
put an end to all sufferings through the attainment ofNibbana. So, Nibbana is %
the end-state of all sufferings. Nibbana is the greatest good. »

Nibbana 113
All the things of the world are of two kinds: Sankhata ( conditioned) and
Asankhata (unconditioned). The things which have cause and effect and are
subject to change are Sankhata ( conditioned). The things which have no
causality or cause and efect are Asankhata (unconditioned), Nibbana also is
Asankhata which means free from cause and effect. It has no change. Nibbana is
calm and eternal. The imperpetuality or inconsistency of all mundane things is
sorrowful. But the permanence of the pleasure of Nibbana is indestructible. That
is why Buddha said, ‘Nibbana is the highest bliss.’ Nibbana is cause
and effectless. It has neither origin nor extinction. Nibbana is constant, Nibbana
is the most pleasing. So, Nibbana is the best among what is visible or invisible
or beyond imagination. There is no other better desirable thing in human
expectation than this. For this, the meditative and wise man concentrates on
untiring meditation to attain Nibbana.
Buddhism is the religion of logic, religion of wisdom and religion of the wise.
Nibbana can be attained only by the wise. For this, it is necessary to know the
qualities completely of the things by perfect knowledge. The Sankharas
( disposition) are to be destroyed following the path directed by Buddha. It is
possible to attain Nibbana if only one can gain true knowledge about qualities
and true natures of the things. It is not possible to obtain Nibbana without
wisdom and meditation. It is mentioned in the book Dhammapada:

natthi jhanam apafifiassa pafifia natthi ajhayato

yamhi jhanam pafifia ca sa ve nibbana santike.
Meaning: He who does not have wisdom cannot meditate. He who does not
have meditation cannot attain wisdom. He, who has both wisdom and
meditation, remains near the Nibbana.
So, the virtuous and wise Bhikkhu or the learned man has to be free from
antipathy and delusion first by meditation. After that, by meditation, he will be
unattached, distressless, fearless and well wisher. As a result, it would be
possible for him to attain Nibbana.

Exercise
Discuss the classification of Nibbana (Group work)

Forma-15, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

14 Buddhist religion and moral education
Lesson: 3

Necessity of attaining Nibbana
The necessity of attaining Nibbana is undeniable for a peaceful world through
the accomplishment of wholesome deeds and abstaining from unwholesome
deeds caused by lust, malice, desire and passion and for the emancipation from
the sorrowful flow of life confined to the chain of birth-death, decrepitude and
desease. The world is sorrowful. The sufferings derive from craving. The cause
of craving is ignorence. Because of ignorence, human beings attached with bad
thinking involve in different types of misdeeds. Through this, as the unwise
human being does harm to his own self he does to others. As a result, the peace
of the life and the world is disrupted. The person who is engaged in attaining
Nibbana is to always do wholesome deeds. He is to completely realize the four
noble truths and is to follow the eight noble paths to be emancipated from
craving, the cause of suffering. Ignorence can be removed being free from lust,
malice and delusion through the untiring good meditation. He becomes fearless
and good wishing in the uninterrupted good meditation of Nibbana. So, he does
well to himself to all and becomes the cause of all kinds of welfare to the world.
He leaves any intention to do harm to others, pride etc. He practises selfcontrol.
He becomes friendly to all. In this way the practise for attaining Nibbana plays
a helpful role to the development of moral and humanistic qualities. So,
everybody should practise for attaining Nibbana. It is not possible to attain
Nibbana within a short time or small effort. It requires austere practice.
Though it is difficult to understand Nibbana and to make others understand it,
yet it is possible to attain Nibbana by human beings. Buddha said, born as a
human is rare, because human beings have conscience. Man can judge good and
bad. Human life is to be earned through the accomplishment of wholesome
deeds. The gods only enjoy happiness. The devils only suffer from sorrows. The
animals and birds are led by the instincts.
Only the human beings in this world experience both sorrows and happiness. It
is possible for human beings to do wholesome deeds in this world. The life style
of the animals is more difficult and uncertain than that of human beings. If one
does unwholesome deeds, one will have to be born as animals. Arising the
aspiration and intention of attaining Nibbana if one accomplishes wholesome
deeds, his possibility to take birth in the animal clan is obstructed. For this
reason, one should try for attaining Nibbana.
Nibbana is the most desired thing to the Buddhists. To attain the highest bliss
Nibbana one has to earn the fruition of virtue doing wholesome deeds for the life
after life. One has to be endowed with the perfect knowledge of Four Noble 3
Truths. One has to follow eight noble paths. It is possible to enter the pathof “%

Nibbana 115
Nibbana following the eight noble paths. Eight noble paths give direction to men
to move towards right path. It has been said that Buddhism is the religion of
wisdom, religion of the wise. So, it is the wise man who can really realize that
the world is sorrowful. It is craving which is the cause of suffering. It is for
craving for which one has to take birth repeatedly. If one takes birth, one has to
undergo different kinds of sufferings, such as decrepitude, disease, separation
from the dear ones, attachment to the disliked ones, death etc. To be liberated
from craving should be the aim of all. For this reason, a wiseman requires to
endeavour for attaining Nibbana.
Exercise
What are the practices one should do to attain Nibbana?
How can one build a beautiful life through attaining Nibbana? Analyze you answer with
arguments. (Assignment).
Exercise
Fill in the blanks
1. Nibbana is a ................... State.
2. Nibbana is the best theory of.............. Lord Buddha.
3. Nibbana is a on ...............:000 EXperience.
4. From one lamp to another lamp this way innumerable........ can be lit up.
5. He, who does not have meditation, does not attain .............cc:006
Short Questions
1. What is the meaning of the word Nibbana?
2. What do you mean by Anupadisesa Nibbana?
3. What are the charecteristics of Sopadisesa Nibbana?
4. What is said about Nibbana in the book ‘Milinda Panha?
Essay type Questions
1. Discuss your idea about Nibbana.
2. ‘Nibbana is the most desired thing for the Buddhist’ — Explain.
Multiple Choice Questions
1. What is Nibbana?
26 a. Worldly knowledge b. prevention of desires
8 c. Happiness of the mind d. Decay of craving

116 Buddhist religion and moral education
2. What is the cause of entire prevention of rebirth of an emancipated
man?
i. to destroy craving
li. to attain emancipation of mind
iii. to destroy lust, malice and delusion.
Which one below is correct?
a. iand ii b. iiand iii
c. iandiii d. i,iiand iii
Answer question nos. 3 and 4 reading the following passage:
The fame of the Kallyansree Mahasthavira, the Principal of Ariya Vihara of
Dhammapura spreads all arround as he leads the Vihara in a well planned way.
Through meditation, he wonders being heedful in Dhamma and Vinaya as
shown by Sammaka Sambuddha and at one point he becomes able to realize the
ways of emancipation from sufferings while the Five Aggregates Still remain.
3. Which Nibbana knowledge of Gautama Buddha did kallyansree
Mahastavira realize?
a. Attainment of Nibbana in this life ?
b. Sopadisesa Nibbana knowledge
c. Anupadisesa Nibbana knowledge
d. Sopadisesa and Anupadisesa Nibbana.
4, Through the attainment of that Nibbana knowledge it is possible to —
i. Cease the flow of birth and death
il. Control the five senses
iii. Destroy sufferings and craving.
Which one below is correct?
a. i b. iand ii
c. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii. S

Nibbana N17

Creative Questions

1. Anil Bikash Chakma was a retired officer. He gained a comprehensive
understanding on Sutta, Vinaya and principles of religion instructed by
Buddha studying different religious books in his life as a layman. So, he took
initiation at monastery under a monk leaving the illusion for family life. First
he attained worldly knowledge about the decay of craving, putting out of the
anger, malice and delusion, ceasation of the flow of birth and death etc. by
observing the religion. He initiated as Bhikkhu from Samanerahood and
through acquiring the knowledge of the books of the Tipitaka, he was able to
understand this speech ofBuddha-'Nibbanam Paramam Sukham.'

a. What originates from craving?

b. Why has somebody to follow eight noble paths? Explain briefly.

c. Which theory of Buddha could Anil Chakma understand when he was a
Samanera? Explain.

d. Explain in the light of the textbook the lesson gathered earned by Anil
Chakma after initiation as Bhikkhu.

2. Reverent Dhammakirti Sthavira said in a preaching at Bhikkhu congregation,
‘Primarily it is mentioned about Nibbana in the book Dhammapada as
such! -

arogya parama labha santutthi paramam dhanam
vissasa paramanati, nibbanam paramam sukham.
Buddha said, 'Human life is rare. Human beings have conscience. One takes
birth as a human being accomplishing wholesome deeds and judging the
good and bad.
a. For how many years did Gautama Buddha preach?
b. Why does not one have to take birth any more after attaining Nibbana?
c. What kind of Nibbana does Dhamma Kirti Sthavira hint in his
instruction? Explain.
d. To what extent is the recessity of Nibbana in Buddha's instruction
wo narrated in Uddipaka logical? Analyse in the light of the textbook.
S
N

Chapter Eight
The Councils
The history of Budhism is closely related with the Budhist's Councils. It is not
possible to know the real history of Budhism without the knowledge of the
Councils. The Budha did never render his doctrine in the written form. He
delivered His teachings in different places in different occasions. His disciples
got the teachings by heart and spread them orally. After the Great Passing Away
(Mahaparinibbana) of the Buddha, his disciples held the Councils and compiled
the teachings of Buddha. Through books and in many other ways the
Mahakarunika Bhikkhus, followers of the true religion, managed to preserve
and propagate by holding the Councils and in this way they preserved the purity
of the teachings of the Budha. So in the history of the Budhism the role of the
councils is unique. In this chapter we will study about the Budhist's Councils.
By the end of this chapter we will be able to —
* Describe the idea and the background of the Council
* Give idea about how the words or teachings of the Buddha were
compiled through the Councils
* Describe the causes and results of holding the first, the second and the
third Councils
* Analyze the contributions of the Councils in preserving the teachings of
the Buddha in written form (in the form of books)
Lesson: 1
The idea of the Councils
The word 'Council' has different meanings in the dictionary such as music, song,
chirping, publicity, declaration, rehearsal, meeting or assembly and to pronounce
together, recitation, to sing, to hear again or to consider etc. In spite of its having
different meanings, in the Buddhist Literature it is used to mean meeting or
assembly. If there arose any debate or problem regarding the Buddha's religion
and philosophy or rules and regulations of the Sangha in the life time of Buddha,
Buddha himself or his leading disciples according to his direction, solved it. But
after the Mahaparinibbana of Buddha, the wise Bhikkhu Sangha solved these
problems by holding meeting or assembly. It is known that, after the
Mahaparinibbana of Buddha many important Councils were held to solve the
question related to the Buddhism, to decide real sermons of the Buddha, to
compile, to preserve, to keep the purity and to propagate. In the history of the 3
Buddhism this is known as Councils. Briefly, Council is the highest decision “

The Councils 119
making meeting or assembly. In these meetings hundreds of aged, wise and
Arhant Bhikkhus were present. The Councils continued for several months
according to the importance of the matters to be discussed. After the three
months of Great Passing Away (Mahaparinibbana) of the Buddha, the wise disci-
ples of the Buddha held a Council and compiled together all the scattered
sermons of Buddha.

In the history of the Buddhism it is known as the first Council. After the
compilation of the sermons or words of Buddha in the first Council, Bhikkhus
propagated them orally through keeping it in memory. This continued till the
first century BC. Sometimes controversies arose regarding the sermons of
Buddha as they were transmitted orally and were not preserved in the form of
book or in written form. Besides this, for many reasons the sermons and words
of Buddha got corrupted and anarchies were created in the Sanghas. By holding
the Councils the Bhikkhu Sangha solved these problems and preserved the
sermons and words of Buddha accurately. So the importance of the Councils in
the history of the Buddhism is immeasurable. According to the legend, nine
councils were held.

There are controversies about the number, time and place of the Councils. The
Buddhists of the South East Asia believe that six councils were held altogether
of these the first three Councils were held in the Ancient India, the fourth in
Ceylon, fifth and sixth Council in Burma (Myanmar). According to Sinhalese
(present day Sri Lanka) tradition the fifth, sixth and seventh Councils were held
in Ceylon. Besides, there are controversies about the second and third Councils.
It is known that after the second Council another Council was held under the
guidance of the Mahasangikas. But there is no reference of it in the books of
Theravada. Again there is no reference of the third Coundcil held under the
patronage of Emperor Asoka in the Mahayana Sutta. According to the Mahayana
Sutta, the third Council was held at Jalandhara in Kashmir under the patronage
of Emperor Kaniska. According to the legend of Thailand the first three Councils
were held in India; the fourth, the fifth, the sixth and the seventh Council in
Ceylon and the eighth and the ninth were held in Thailand. In the midst of many
controversies the Theravada Buddhists believe that the first three Councils were
held in India, the fourth in Ceylon, the fifth and the sixth in Myanmar
(previously Burma). The six Councils are very important in the history of the
Buddhism. The sixth Council has a great role in compiling the sermons and
words of Buddha and in preserving them correctly. So, these are also called
Great Councils.

Exercise
N How many Councils were held according to the legend?

120 Buddhist religion and moral education
Lesson: 2
The objective and background of the councils
The six councils were held in different places. To compile the sermons and
words of Buddha and to preserve them correctly were the main purpose of the
Councils, but the background of each council was different. By considering the
history of the first Council, it is found that, after the Great Passing Away
(Mahaparinibbana) of Buddha the Bhikkhus began to lament. All of them
became afraid to unruly behaviour of a monk named Subhadra. According to the
travelogue of Hieun Tsang and the books of Tibets, almost all the unruly Monks
had the same intention. At this Mahakassapa Thera and other leading monks
became very anxious thinking the degradation of Buddha's Dhamma. They
thought that soon the Bhikkhu Sangha would be deviated and disorderly if such
thoughts were originated while the dead body of Buddha was present. The
sermons and words of Buddha will be corrupted and will be forgotten. As a
result, Buddhasasana (teachings of Buddha) will be declined. Realizing the fact,
the learned and respectful Theras felt the necessity of preserving the sermons
and words of Buddha retained in the memory of the different Monks by
compiling. Then the first Council was held at the Sattapanni Cave (Guha) in
order to compile and preserve the sermons and words of Buddha.
From the history of the second Council it is known that the Vajji Monks
introduced ten rules, other than the Vinaya Rules after one hundred years of the
Great Passing Away (Mahaparinibbana) of Buddha. These are known as
"Dasavatthuni' which will be discussed elaborately in the second council section.
The second Council was called at Balukarama of Vesali to decide whether the
"Dasavatthuni' was according to the Vinaya rules or not.
From the analysis of the history of the third Council it is found that under the
royal patronage of the Emperor Asoka Buddhism spread widely in India. The
hospitality and honorarium of the Buddhists' Monks increased and they got
special dignity. So, to gain hospitality and honorarium many ascetic or Tirthikas
of other religions introduced themselves as Bhikkhu by shaving their heads and
puting on civara (yellow robes) and holding the begging bowl. They lived there
occupying many Vihara and Temples by falsity. They began to preach their false
doctrine as true religion and true religion as false doctrine. Anarchy was created
in the Sangha and confusions were created regarding the real sermons and words
of Buddha. The third Council was held at Asokarama Vihara at Pataliputra to
decide the real sermons and words of the Buddha and to remove the existing
anarchy in the Sangha. °0
S
AQ

The Councils 121
From the history of the fourth Council it is found that the son and daughter of
Emperor Asoka, Mahinda Thera and Sanghamitta Theri, established the
Buddhism in Sri Lanaka. But the Indian Tamils occupied Sri Lanaka and ruled it.
They continued to destroy the Buddhist Vihara and culture. They were always at
war with the Sinhalese. At last king Vattagamini removed the Tamils with the
help of the Sinhalese and began to rule Sri Lanaka. Peace returned and the
Buddhism got new dimension. As war continued for a long time famine
occurred. This created passions for worldly pleasures among the people and they
began to lose moral sense. The Buddhism was at stake for repeated foreign
attacks. Anarchy was also created because of the conflict of the Mahavihara and
Abhayagiri Nikaya. The number of the irresponsible and irreligious monks was
increasing. There were many Arhants but the number of the monks retaining the
Tipitaka in mind was decreasing. For these reasons, there arose a possibility of
decline and contamination in Buddha's teachings that had been preserving orally.
Under the patronization of king Vattagamini, the fourth council was convened at
Alu Vihara (according to another opinion Aloka Vihara) in Ceylone to give
permanence form of Buddha's teaching or the Tipitaka along with Atthakatha by
writing down. It is known as the council of Alu Vihara as it was held at Alu
Vihara. This council held in the first century B.C. and whole the Tipitaka along
with Atthakatha was written in palm-leaves.

In 1871 the fifth council was held at Mandalaya during the reign of king
Mingdonming of Myanmar. The fifth council was convened at Kaba Azey, the
world Peace Pagoda, near Rengoon for the purpose of preserving the Tipitaka,
the sermons and the words of Buddha, on the marble stones by engraving. The
Tipitaka was engraved on 729 marble stones at the Mandalaya mountain.

The Tipitaka had been written and engraned by different people in different
places. Because of the blunders of the writers and engravers, the sermons and
words of Buddha were presented in a wrong way. Grouping and negligency in
the religious matter were noticed in the society because of the foreign rule. The
sixth council was convened in Mayanmer in 1954-1956 in order to record the
sermons and the words of Buddha correctly, to develop the Buddhasasana, and
also to spread it in home and abroad. The entire text of the Tipitaka was recited
and tape-recorded in that council. After making a comparative study of the books
of the Tipitaka published in the different countries, a rough draft was prepared
for re-production.

The backgrounds of the above-mentioned six Great Councils were different but
the purposes were same. The main purposes of the Councils were to compile, to
preserve and to propagate the sermons and the words of Bhuddha correctly.
Forma-16, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

122 Buddhist religion and moral education
Exercise
What did Subhadra say after the Great Passing Away (Mahaparinibbana) of Buddha?
What is the main purpose of the Council ?
Describe the background of the fourth Council.
Where and why were the fifth and sixth Councils convened ?
Lesson: 3
The First Council
The cause of calling the first Council:
There is no controversy about the cause of holding the first Council. It is said
that Mahakassapa Thera was not present at Kusinagar while Buddha attained the
Great Passing Away (Mahaparinibbana). He heard the Great Passing Away (Ma-
haparinibbana) of Buddha on his way to Kusinagara from Pava. He also heard
that the Bhikkhus, who are wise and modest, had become anxious as to the
decline of Buddha's Dhamma at the comment of Subhadra, an unruly Bhikkhu.
We learnt about the comment of Subhadra in lesson two. Many arrogant monks
were happy at the Great Passing Away of Buddha as they could pass their lives
according to their own will. Mahakassapa Thera reached Kusinagara and heard
about the intention of the arrogant monks.
He became very astonished and surprised at this as Buddha did never render his
sermons and words in written form. After memorizing the precepts and words
his disciples would preach them. Mahakassapa Thera and other leading and
modest Monks thought that the sermons and the words of Buddha might be
contaminated if these remained scattered or memorized by different people.
They might be forgotten and lost. The words of other persons might be treated as
the words of Buddha and Buddha's Dhamma might be declined. Realizing the
facts, Mahakassapa Thera and other modest Monks felt the necessity of
compiling the sermons and the words of Buddha. For this, the first Council was
convened.
Duration, place and patranage of the first Council: There is a slight
controversy regarding the time and place of the first Council. According to the
Buddhist tradition, the first Council was held in the cave of Sattapanni at
Rajagaha after three months of the Great Passing Away (mahaparinibbana) of
Buddha. King Ajatasattu patronized the Council. Under the patronage of king
Ajatasattu a great pandal was built in front of the Sattapanni Cave. Southfacing
and northfacing five hundred seats were arranged for the Theras. East-facing =
Dhammasana (seast of preaching) was made at the middle of the pandal. BS

The Councils 123
The selection of the Councillors :
Mahakassapa Thera was selected President of the first Council unanimously. It
was decided that all the participating Bhikkhus should be Arhants. Then a
decision was taken to select five hundred Arhants who were versed in Buddhism.
At first Ananda Thera was not selected as he was not then obtained Arhantship,
so four hundred ninety nine monks were selected except Ananda. But a place was
kept vacant for him as he was the attendent of Buddha and was also a Srutidhara
(who is able to retain sermons after hearing). He retained all the sermons of
Buddha. The disciples of Buddha were informed of his quality and all were
expecting his presence. He attained the Arhantship just before the begining of the
Council. After the attainment he entered the pandal and took his own place. After
the fulfilment of five hundred Arhants the proceedings of the Council began.
The prceedings of the first Council:
Mahakassapa himself was appointed as questioner. It was decided to collect
Vinaya first. Upali adorned the Dhammasana. According to the consent of the
Sangha, Mahakassapa Thera asked questions to Upali Thera about Vinaya. First,
when four Parajikas (the gravest transgresion of the rules for the Bhikkhus) were
introduced, to whom, the place of introduction etc. were asked and also asked
question about Mula Pragypti and Anupragyapti. Upali Thera gave answers to all
the questions. In this way thirteen Sanghadisesa, two Aniyata, four Patidesaniya,
thirty Nissaggiya; ninety two Pacittiya were fixed after recitation. After that both
Vibhanga, Mahavagga, Cullavagga, Parivara Patho were recited. The Councilor
Bhikkhus who were present attentively listened to the Vinaya recitation of Upali
Thera. They unanimously approved the Vina ya recited by Upali’.
Besides, decisions were also taken about the lesser and minor precepts (khudra-
nukhudra Sikkhapada) because Buddha, while he was living, told that the Bhik-
khus might change the lesser and minor rules if they wish. The compilation of
Vinaya was completed after the approval of the five hundred Arhants. Vinaya is
the life of Buddhasasana. So between Dharnrna and Vinaya, Vinaya was first
collected.
Then Ananda Thera was called upon to recite Dharnrna ( or Sutta) like Vinaya.
Ananda Thera took his seat on the Dharnrnasana. Mahakassapa Thera, as the
questionier, asked the questions about the Dharnrna to Srutidhara Ananda. First,
where 'Brahmajala Sutta' was preached and to whom it was preached were asked.
Then, the questions were asked about subject matter of Brahrnrnajala Sutta and
~ Puggala (individual). After that, questions about the 'Samannaphala Sutta’ were
Ss asked. Ananda Thera properly answered all the questions. In the same procedure

124 Buddhist religion and moral education
Digha Nikaya, Majjhima Nikaya, Samyutta Nikaya, Anguttara Nikaya and
Khuddaka Nikaya were recited. After the approval of five hundred Arhant
Bhikkus the Sutta or the Dhamma came to an end. The first Great Council took
four months to complete. The first Council is also called the 'Pancasatika sangiti'
as it was participated by five hundred Arhants.
The consequences of the first Council:
In the presence of five hundred Arhants, under the presidentship of Kahakassapa
Thera and by the recitation or preaching of Upali and Ananda, the teachings of
Buddha were compiled or collected as the Dharnrna-Vinaya.
Exercise
What is the cause of holding the first Council?
Why was not Ananda Thera Selected as Councillor?
What did Upali Thera recite in the first Council?
Lesson : 4
Second Council
The cause of holding the second Council:
The Bhikkhus of Vajji clan introduced 'Dasavatthuni' (ten points or rules) which
were not related with the Vinaya rules in the sangha hundred years after the
Great Passing Away (Mahaparinibbana) of Buddha. Not only that, they also
requested the devotees to give Kahapana (Gold and Silver coins) by keeping a
copper vessel filled with water at the middle of the Bhikku-sangha on the day of
Upasotha. They requested the other Bhikkhus, followers of Vinaya, to support
the Dasavatthuni. They tried to influence Yasa Thera by giving gifts. But Yasa
Thera forbade the Bhikkhus of vajji clan to carry out the practices which are not
related with the Vinaya rules and contradictory to Sangha. The Bhikkhus of Vajji
clan rejected his request. Then he requested the Bhikkhus to dissuade vajji
Bhikkhus from these ill practices. The Bhikkhus of Vajji clan were agitated at
this and pronounced on him a penalty of Patisaraniya Kamma (Confessional
action). In other words, they invited him to join hands or to make friendship
again. Yasa Thera did not pay heed to the arrogant monks and requested the
people of Vesali to protect the Dhamma. Being agitated, the Bhikkhus of Vajji
clan removed him from the Sangha by giving him 'Ukkhepani Danda'. Yasa
Thera gradually requested all the modest Bhikkhus to solve the problem. They
responded to the call and convened the second Council to decide whether the
Dasavatthuni (ten points or rules) introduced by the Vajji Bhikkhus, were gainst 2
the Vinaya rules or not. Following are the Dasavatthuni: aq

The Councils 125

1. The Bhikkus can preserve the salt in the horns if they wish and can use it in

time. But according to number thirty five Pacittiya rule of the Patimokkha, the

Bhikkhus can not do it.

2. The Bhikkhus can eat their food even after the shadow of the sun slanting upto

two fingers broad. But according to the rule of the Patimokkha, the Bhikkhus can

not eat their meal after midday.

3. After eating meal once, the Bhikkhus can take another meal in another village.

But according to number thirty five Pacitti ya rules of the Patimokkha they can

not do it.

4. The Bhikkhus of different dwelline places of one periphery can perform Upo-

satha separately. But it is contradictory to the rules of boundary and dwelling

places.

5. The Bhikkhus can perform Vinaya Kamma (activities relating bhikkhu

sangha) thinking of taking the approval of the absent Bhikkhu afterwords. But it

is contradictory to the rules of Sangha.

6. Without considering in the light of rules and regulations, the Bhikkhus can

accept to obey the customary rules. But according to the tradition of the

Buddhism, the Bhikkus can not accept customary rules if they are not proper and

permitted by Vinaya.

7. The Bhikkhus can drink buttermilk in the afternoon. But it is contradictory to

number thirty five Paciltiya (expiation) rule of Patimokkha.

8. The Bhikkhus may drink toddy palm juice if they wish. But it is contradictory

to rule number fifty one of Pacitti ya of Patimokkha.

9. The Bhikkus may use rugs with fringe. But it is contradictory to rule number

89 of Pacittiya of Patimokkha.

10. The Bhikkhus may accept gold, silver or money of any kind. But it is

contradictory to the rule number eighteen ofNissaggiya of Patimokkha.

Duration, place and patronage of the second council:

The second Council was convened after hundred years of the Great Passing

Away (Mahaparinibbana) of Buddha during the reign of King Kalasoka. Under

his patronage, it was held at Valukaram of Vesali.

The selection of the Councillors and the proceedings:

The Bhikkhus of Vajji clan gave punishment to Yasa Thera. Being driven out

from the Sangha, Yasa Thera took shelter in his birthplace Kosambi. From there
« he gave messages to the Bhikkhus, followers of vinaya, and tried to be united.
3 He sent messages to the Bhikkhus of Avanti in west India, Patheya region and

126 Buddhist religion and moral education
Southern region. He himself went to venerable Sambhuta Sunvasi who was
staying at Ahoganga Mountain. Thera Sambhuta Sunvasi was a great logician
and scholar. He supported the opinion of Yasa Thera about the Dasavatthuni (ten
points or rules).

After getting the news, sixty Arhants from west India and eighty eight from
South India reached the Ahoganga Mountain and met Sambhuta Sunvasi. Being
anxious, they said that Buddhasasana may decline in future if the Dasavatthuni
is not solved. Being councelled by Sambhuta Sunvasi they met Revata Thera and
informed him of the matter. After analysing the Dasavatthuni in detail he
justified them as against the Vinaya rules and told that the Bhikkhus ofVajji clan
should abandon them.

In this time, the Bhikkhus of Vajji clan also tried to get support in favour of them.
They, too, sent valuable gifts to Revata Thera to bring him in their side. He
refused the gifts and adevised them to give up the Dasavatthuni or the practice
that is contrary to the Vinaya rules. Then they tried to get cooperation from
Uttara, the disciple of Revata Thera. But they failed. After that, the Bhikkhus,
who were present there at the counsel of Revata Thera, planned to assemble at
Vesali to settle the disputs. After selecting seven hundred Arhant Bhikkhus,
learned and expert in the Tipitaka, they assembled at the Valukaram in Vesali for
the purpose of holding council. There was much altercation between the two
groups of the monks. At last, an Arbitration Council was formed consisting of
eight Bhikkhus. Four monks from East India and four monks from West India
participated in the meeting. Eight members of the Arbitration Council were
Sabbakami, Khujjasobhita, Salha, Basava, Revata, Sambhuta Sunvasi, Yasa and
Sumana Thera. These eight great scholars discussed the Dasavatthuni in detail in
the meeting and declared it to be against Vinaya rules. It has been mentioned in
the Cullavagga that Revata Thera presided over the council and Sabbakami
Thera sat on the Dhammasana (seat of preaching).

All the proceedings of the second council completed neatly just as in the first
Council. It continued for eight months. The sermons of the Buddha, collected in
the first Council, were recited again and were compiled as the Dhamma Vinaya.
Seven hundred Arhants were participated in this council. So it is called
‘Sattasatika Mahasangiti (the Great Council's of seven hundred)’. Vinaya, the
tules to be followed by the Bhikkhus, was the main topic for discussion. So it is
also called the Vinaya Sangiti.

The results of the second Council : It was decided in the Council that the
Dasavatthu (ten points or rules) introduced by the bhikkhus of Vajji clan were
against Vinaya rules. The sermons and words of Buddha, collected in the first
Council, were approved as the actual sermons and words of Buddha. These were
recited again and were collected as the Dhamma Vinaya. A group of monks &
could not accept the decision of the Second Great Council. »

The Councils 127

They were expelled from the Sangha. They were huge in number. They tried to

establish themselves. As a result, they arranged another Council. It is said that,

ten thousands Bhikkhus were present in that Council. But nothing is known

about it. After the second council, the Bhikkhus (monks) were divided into two

groups - the 'Theravadi' and the 'Mahasangika.

Exercise
What is meant by ‘Dasavatthuni’?
Write down the names of the members of the Arbitration Council of the second Council?
Why the second Council is called Sattasatika Mahasangiti?
Lesson : 5
Third Council

The cause of holding the third council: Under the royal patronage of

Emperor Asoka the Buddhism was spread all over the India. The hospitality and

honorarium for the Bhikkhus increased and they achieved special dignity. As a

result, for the purpose of getting hospitality and honorarium many heretics and

ascetics of other religions started to introduce themselves as Bhikkhu by shaving

their heads and holding begging bowl and civara (robs). They occupied

monasteries and temples by forgery and continued to live there. They preached

false doctrine. The corrupt Bhikkhus went here and there and continued to

disturb. They were increasing in number. The modest Bhikkhus became annoyed

because of their behaviour which was not befitting with the Vinaya rules. As a

tesult, anarchy was created in the Sangha. Besides, at that time the Bhikkhus

were divided into eighteen Nikayas (groups). Each of them claimed tobe _gen-

uine followers of the doctrine of Buddha. As a result, it became difficult to ascer-

tain which is the real doctrine of Buddha. The monks of one Nikaya refused to

live and perform religious rituals with the monks of another Nikaya. More-

over, the modest Bhikkhus also refused to hold the religious rituals like Upo-

satha, Pravarana etc. with the corrupt Bhikkhus. This chaotic situation was one

of the main causes of holding the third Council.

The duration, place and patronage of the third Council:

The third Council was held at Asokarama in Pataliputta, the capital of Magadha,

during the reign of Emperor Asoka. Emperor Asoka patronized that council
% greatly. After the completion of the third Council, he sent missionaries to
“ different countries.

128 Buddhist religion and moral education
The selection of the councillors and the Proceedings:

The modest Bhikkhus refused to perform the religious rituals such as Uposotha,
Pravarana, and Pattimokkha recitation etc with the false monks. For this reason,
these religious rituals remained suspended for a long time in the city of
Pataliputta. Then the false monks conspiringly passed an order from Emperor
Asoka to perform Uposatha. But this did not make the real monks agree to
perform Uposatha. As a result, many modest Bhikkhus were killed at the order of
the inexperienced minister. Emperor Asoka became anguished at the news. He
thought that the Bhikkhus were killed because of his indifferent attitudes. He
sent a minister to bring Moggaliputta Tissa Thera from the Ahoganga mountain,
to know whether he was responsible for this sinful act or not. Moggaliputta Tissa
informed the Emperor Asoka that if a work is done with sinless feelings that will
be no offence. Then the Emperor took lessons from him on the Dhamma of
Buddha for a week.

At the counsel of Moggaliputta Tissa Thera, he took the monks one by one behind a
curtain and asked them about the doctrine that they followed. None of the false monks
could give the answer. Only the modest Bhikkhus said unanimously that they were the
'Vibhajjavada'. Then the Emperor Asoka could detect the real monks. He expelled the
arrogant monks wearing white dresses from the Sangha. It is known that they were
more than sixty thousands. After this he said to the modest Bhikkhus. 'Bhante! The
Sangha has been purified. Now the Bhikkhus may perform the Uposatha.' The purified
Sangha performed the Uposatha together at Asokarama Vihara.

After the purification of the Sangha, Moggaliputta Tissa Thera convened the
third Coucil for compiling the real sermons and words of Buddha. He selected
one thousand Arhants who were skilled in Dhamma-Vinaya and had knowledge
in three disciplines for the Council. The Council was presided over by
Moggaliputta Tissa Thera and they collected the Dhamma-Vinaya according to
the method adopted in the first and second Councils. Moggaliputta Tissa Thera
wrote a book named 'Kathavatthu' in this Council. In the book, he refuted the
views of others and established the doctrine of the 'Vibhajjavada’. The book was
incorporated into Abhidhamma Pitaka as it reflected the summary of the
sermons and words of Buddha. This Council continued for nine months. The
Sritidhara Arhant Bhikkhus again retained the pure sermons and words of
Buddha. Abhidhamma Pitaka was referred for the first time in this Council and
the words of Buddha were named the Tipitaka.

Sending the missionaries: After the Council magnanimous Asoka sent the
Bhikkhu Sangha to different countries to preach the religion. He appointed
officers to propagate the religion. They were called Dharma-Mahamatra. They
propagated the religion in all the cities and towns. He also sent his own son
Mahinda Thera and daughter Sanghamitta Theri respectively to propagate the
religion. The names of the countries in which Emperor Asoka sent missionaries S
after the third Council are given below: N

The Councils 129
Itthiya, Utthiya Bhaddasala, Sambala Lankadvipa
and devotee Sumana under the
guidance of Mahinda Thera

The results of the third Council:

The results of the third Council are given below:

1. The fake and arrogant Bhikkhus were expelled from the Sangha.

2. All the Bhikkhus participating in the Council unanimously admitted that the
Dhamma-Vinaya collected in the first and second Councils were the uttering
made by Buddha and the advice given by Him.

3. The Dhamma and Vinaya recited and compiled in the first and second
Councils were again approved in the third Council.

4. The Vinaya that recited in the first Council were kept unchanged in the third
Council and the Dhamma was divided into two sections called Sutta and
Abhidhamma. As a result the sermons and words of Buddha were divided
into three categories such as Vinaya, Sutta and Abhidhamma which together
constitute the Tipitaka.

Exercise
How many Arhants took part in the third Council?
Make a list of the places where missionaries were sent.
Lesson: 6
The Role of Sangiti to compile Buddhas words in the form of a book

Buddha delivered many sermons on different occasions in different places. His

disciples used to learn these sermons by heart and propagated them orally. The

sermons of Buddha, retained in the memory of the different Bhikkhus, were

Forma-17, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

130 Buddhist religion and moral education
compiled together for the first time in the first Council after three months of the
Great Passing Away (Mahaparinibbana) of Buddha. With the passage of time,
these constitute the present Tipitaka and were compiled in the form of a book.
Any topic, circulated orally, may have the possibility of being corrupted for
many reasons. The main causes among them are:
1. The influence of the other languages 2. the co-existence of the people
speaking different languages 3. weakness in pronunciation 4. weakness in
understanding; and 5.weakness in explanation. There was every possibility of
fear that the sermons and words of Buddha might get lost. There was every
possibilty of decline and misinterpretation of Buddha's sermons as they were
retained in memory and were orally transmitted. Testimonies can be found if the
history of the second Council is thoroughly discussed. Within the hundred years
of the Great Passing Away (Mahaparinibbana) of Buddha dispute was created in
the Sangha for the first time regarding the interpretation of certain Vinaya rules.
As a result, the Sangha happened to be divided into two groups. Purity was kept
through the second Council by reciting and compiling again the sermons and
words of Buddha, compiled in the first Council. The Sangha of Buddha
happened to be divided into eighteen Nikayas (groups or sects) within a hundred
years after the holding of the second Council. Bhikkhus of each Nikaya
introduced themselves to be the bearer of the real sermons and words of Buddha.
Besides, under the royal patronage of the Emperor Asoka the hospitality and
honorarium for the Bhikkhus increased and this led many heretics and ascetics of
other religions started to introduce themselves as Bhikkhus by shaving their
heads and holding begging bowl wearing and civara (Patta-civara). For this it
became difficult to determine the real sermons and words of Buddha.
In this situation, the real sermons and words of Buddha were compiled again by
convening the third Council. After this Mahinda Thera, the son of the Emperor
Asoka brought it to Ceylon. There also Buddha's tecahings were propagated
orally for a long time through learning by heart. There created a possibility of
corruption and forgetfulness of the sermons and words of Buddha for wars,
famine and sensual pleasures. Then the king Vattagamini was ruling in Ceylon
(Sri Lanka). Under his patronage the fourth Council was organized and the
sermons and words of Buddha were written in palm-leaves for the first time. It
constituted the basis of the Tipitaka of the present day. From then on, in order to
preserve the sermons and words of Buddha, these were copied, engraved on
marble stones and published in the form of books from the manuscript written
g

The Councils 131
in the palm-leaves. But because of the errors of the engravers and the writers,
sometimes the sermons and words of Buddha were presented wrongly. As a
result, confusions were created. To save from this, the fifth and the sixth
Councils were convened again. The books published in different countries were
examined and scrutinized comparatively through these Councils and the
sermons and the words of Buddha were published in books correctly. We are
now getting them easily and can learn. So, it can be said that the vole of councils
is immense in the compilation of the sermons and the words of Buddha in a
book.
Exercise
Where and when were the sermons and the words of Buddha written for the
first time?
For which reasons the orally-circulated topics may be corrupted?
Exercise
Fill in the gaps
1. Council is the ............... meeting or assembly of the Bhikkhu-sangha.
2. The Bhikkhus having respect for the Dhamma and Vinaya rules felt the
necessity of ..................... the sermons and words of Buddha.
3. Ananda Thera attained .......... just before the beginning of the Council.
4. First Council took ................ months to complete.
5. The preached religion as ................ and irreligiousness as religion.
Short Question
1. Where and under whose patronage was the first Council held?
2. Why are the Bhikkhus of Vajji clan the followers of the irreligiousness?
3. Why and from whom did Asoka accept the Buddhism?
« 4- How were the sermons and words of the Buddha compiled through the
s Council?

132 Buddhist religion and moral education
Essay type Questions
1. Describe the results of the first Council.
2. What is called ‘Dasavatthuni’. What are these ? Describe.
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Who was the last disciple of the Buddha?
a) Dhammarakkhita b) Mahadeva
c) Subhadra d) Ananda
2. Which one is the main cause of holding the second Council?
a) To expel Yasa Thera from the Sangha.
b) to accept the arrogant Bhikkhus.
c) to organize meeting.
d) to declare ‘Dasabatthuni’ illegal.
Look at the picture and answer the question 3 and 4:
A pa
wh i ABN
ea i ee
v) oO WY) | KN \\\t >
My? : 3A 4 VY od yy, | NY
hey Ly wa AX pay. ne hy et 225.
i? eI ene i Nar x sr ni '4 VN
NA
Picture model: (From the left) king Ajatasattu, Emperor Kalasoka, Emperor S
Asoka, Emperor Kanishka. “

The Councils 133
3. What is the contribution of the above mentioned rulers in
compiling and preserving the sermons and words of Buddha?
a) for holding a Council.
b) for preaching Sutta and Moral Verses.
c) for propagating the advice of the Jataka.
d) for spreading the Attakatha.
4. What was the purpose behind the activities of these personnels?
a) to control ‘rituals or Kammayagga’.
b) to increase wealth.
c) to extend the kingdom.
d) to preach religion.
a. How many parts were the Bhikkhu-sangha divided after the
second Council?
b. Explain the purpose of holding the Council in the Buddhism?
c. To which Council is the information in Chart-1 applicable? Explain.
d. Describe the role of the two persons mentioned in the Chart-2 in
3 organizing the Councils.

134 Buddhist religion and moral education
2. The Assembly of the National Parliament of Bangladesh is presided over by
the honourable Speaker.The elected honourable members of the Parliament
raise different problems in the Assembly for the welfare of the people and
for the development of the locality. They are accepted, cancelled and
amended unanimously through investigation and selection. At last these are
turned into laws ..
a) Who is the author of Kathavatthu?
b) What is meant by Dharma Mahamatra?
c) Which activities in the textbook are indicated by the National
Parliament, described in the above passage?
d) Analyze the religious significance of these activities.
=<
8

Chapter Nine
Jataka
The word 'Jataka' means one who is born. But in Buddhist literature, the
incidents of previous births of Gautama Buddha are termed as jataka. Before
being Buddha, Siddhartha Gautama had to be born in many different clans and
had to pass many years for obtaining enlightenment or for the attainment of the
Buddhahood. The being who tries to gain wisdom or supreme enlightenment is
called Bodhisattva. For this he is entitled as Bodhisattva in every birth. Because
of the result of his actions of previous births he was born several times in
different clans as king, minister, god, businessman, candala, animals and birds
etc. and practised the life of the Bodhisattva. In the state of the Bodhisattva, he
practised the ten perfections (parami) such as : dana ( charity), sila (precepts),
nekkhamma (renunciation), panna (wisedom), viriya (vigour), khanti
(forgiveness), sacca (truthfulness), adhitthana (resolution), metta
(loving-kindness), upekkha (discerning rightly or neither attachment nor
aversion) and attained the highest superiority in the character. Then after gaining
the full wisdom in the last birth he attained the enlightenment (BoddhiJJana) and
became famous as Sammaka Sambuddha.
In the tales of Jataka the descriptions of the different incidents of the
Bodhisattva life of Goutama Buddha are found. In the tales of the Jataka, he is
sometimes the main character, sometimes he is the observer and some where he
has played a minor role. The tales in the Jataka are enriched with moral and
humane lessons. The characteristics of the Jataka are that it tries to purify the
character and enhance the superiority. In course of discussion, Buddha narrated
the incidents of his past life to his disciples and followers and inspired them to
develop their moral and humane qualities. By reading the Jataka one can form an
ideal life full of honest qualities and amity and compassion for all living beings.
Besides, many important information as to socio-economic condition of
Buddha's period are found in the Jataka. The role of the Jataka is not limited. It
is essential to read the Jataka to know about the ancient state of the legends that
are transmitted from generation to generation, the changes they under went and
the purpose of writing them. The Jataka plays an exceptional role as the source
of writing stories, novels and plays in the world literature. For this reason it is
called the unparallel source of the ancient history. In this chapter we will study
four Jatakas named Shuka Jataka, Seribanija Jataka, Janasandha Jataka and
Sukhavihari Jataka.
By the end of this chapter we will be able to -
x * Describe the stories of Buddhist Jataka
‘ * Analyze the learnings from the stories of the Jataka.

136 Buddhist religion and moral education
Lesson: 1
Shuka Jataka
Long long ago, there lived a king named Brahmadatta in Varanasi. At that time
Bodhisattva was born in the form of a Shuka bird in the Himvanta Province.
Bodhisattva as Shuka bird had much strength. He was the leader of the
thousands of the Shukas. The leader Shuka and his wife had a son. Both of them
reared him with love and affection. The eyesight of the shuka and his wife
became weak as they were growing old. They could not fly as they could
previously. The son of Shuka went out in search of food keeping his parents at
home. While flying one day he saw a green island surrounded by the sea.
There was a mango orchard in that island. There were ripe and juicy mangoes of
golden colour. He drank the mango juice to his heart's content. The juice was as
sweet as honey. On his way back home he brought ripe mangoes for his parents.
After eating the mangoes Bodhisattva realized that the mangoes were from that
island surrounded by the sea.
He asked his son "Was the mango from that island surrounded by the sea." The
son replied, "Yes, father."
Bodhisattva said, "Listen, my son, it is difficult to fly a long distance. The
shukas which fly to that island do not live long. You are our only son. We have
none in this old age. Never fly to that island." But the son of Shuka did not pay
heed to the advice of his parents. Being greedy he often went to that island to
taste the mango juice.
One day he drank much mango juice. He drank so much that his body become
weighty. Then he began to fly taking a ripe mango in his beak for his parents. He
felt drowsiness in his two eyes. So the mango dropped into the sea suddenly.
2
8

Jataka 137
= _ ==. a7
—_—— yo Sg VG4EF
—— ——— bi & = ==
a = Pte, 4 a
_ Ss * ic ~~ a Sf: = LT se
SS —— “ES ¥ =r oe
——— __ = == a
_——— a. Nh SSS
Se SSeS Ee ES 7
— a eee
The Shuka is carrying mango for his parents
He lost the way because of sleep and tiredness and began to fly lowly touching
the water. Being tired and exhausted, he fell into the deep sea. At that very
moment a large fish devoured him. Bodhisattva saw that the daytime is almost
finished. The sun had set. The night appeared gradually. Their son did not come
back. He realized that his son had died falling into the sea.
The parents began to bewail loudly.
There remained none to look after them. One day the old parents died of hunger
and thirst.
Advice : Always obey the superiors.
Exereise
What did the Shuka do ignoring the advice of his parents?
Write down the consequences of the Shauka for not paying heed to the parent’s
words.
Forma-18, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

138 Buddhist religion and moral education
Lesson: 2

Seribanija Jataka
The Bodhisattva was once born as a pedlar in Seriba state. His name was then
Seriban. In that country there was another pedlar named Seriba. He was very
greedy. Once, Bodhisattva took seriba with him in the city Andhapura for
trade.
Once upon a time a rich merchant family lived at Andhapura. But that merchant
family became poor by losing all the wealth. All the male members of the family
died one after another. None was living in that family except a little daughter
and an old grand mother. They maintained the family by working hard in the
houses of the neighbours.
They had a plate made of gold. The merchant used to take rice in that plate.
None used the plate after the death of the merchant. It became dusty as it was not
used for a long time. Then it did not seem to be gold as it was kept with the
broken pieces of utensils. The old grandma also forgot about it.
One day a pedlar, greedy Seriba was going by the side of the house of the
merchant calling, "Will you buy pitcher, will you buy pitcher" Hearing the
calling of the pedlar the girl said to her grandmother, “please grandma, buy me
an ornament.” The grandmother said, "We are poor. Where we will get money?"
The girl then brought the gold plate from the broken pieces of the utensil and
said, "It does not serve any purpose. Sell it and buy me the ornament." The
grandmother agreed and called the peddler. She said, "Would you please give
my grand daughter an ornament in exchange of this plate?"
The pedlar observed it turning round and round. Seeing it, it seemed to him that
it might be a gold plate. Then he scratched at the back of the plate with a pin and
realized that the plate is really made of gold. Then he decided to get the plate by
cheating them. He said, "What is the price of it? If it costs even a quarter paisa,
it will be a loss" - saying this he showed indifference and leaving the plate he
went away.
After a while, on his way to return home, the Bodhisattva called, "will you buy
pitcher? Will you buy pitcher?" Hearing the calling of the pedlar, the girl again
insisted her grandmother for buying ornament. S

Jataka 139
The old grandmother said, "You have heard by your own ears that the plate has
no value. There is no other thing at home to sell."
The girl said, "That pedlar is not good. His words trouble the mind. The calling
of this pedlar is very sweet. He may agree to take the plate. Try once." The old
lady called and asked him to sit down. Then she handed over the plate and
seeing at once Bodhisattva realized that it was a gold plate. He said, "Mother,
the price of the plate is one lakh. Such an amount of money is not with me."
The old lady said, "A pedlar came a few moments ago. He told that its price was
not even a quarter paisa. It may be that because of your virtue it has been con-
verted to gold plate. We will give it to you. You give whatever you like instead
of it. Bodhisattva then had five hundred taka and the thing which valued five
hundred taka. He kept only eight taka from it. After that he took the gold plate
and went to the river side. A ferry boat was at the ghat. He got into the boat and
said to the ferry man, "Brother, cross me the river.
The greedy Seriba again went to the house of the old lady. He said, "Give me the
plate, while returning thought that it looks odd if I don't give you something in
exchange of the plate. So I come again. The old lady said, "What nonsense!
Didn't you tell that it costs not more than a quarter paisa? An honest pedlar came
a few minutes ago. He may be your master. He has bought it for one thousand
taka."
Hearing the words of the old lady, the greedy pedlar felt giddy. He began to
flounce as if he were mad. He threw away all the belongings, money. Then was
saying, "Alas' I am undone. Seriban has seized my gold plate of one lakh taka by
trickery," he ran away to the river side to catch gold of Bodhisattva. The boat
was then on the mid river. Seriba shouted as if he was mad and loudly said to the
boatman. "Tum the boat, tum the boat." Bodhisattva forbade the boatmen and he
did not tum the boat.
The boatman went to the other side of the river carrying Bodhisattva. The
~ greedy Seriba could not bear that sight and loss of the gold plate. His heart broke
S down with anger and dispair. He died of blood vomiting.

140 Buddhist religion and moral education
WEE leas ee IE
ses 2g eC) ——

hy ae
The greedy pedlar is telling the boatman to turn the boat

did charitable works and honest deeds, enjoyed the results of the good deed and

went to heaven

Advice : Grasp all, lose all.

Exereise work
What was the name of the Bodhisattva in the disguise of the pedlar?
What did the Boddhisattva say to the old lady about the gold plate?
Lesson: 3
Janasandha Jataka

Long long ago Brahmadatta was reigning in Varanasi at that time. Then
Bodhisattva was born in the womb of the chief queen of Brahmadatta. He was
named Janasandha. Being grown up, he went to Takkhasila for getting higher .
education. He returned Varanasi after attaining competency in all the scriptures &

Jataka 141
and crafts. On the day he returned, king Brahmadatta freed all the prisoners from
the jail at the success of his son. Then he appointed him to the post of the
viceroy. The people were living happily under his rule. His father died after few
years of his appointment. The people made Bodhisattva the king. He
established six charity houses at the four gates of the city, one at the middle and
the other near the palace and donated six lakh coins every day. The people of the
Jambudipa become astonished at this great charity. They were satisfied at his
tule. Stealing and dacoities came to an end. There was no sign of feuds
anywhere. The prison house was lying vacant.
SSO Pe», a aad Rg
oe a ae
ay ce yi AN Ma UR a) C4
wien ‘ IP NMA, New b's hy } Wh Whe
wi ps Ana)
Aime i VARGA HAND, ae Mn ar N7 Hie
We ee d \ Ne
King Janasandha is giving religious advice to the people
Bodhisattva himself maintained five precpts. He performed uposatha according
to the rule. He was very attentive in ruling the kingdom in accordance with the
law. He always advised them to follow the religion to perform their works and
business honestly.
One day king Janasandha took Uposatha vow on the fifteenth day of the
e full-moon. He thought, "I will advise the people so that their peace and
& happiness increase and they can lead their lives with religious zeal."

142 Buddhist religion and moral education
He assembled the city dwellers as well as the inhabitants of the palace by
sounding the kettledrum. Sitting on the decorated 'Rajpalanka' in the royal
domain he told them. "The city dwellers, listen to me attentively:
1. Acquire knowledge in the boyhood.
2. Earn wealth in the youth time.
3. Avoid deceitfulness and evil desire.
4. Don’t be cruel and angry.
5. Don’t be neglectful in nursing the parents.
6. Learn from the masters.
7. Pay honour to samanera, Brahmin and virtuous people.
8. Keep away from killing animals.
9. Avoid miserliness and give food and drink.
10. Don’t have attraction for other men and women. Be self-controlled.
Perform ten kinds of duties.
Later, the above mentioned ten advices became renowned as 'Dasa rajadhamma!
or 'Ten types of royal duties'. The king not only gave honest advice, he himself
also lived an honest life. He performed his royal duties with honesty. Following
the advice of the king, the people lived happily with righteousness and honesty.
Advice: People will be pious, if the king is pious.
Exereise
Who was Janasandha?
Write down the “Dasarajdhamma” or the ten types of royal duties.
Lesson: 4
Shukhavihari Jataka
In ancient time, Bodhisattva was born of an 'Uddichya Brahman' clan during the
teign of Brahmadatta, the king of Varanasi. He thought that the domestic life is
full of sufferings and it is rather comfortable to leave the home. Thinking that he
went to the Himalaya. Going there he took the initiation (pabbajja). At last he
attained higher state of meditation and eight type results of the meditation. He 2
had five hundred ascetic disciples. S

Jataka 143
Once in a rainy season, Bodhisattva reached the Himalaya with his disciples.
Begging from the towns and the townships they reached Varanasi. He passed
four months rainy season in the garden of the king as a guest. Then he went to
the king to bid farewell.
The king said, "You have become old. Why will you return to the Himalaya at
this age? You stay here sending the disciples to the hermitage in the Himalayas."
He agreed to the request of the king. Then he said to the eldest disciple, "I give
you the duty to look after the five hundred disciples. You go to the Himalayas
along with them. I will stay here."
This disciple of Bodhisattva was previously a king. Leaving the kingship he
took pabbajja. Practising meditation he had possessed eight types of results of
meditation. After getting the command from the master he went to the Himalaya
with the disciples. There residing with the ascetic disciples, he becomes restless
to meet the preceptor. Then he said to them. "Stay here carefully. I will go to the
master to pay him tribute."
Saying this he came to Varanasi and went to the master. After paying tribute to
the master he asked him about his well being. Then he lay down on a mat
spreading by the side. At that very moment, the king also came to meet the
ascetic. He paid tribute to the ascetic and sat by one side.
AACA RATA CCUG a if =
ey as ———___
8 The ascetic is absorbed in deep meditation

144 Buddhist religion and moral education
The newly arrived ascetic did not leave the bed even after seeing the king. Lying
comfortably, he repeatedly said 'Oh, what a happiness! Oh, what a happiness!"
The king thought that the ascetic might be neglecting him. If it does not, then
why he is saying in that manner 'Oh what a happiness! Oh, what a happiness!"
Bodhisattva said, "Emperor, this ascetic was previously a king like you. But now
the happiness that he has got after becoming ascetic, he did not get while he was
a king. The happiness of a kingship sums to be insignificant to him. After taking
initiation he now feels the pure happiness of deep meditation. He is saying thus
because of the great outburst of emotion. Saying this Bodhisattva in order to
teach the king moral lesson recited the following verse,

The person who has no need of a protector.

The person who is not worried about others protection,

That excellent person is beyond any desire.

Always get the taste of unlimited happiness.
Meaning: That is the person who has no desire is really happy. He does not think
to save himself under the protection of others. He does not think to do something
for himself. Hearing this religious precept, the king made obeisance by bending
and touching the feet of Bodhisattva and went to the palace. The ascetic also paid
tribute to Bodhisattva and returned to the Himalaya. Bodhisattva remained at
Varanasi. He died at the full age after attaining full knowledge and went to the
abode of the Brahma.
Advice : Happiness lies in sacrifice, not in enjoyment.

Exercise
Why Bodhisattva went to the Himalayas?
%
8

Jataka 145
Exercises
Fill in the gaps
1. He was the ........ of the thousands of the shuka birds.
2. The merchant took rice from that .......... plate.
3. Show honour to the Samanera, Brahmana and ........... .
4. At last he attained --------meditation and of the results of the meditation.
5. The person in whom there is no .......... .......... 1s the real happy person.
Short Questions
1. Where did the son of the Shuka go to drink the mango juice?
2. What is the price of the gold plate of the old lady?
3. What were consequences of the greedy peddler?
Essay Type Questions
1. What advice did the Bodhisattva gave to his son and why?
2. Explain the advice, “Grasp all, lose all” to the context of the Seribanija
Jataka.
3. Explain the importance of “Dasarajadhamma.”
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Where did Boddhisattva go leaving the house in the Sukhavihari Jataka?
a) In the deep forest b) Inthe Himalaya
c) To the river side d) Inthe Buddhist monastery
Forma-19, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

146 Buddhist religion and moral education
2. Ascetic: ‘oh, what a happiness!’- In what context has this saying been
used?

a) To disregard the king

b) To enjoy the royal happiness

c) To be absorbed in the happiness of deep meditation

d) To get rid of diseases
Read the following passage and give answer to the questions no. 3 and 4:
Simanta Barna is the only son of his parents. His father was the owner of two
garments factories. He inherited the garments factories after the death of his
father and he was active in obeying the rules and regulations. He showed honour
to the workers and advised them to be virtuous and to perform their duties
honestly.
3. Which king’s character is similar to that of Simanta Barua?

a) Janasandha b) Vessantara

c) Shibi d) Indra
4. By following the advice of Simanta Barua the lives of the workers may be-

i) happy

ii) peaceful

iii) gracious

Which one is correct?
a) i&ii b) ii & iii
c) i&iti d) i, ti & iii
x
Rg

Jataka 147
Creative Questions
1. Sourabh Chakma nursed and looked after his old parents. By cutting
wood from the forest and selling them, he maintained the family. One day
his father said, "Being greedy, you don't go to the deep forest. Going
there no return with the life." Still, he entered into the deep forest in the
hope of getting huge wood and he died from venomous snake-bite.

a) What is Jataka?

b) Why did king Brahmadatta free all the prisoners?

c) Which character in the Jataka is indicated by the character of Sourabh

Chakma?
d) The advice of the father of Sourabh is logical explain to the context of
the advice in the Jataka.
2. In ancient time, Bodhisattva was born as a merchant during the reign of
Brahmadatta, the king of Varanasi. His family becomes helpless at the Sudden
death of the merchant. After death, Bodhisattva was born as a duck. Knowing
the helplessness of the family of his previous birth he sent feathers of gold one
by one to his wife. Selling them the wife of the merchant manged the family. But
she was greedy. She killed the gold duck to get the feathers at a time. After that
she began to remorse.

a) What is the advice of the Shukhavihari Jataka?

b) Why is it essential to study Jataka? Explain.

c) Which character is indicated in the Jataka by the character of the
merchant’s wife?

d) The last consequence of the merchant’s wife is related with the
consequence of the pedlar Seriba in the Jataka- Do you agree? Give
opinion in favour of your answer.

2
Rg

Chapter : Ten
Biographies

Many kings, rmmsters, devotees, Theras and Theries played important role in
the propagation of the Buddhism. They are still immortal in the history of the
Buddhism because of their service and contributions. The biographies of these
great personnels are found in the Pali literature. Their life and ideology are
exemplary. By reading their biographies we can build our moral and humane
life. In this chapter we will learn about Sariputta and Moggallana, the two great
disciples of Buddha, Purnika Theri, the renowned devotee Visakha, king
Prasenjit and Bhikkhu Shilabhadra, the pride of Bengal.
By the end of this lesson we will be able to -

« Give identity of the Buddhist intellectuals

* Explain their ideology and life after reading the biograpphies of Theras,

Theries and prominent intellectuals.
Lesson: 1
Sariputta and Moggallana
Sariputta and Moggallana were at the top in the sangha established by Buddha.
They were the Aggasavaka of Buddha. Savaka means disciple or the person who
hears, keeps and retains the religious matters. So, Aggasavak means the formost
among the disciples. Among the disciples of Buddha, Sariputta and Moggallana
were outstanding in hearing, retaining and maintaining the Dhamma of Buddha.
Sariputta by knowledge and Moggallana by psychic power were the best of all.
Aggasavaka Sariputta was also familiar as Dhammasenapati. During the time of
religious instruction Sariputta would sit by the right hand and Moggallana by the
left hand side of Buddha. So they were called the right hand and the left hand of
Buddha.
The family name of Sariputta was Upatissa. As he was the son of Sari Brahmani
he was called Sariputta. He was born in the village Upatissa situated in between
Nalanda and Indrashila. According to some other information he was born in the
village Nalaka. He was also known as Upatissa. Perhaps it was his actual name.
But in the Pali literature he is not mentioned in that name. Because of the
similarity between the name of a village and the name of a person, it is assumed
that he came of an aristocratic family. It may be that the village was known
according to the name of his race. His father's name is not known. ES
N

Biographies 149
But it is believed that his father was a highclass Brahmin. Sariputta had there
brothers and three sisters. The names of the brothers were Cunda, Upasena and
Revata. The names of the sisters were Cala, Upacala and Sisucala. All his
brothers and sisters were converted to the Buddhism and became Thera and
Theri. Sariputta was very prompt.
On the other side, Moggallana was called Moggaliputta as he was the son of
Moggali Brahmani. He was born in the village Kolita at Rajageha on the
birthday of Sariputta. His father was the chief personnel in that village. Perhaps
the village was named according to the name of his race. He was called Kolita
as he was the son of the traditional 'kula' or race in the village. The family of
Sariputta and the family of Moggallana had a good relationship for a long time.
As a result they were intimate friends from the childhood. They lived in the two
villages situated side by side. They had immense wealth.
One day, the two friends went together to watch a drama. After watching the
drama they had the feeling of renunciation. Being disgusted with the family life,
they decided to renounce the worldly life. After that, they forsook their family
and took the discipleship of Sanjaya Belatthaputta. Sanjaya Belatthaputta was a
wandering Brahmin mendicant. They learnt all the teaching from the preceptor
within a short time. They asked the preceptor, "Preceptor, there is no clue to the
final emancipation in this. We want to acquire something which will prevent us
from having sorrows of many births, diseases, death, suffering etc. Preceptor
Sanjaya Belatthaputta did not give any answer and remained silent. He was
actually a "Vikkhepavadi" or Evasive Disputent'. The followers of this issue can
not give any decision. They always hesitate. Then they wandered about the
whole Jambudipa and had discussion with different scholarly persons. But they
did not get satisfactory answer and the way to emancipation. Then they decided
to take two paths. If they traced the expected pioneer, they would inform each
other. Promising so, they started their journey along two ways.
After few days Sariputta was wandering in Rajageha. One day, Assvajita, a
disciple of Buddha was collecting alms there. At that time Sariputta met
Assvajita. Sariputta was charmed at seeing the dignified appearance of
Assvajita. He asked Assvajita. "Venerable Sir, whose disciple are you? Who is
your teacher’ which is tenet does he follow?" Assavajita said, "The Sammaka
Sambuddha Mahasamanera Goutama Buddha of the Sakya clan is my
precepter." Sariputta wanted to know about the religious doctrine of Buddha.
Then Assvajita narrated a verse told by Buddha to him. The essence of the
narration is: "There is cause behind the origin of everything. Nothing originates
x without cause. Buddha said that there is ceasation to the cause. The peace is
= earned with the attainment of the Great Nibbana." This is the doctrine of
“ Buddha. So Buddha is Nibbanavadi. After hearing the narration Sariputta

150 Buddhist religion and moral education
attained the fruition of Sotapatti immediately. He went to Moggallana and
informed him of the matter. After hearing the verse from Sariputta, Moggallana
also attained the fruition of Sotapatti. Then they decided to visit Buddha. Out of
gratitude, Sariputta wished to take the preceptor Sanjaya Belatthaputta to the
Buddha. In spite of his earnest requests he did not agree to go to Buddha.
Sariputta and Moggallana started the journey towards Buddha with five hundred
disciples of Sanjaya Belatthaputta. At this Sanjaya Belatthaputta was stricken
with sorrow and became agitated. Buddha was then residing at the Venuvana
Vihara at Rajageha after the instruction "Dhammacakka Pavattana Sutta" at
Saranath.

Sariputta and Moggallana accompanied by the followers reached Buddha at
Rajageha. Buddha was then giving religious instructions to the disciples. Seeing
Sariputta and Moggallana, Buddha with his divine knowledge understood their
desire. Buddha initiated them in the Bhikkhudhamma (path of Bhikkhu). All the
followers, except Sariputta and Moggallana, attained Arhantship at the place of
the ordination. After the ordination, on the seventh day Moggallana and on the
fifteenth day Sariputta attained the Arhantship. On the day of the Ordination
Buddha declared Sariputta and Moggallaya as Aggasavaka in the assembly of
the Theras and Theris and preached Pattimokkha. They had an arduous
endeavour of many births and rebirths. There were eighty Mohasavakas in the
Bhikkhu-sangha of Buddha. Among them these two were Aggasavakas.
Sariputta was endowed with great wisdom. His scholarship was exceptional. He
could preach the short sermons of Buddha lucidly and easily. The principal
advice of Sariputta is: "Man is mortal. He can die at any moment. So follow the
virtues. Listen to the Dhamma in the proper time. Don't be destroyed by falling
in sorrow. The inside and outside of the cities are kept well protected to defend
from the attacks of the enemies. In the same way protect yourself and keep away
from all sorts of sins. The persons who do not follow the virtues and do not listen
to the Dhamma in the proper time, they are lamented falling into hell."
Moggallana was excellent in psychic power. This phsysic power was the source
of endless working activities. He preached the doctrine of Buddha by flying all
over the heaven, earth and hell. s

Biographies 151
Even after returning from the hell and seeing torments in the hell, he advised the
others. For this reason his instructions were always attractive. He not only
included new items in the instructions but also described them easily and lucidly.
After the attainment of the Arhantship he expressed his thoughts in verse to his
followers. The experiences that he earned from his life have also been
expressed.
The substances of some of his verses are as follows: "This body is impure, the
container of excrement and worms. Why do you adore the body? Impure things
are coming forth through the nine doors of the body. Everyone avoids
excrement. The Bhikkhus abandon this impure human body in the same way."
Sariputta and Moggallana, the two Aggasavaka attained the Parinibbana before
the Parinibbana of Buddha. Moggallana attained the Parinibbana after the fifteen
days of the Parinibbana of Sariputta. As they possessed the Arhantship, they
were informed of their death previously. So before the Parinibbana, they paid
homage to Buddha and took his permission for the suitable place of the
Parinibbana. Sariputta attained his Nibbana at his birth place. Moggallana was
attacked by a killer at Kalasaila Mountain because of misdeeds of his previous
birth and attained Nibbana. In his previous birth, being instigated by his wife he
cast his old, blind parents to die in front of the animals in the deep forest. As a
result he had to die in this way. Buddha ordered to preserve the sacred relics of
Moggallana at the east gate of Venuvana Vihara. The merchant Anathapindika
built a stupa on the relics of Sariputta at Savatthi after taking permission from
Buddha. The two Aggasavaka could explain the words of Buddha lucidly. For
their great deeds they are immortal in the history of the Buddhism.
By reading the biographies of two Aggrasavaka of Lord Buddha, Sariputta and
Moggallana, we learn that a man can acheive his goal if he has a concentrate
mind and perseverance. We learn that no deed goes in vain. One must get due
rewards for one's wholesome or unwholesome deeds. Moggallana died at the
hands of the killer for the misdeed of his previous life. So one should not do evil
deed secretly or being instigated by others.
Exercises
Whose disciples were Sariputta and Moggallana at first?
Which doctrine did Sanjaya Belatthaputta follow?
= What was the chief advice of Sariputta?
s Write down the gist of the verses of Moggallana.

152 Buddhist religion and moral education

Lesson: 2

Visakha
At the time of Buddha, there lived a rich devotee of a noble family in the city of
Bhaddiya. His name was Mendaka Setthi. He had a son named Dhananjaya. His
wife's name was Sumana Devi. They were very pious, generous and were
devoted to humanitarian service. Visakha was born to them. From the childhood
visakha was very generous. She was famous for generosity and patronage. She
became immortal in the history of Buddhism for her generosity and service to
the Bhikkhu-sangha.
Once getting an invitation, Buddha, with his disciples, came to Bhaddiya city to
ordain a Brahmin and about three hundred of his followers. On the occasion of
the arrival of Buddha, The Mendaka Setthi went to see Buddha with Visakha.
She was then seven years old. She had five hundred companions, five hundred
maid servants and five hundred well decorated chariots. Visakha got the
opportunity to pay homage to Buddha from very near. Being informed of the
virtues of Visakha, acheived by her in her previous birth, Buddha precahed her
Dhamma. Everyone presented there listened to the sermon with deep respect.
Hearing the sermon Visakha with her five hundred companions and the
Mendaka Setthi attained the fruition of Sottapatti. Mendaka Setthi with due
respect invited Buddha along with his Bhikkhu Sangha to take midday meal at
his house. Buddha accepted the invitation. Next day he arrived at the house of
and the Mendaka Setthi with his disciples in proper time. Mendaka Setthi
entertained Buddha Bhikkhu-sangha with delicious foods with. Buddha
instructed them about the Dhamma. Visakha and the members of the family of
Mendaka Setthi were delighted greatly at this. They requested Buddha and the
Bhikkhu-sangha to stay fifteen days more. Seeing their respect and devotion
Buddha agreed. As a result Visakha got a wonderful opportunity in her
childhood to hear the sermons of Buddha and to provide him her service.
With the passage of time, Visakha attained the age of marriage. The parents
became active to marry her off. There was a merchant named Migara at Savatthi.
He had a son named Punna Vaddhana. Visakha was married to Punna Vaddhana
at the family level. The father ofVisakha sent her to her father-in-law's house
accompanied by a large number of slaves, chariots, precious jewels and gems.
The father of Visakkha gave her ten admonitions to live with amity and peace in
her father-in-law's house. These ten admonitions are considered as universal ,,
admonitions. They are: 3

Biographies 153
1. Don't take the indoor fire to outdoor. It means that if you find any fault with
any member of your father in law's house, you must not tell them others.
2. Don't bring outside fire inside. It means that if any neighbour tells ill about
the members of your father in law's house you must not tell them it.

3. Give only to him who gives. It means that you should lend only to those who
returns.

4. Don't give to him who does not give back. It means that don't lend the person
who borrows but never pays back.

5. Give to him who gives or does not give. It means that if a relative is poor and
has no capacity to pay, you should give them.

6. Eat happily. It means that when the seniors finish eating take information
about the meals of others and take your own meal.

7. Sit happily. It means that you have to sit in such a place that you should not
have to get up at the sight of the seniors.

8. Lie happily. It means that after you have finished all the household chores
and after the lying down of all the members of the family you will go to bed.

9, Take care of fire. It means that you provide necessary nursing carefully to the
seniors and children.

10. Show devotion to the father-in-law, mother-in-law and husband as you show
devotion to a God.

These admonitions are given in the marriage ceremonies and in different social

programmes till today. These admonitions play a great role in keeping the family

happiness.

The merchant Migara, the father-in-law of Visakha, celebrated his son's marriage

for seven days. Prosenjit, the king of Kosala and many other respectable

personnels attended the mamage.

Visakha tried to complete the household chores all by herself. Her father-in-law

and mother-in-law were satisfied with her. But the merchant Migara was a

follower of ascetics. They did not wear clothes. They came to the house of the

merchant Migara. One day the merchant Migara took Visakha before them on

the occasion of the Gurupuja. Visakha found them without clothes. She

expressed her annoyance. The asceties felt her state of mind. They said to the

merchant, "this lady is the disciple of Gautama Buddha. Remove her from the

house. Otherwise you will be destroyed." The merchant became very anxious at

this.

Forma-20, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

154 Buddhist religion and moral education
One day Migara was eating frumenty mixed with honey sitting on the
Mahapalanka. At that moment an Arhant came to the merchant Migara's house
for alms. Seeing him, the merchant did not show any desire to give him
something. Visakha could not give anything without the permission of her
father-in-law. She said to the stranger Bhikkhu, "Venerable Sir, please go
elsewhere. My father-in-law is taking stale food." Hearing this merchant Migara
became angry. He said to Visakha, " Go away from this house." He ordered the
slaves to drive her out. But everyone of the house was fond of Visakha. Hearing
this Visakha said, "I am not a bond-maid. You can not drive me out according to
your sweet will. My father sent me to my father-in-law's house by engaging
eight respectful persons. Call them. If they find me guilty, I'll go away. But I will
never leave the house with defamation." The angry merchant Migara called the
witnesses. They wanted to know about the cause of such behaviours from
Visakha. In the reply Visakha said, 'my father-in-law is eating stale food’ it
means that he has been blessed with the fruits of religious merits of his previous
birth. He is eating the food which he has earned thus". She got the Judgement in
her favour.

In another night she went outside the room taking the lamp in her hand. The
merchant wanted to know the reason of it. Visakha said that getting the news of
the delivery of a mare she along with the bond-maids went to the stable taking
the lamp." Then merchant said. "Didn't your father forbid you to take the fire
from home to outside? Why did you ignore his instruction?" Visakha said, "Yes,
he did it. But I have not violated his command. I am obeying his instruction. By
‘not taking the indoor fire to outside' he meant that I must not talk about the faults
of the members of my father-in-law's house to others. I never speak ill of my
house to other." Then she explained other instructions of her father to her fa-
ther-inlaw. The merchant Migara realized his fault.

Mean while having faced with undesired questions repeatedly, Visakha decided
to go back to her father's house. She said to her father-in-low, 'I am now ready to
go back to my father's house.’ Hearing this merchant Migara admitted his fault.
He repeatedly requested Visakha not to go to her father's house. Seeing the
humility of her father-in-law Visakha said to her, 'You are a devotee of the
unclothed ascetics. I am the worshipper of the Tiratana. I am the daughter of the
race that has a profound respect for Budhasasana. I can not but serve the
Bhikkusangha. If you give me the permission to donate and hear the doctrine of
Buddha at my sweet will, I will stay. The merchant Migara agreed.

After a few days, Visakha invited Buddha with his disciples at her house. The
unclothed ascetics also came and stayed outside when they got the news that ,
Buddha with his disciples were going to the house of the merchant Migara. S

Biographies 155
They thought that if Migara take refuge in Buddha, they would be deprived of
the charity. With this fear they forbade the merchant Migara to meet Buddha.
According to the advice of them the merchant Migara remained in his room
seeing the Bhikkhus. After arranging the gifts Visakha called her father-in-law.
But according to the words of the unclothed ascetics he told her to complete the
charity. Visakha gave the gifts to Buddha and his disciples with deep respect.
After the completion of the act of charity, Visakha called her father-in-law to
hear the doctrine of Buddha. The merchant thought that if he did not go now it
would be a great offence. Thinking that, he was about to go there. At that time
the unclothed ascetics said, 'If you want to hear the Dhamma of the Samana
Gautama, hear it from behind the curtain. They thought that Buddahada mag-
ical power. They would spell the merchant Migara and would make him his
flower.
According to the command of the ascetics the merchant Migara sat behind the
curtain. Buddha said, 'the merchant, wherever you may sit whether behind the
curtain or behind the hill or even behind the horizon, my words will reach
everywhere.’ Saying this, Mahakarunika Buddha, started preaching. The
merchant attained the fruition of Sotapatti. After that, in front of Buddha he
addressed Visakha as mother and said, 'Mother, you have rescued this son after
so long.’ Since then Visakha is called 'Migaramata' or the Mother of Migara.
From then on, at the initiative of Visakha, arrangements were made for the
midday meal everyday for the Bhikkhu-sangha. The merchant himself became
respectful to Buddha and his disciples. Visakha built a large monastery at
Savatthi by spending eighteen crores gold coins and donated it to Buddha and
his disciples. This is known as 'Pubbarama Vihara'. Visakha sought the co-opera-
tion of Moggallana for the supervision of the construction work of the Vihara.
Moggallana helped to construct the Vihara with his five hundred followers.
It is said that, Moggallana with the help of his psychic power took only nine
months to complete the Vihara. The two storied Vihara had one thousand
rooms. Visakha decorated all the rooms after her liking. Four months festival
was held on the occasion of the handover of the building. Visakha had to spend
still more nine crores gold coins. Buddha performed six 'Vassavasa' or rain
retreat in diferent times at Pubbarama Vihara. Visakha went to the Vihara thrice
everyday taking food, other necessary things, incense etc. Once, Visakha asked
= for eight boons from Buddha. Buddha granted them. These boons have unveiled
“anew side of Visakha. The boons are:

156 Buddhist religion and moral education
1. Visakha will provide food to any Bhikkhu who will come to visit Buddha as

long as she lives.
2. Visakha will provide clothes to the Bhikkhu-sangha as long as she lives.
3. Visakha will arrange all facilities of medical treatment for the sick Bhikkhus

as long as she lives.
4. Visakha will provide food to the attendent of the sick Bhikkhus as long as

she lives.
5. Visakha will supply necessary diet to sick Bhikkhus at Vihara as long as she

lives.
6. Visakha will provide ‘rice gruel’ to the Bhikkhus as long as she lives.
7. She will give clothes to the Bhikkhunis as long as she lives.
Profound conscience of charity and generosity has been expressed through
Visakhas prayer for the boons. In this way Visakha accumulated unlimited
virtues by engaging herself to the service of Buddha and the Bhikkhu-sangha at
her own delight. Five hundred Bhikkhus took meal everyday at the house of
Visakha. Visakha had ten sons and ten daughters. Each of them had ten children.
All of them had strength and wealth and lived happily. Visakha became famous
as 'Maha Upasika' or 'the great devotee! in the history of the Buddhist Religion.
From the life of this great devotee we learn that not enjoyment, it is sacrifice that
makes a man great and noble. So everybody should be infused with charity and
sacrifice.

Exercise
How man advice did Visakha’s father gave to her?
How did Visakha ordain her father-in-law?
How may boons did Visakha seek from Buddha? What ae these?
Lesson : 3
King Prasenjit

Prasenjit was the king of Kosala. Savatthi was the capital of Kosala and a very
prosperous town. Buddha had delivered many sermons and precepts in Savatthi.
Many historical events and memories of the life of Buddha are associated with
that place. For that Savatthi is the major place of pilgrimage. The present name co
of the town is Sahet-Mahet. It is now situated in the North Province of India. Ss
Prasenjit was the son of Mahakosala and contemporary of Buddha. He got

Biographies 157
education at Takkhasila. Lichchhavi Mahali and Kolio prince Bhandula were his
fellow students. He came back to Takkhasila after completing his learning and
acquiring knowledge in crafts. Mahakosala, his father became satisfied
beholding his skills in knowledge and crafts and enthroned him as the king of
Kosala. After becoming the king, he used to govern the kingdom with rules and
devotion. He loved the learned and virtuous’ people very much and enjoyed their
company. After getting the friendship of Buddha, king Prasenjit became the
follower of Him. He passed his life being the worshipper of Buddha till his
death.
Though the king Prasenjit was the follower of Buddha, he was sympathetic to
the other religious sects. It is known that once he made preparation of
'Mahayagga' (great sacrifice). But he freed all the animals that were collected for
sacrificing at the advice of Buddha. Latter he gave up the 'yagga’ and set free the
sacrificing animals. He often went to Buddha and took His advice in different
matters. In the 'Samyutta Nikaya’ of the Tipitaka there is a chapter named
‘Kosala Samyutta’ in which many advices of Buddha given to the king of Kosala
Prasenjit are included. Once, Buddha advised him to take moderate meal.
Obeying the advice of Buddha, he possessed a good health.
Mallikadevi was the wife of the king of Kosala Prasenjit. She was the daughter
of a gardener. But she was very intelligent. The king loved her and believed her
much. He took her advice in any matter. One day he asked the queen, ‘Queen!
Whom do you love very much?’ In the reply she said, ‘there is none dearer than
oneself.’ the queen was very pious, so she spoke the truth. The king informed
Buddha of the matter and Buddha confirmed the statement of Mallika to be true.
After marriage, Mallika gave birth to a daughter. The king was dissatisfied at the
birth of a daughter. At this Buddha said, 'If the women are properly educated,
they can be equal to men and can rule the state efficiently’.
The king Prasenjit respected Buddha very much. So he was very eager to create
family relationship with the clan of Buddha. The king Prasenjit invited Buddha
with his disciples for a week and entertained them with the best food items. On
the seventh day he invited Buddha to eat food everyday at his house. Being
unable to accept the invitation, He requested Ananda to take the invitation.
Ananda with his Bhikkhu-sangha went to the house of the king everyday to eat
meal. As the king was busy, he could not take care of them. In the thought of
2 being neglected they prevented themselves from eating food. The king was
& stricken with mental anguish. He decided to marry a daughter of the Sakya clan

158 Buddhist religion and moral education
for the purpose of serving the Bhikkhu-sangha and to have relationship with the
clan of Buddha. At that time the Sakyas never established marital relationship
with any one other than their clan. King Prasenjit was a very powerful king.
Thinking of the possible danger of rejecting the proposal of the king, they made
an alternative arrangement. Mahanama was the king of the Sakyas.
Vasavakhattiya, a daughter of Mahanama, was born in the womb of a slave
Nagamunda. He gave her in marriage to Prasenjit. A son was born to
Vasavakhattiya. His name was Virurava. Virurava did never get honour in the
house of his maternal uncles. Once, the Sakyas dishonoured him by calling him
the son of the slave. He became furious at this. He was seeking opportunity to
take revenge. One day he dethroned king Prasenjit, his father, with the help of the
commander-in-chief of Kosala and took the power. Prasenjit fled to Savatti and
died there within a short time. Then Virurava attacked Kapilavatthu and
exterminated the Sakyas. But while he was returning to his country after the war
being over, he was fallen into the deluge of water and was killed along with his
army.

The mentionable contemporary of king Prasenjit were Bimbisara, the king of
Magadha, Pradyut, the king of Ujjayani, Udayana, the king of Kosambi. King
Prasenjit and the king Bimbisara were relatives. Bimbisara, the king of Magadha
married Kosaladevi, the sister of Prasenjit. He got Kasi as a token of dowry from
the king Prasenjit. Kasi became the part of Magadha. A friendly relationship
grew between the king of Magadha and the king Prasenjit. Ajatasattu, the son of
Bimbisara played a leading role in performing the royal duties. Being instigated
by others, he imprisoned his father. King Bimbisara died in the imprisioned
condition. Hearing the news king Prasenjit got furiated and Kasi was taken back.
For this reason Prasenjit and Ajatasattu were at war for several times. He was
able to defeat Ajatasattu at the fourth time and was kept imprisoned till he was
dethroned. Later he gave his daughter Vajira to him in marriage and gave him the
village Kasi as a token of dowry. Hearing this Buddha advised him by saying,
"the man who wins makes many enemies. The person who is defeated suffers
from mental anguish. But the person who has no defeat or victory can enjoy
peace for ever."

Sumana, the sister of king Prasenjit, took intiation as Bhikkhuni and joined the
sangha. Hearing and following the preachings of Buddha, she obtained
Arahattaphala, the fruit of Arahantship. King Prasenjit and his wife Mallikadevi
loved very much to donate Buddha and his Sangha. Prasenjit built Rajakarma x
Vihara at Jetavana in Savatthi. He built a guest house at the request of his 8

Biographies 159

chief queen Mallikadevi. It became famous as "Mallikarama'. Sitting here

Buddha delivered religious instructions. There was a deep forest named

Anjanavana not far from Savatthi. King Prasenjit used to go on hunting there.

Theri Sujata attained Arhantship hearing the religious instructions of Buddha.

King Prasenjit abandoned the killing of animals after hearing the Dhamma of

Buddha.

Prasenjit was devoted greatly to charity. Once he invited the Buddha with His

five hundred disciples at Jetavana. Calling the citizens he said, 'Come and

witness my charity.' The citizens beheld the charity. Then the citizens also

invited the Buddha with his disciples and said to the king, 'The great king now

sees our charity.' Having witnessed the charity, the king thought that his subjects

had shown greater charity than he. I will again arrange greater charity. In this

way competitions were held between the king and his subjects on charity. Being

defeated again and again, the king thought, 'Could I never make charity like my

subjects?’

Being informed of this queen Mallika arranged for a great charity. In that

programme the king distributed the gifts to the Bhikkhusangha by his own hand.

About fourteen crores of coins were spent for this purpose. By paying tribute to

the Buddha he said, "Reverend Sir, my gifts contain all the material of everyday

use.' He also said, I no more get pleasure in war and in extending the kingdom. I

want to pass the rest of my days in peace and happiness.' At this the Buddha said,

'The arrangements of the items in a gift is not important. Intention of the mind

and the respect and devotion are more important. For the propagation of the

Buddha's religion, the service they provide to the Buddha and the

Bhikkhu-sangha, good rule and act of great charity afterwords king Prasenjit and

queen Mallika are immortal in the history of the Buddhism.

Exercise
Why did Virurava kill the Sakyas?
Which kings were contemporary with Buddha?
What was the relationship between king Prasenjit and king Bimbisar?
Lesson : 4
Punnika Theri

After accumulating the virtues in the present life and the life preceding this lady
% was born of an aristocratic family during the era of Vipassi Buddha. She became
“ worried at the thought of rebirth when she was grown up. She went to the

160 Buddhist religion and moral education
Bhikkhunis. Hearing the Dhamma, she entered into the sangha. She was
maintaining the life of a Bhikkhuni by observing the precepts thoroughly. She
attained proficiency in the Tipitaka by reading it attentively. By the
consequences of her sensitiveness of her previous birth she was born as a
daughter of slave in the house of Anathapindika at Savatthi during the’ time of
Buddha. Then she was given the name Punnika. It is said that she was named
Punna or Punnika as the number of the children was hundred after her birth.
After hearing the preaching of the Buddha, known as the roar of a lion, she
attained the fruition of Sotapatti. Later she was able to make a Udakasuddhi
Brahmin to follow her opinion by reasoning. For this her master freed her from
slavery. After getting the freedom she entered into the sangha and attained
Arhantship. The incident run thus : In her slavery life her everyday work was to
bring water from the river in the very early morning. She had to get water even
in the early morning of the winter season because of the fear of her master's
punishment and rude words. In the morning of bitter cold an Udaksuddhi
Brahmin bathed in the river from which Purnika collected water.
Udaksuddhi is a kind of holy practice of purifying life by getting wet into water.
One day she saw the Brahmin immersed in water. She asked him, 'Brahmin, I
collect water from the river in the winter morning for the fear of my master. For
which fear are you bathing in the morning of this bitter cold?' In reply, she said,
‘Punnika! I am observing the custom of washing the result of sinful act. The
sinful acts that you do in your old or young days can be freed by the bath of
purification.
Punnika said, 'Who has told you that bath of purification can free one from sins?
It is a foolish advice given by a fool. If it does so, then heaven is confirmed for
the tortoises, frogs, snakes, crocodiles and aquatic animals. If it happens so the
killers, thieves and inefficient workers will also get rid of sin by the bath of
purification. If the river can wash the sin previously done, virtues will also be
washed away. 'Q Udakshuddhi ! Clean your mind's difilement first, and then
wash your body. Do not commit sin publicly or secretly. If you commit sin, there
is no way of salvation. You will not get rid of it if you even flee. If there is fear
of sufferings, if sufferings is unpleasant to you, take refuge in Buddha, Dhamma
and Sangha, observe the precepts.’ By realising in this way Punnika proved the
falsity of the bath of purification and was able to make the Brahmin follow her 3
g

Biographies 161
opinion. From studying the biography of Punnika it is known that an ordinary
bond-maid can be famous in the world because of the influence of her good
consciousness and wholesome deeds. Even women can attain Arhantship by her
perseverance and austere endeavour.

Exercise

Write down how was Punnika able to make Udaksuddhik Brahmin to follow her
opinion.
Do you support the arguments of Punnika? Put arguments in favour of your answer.
Lesson: 5
Bhikkhu Shilabhadra

Shilabhadra was the first supreme pride of Bengal. He was adorned with many
titles as acknowledgement of his work. The titles were Sastraguru,
Dhammaratna and Gyanakara. He was born in 529 AD. He was born in the then
Bhadraraja clan of Chandina in Comilla. It is known that his nickname was
Dantabhadra. He became famous as Shilabhadra after his initiation into
Buddhism.
Shilabhadra was uncompromising in acquiring knowledge. He studied Veda,
technology, syntax, medical science, philosophy and other branches of
knowledge in his early age. He was eager to acquire knowledge from his
childhood. By abandoning royal honour and wealth, he travelled ancient India in
search of truth. While travelling ancient India he visited different monasteries.
He tried to know about the religion and philosophy of Buddha. Thus he reached
Nalanda. Nalanda was then a university of high standard. This university was
developed basing on the monasteries. Though it was monastery based university,
the people of all classes had the entrance. During the time of Shilabhadra ten
thousand students and one thousand five hundreds teachers were there. Acariya
Dhammapala was the principal of Nalanda Mahavihara; Shilabhadra took
initiation under his tutorship. It is the place where he took 'Upasampada (higer
ordination)’ according to the rule of the religion of Buddha and became Bhikkhu.
Forma-21, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

162 Buddhist religion and moral education
Then he learned the essence of the Budhism by arduous practice and per-
serverance and acquired wisdom in explaining the difficult theories of | Bud-
dhist scriptures simply. Shilabhadra not only took the essence of the mysti-
cism of Dhamma and philosophy from Acarya (teacher) but also contin-
ued to ask questions entering into the depth of the truth until he got the eternal
truth. In this way he extended the periphery of knowledge and made it transpar-
ent. He obtained efficiency in many subjects.
Shilabhadra earned much praise by defeating a famous Brahmin Pundit (scholar)
in a debate. Then debates were prevailing in ancient India. Even kings and
emperors were associated with it in many ways. It was taken as a matter of great
pride in having great scholars in their own countries. So, the kings and the
emperors were also interested in arranging such debates. An incident like this
happened while Shilabhadra was staying at Nalanda.
Arriving at the state of Magadha, a Pundit of South India claimed that no pundit
was equal to him in spiritual knowledge and also proclaimed his superiority. He
called the pundits of the state of Magadha in a debate on religious matters.
Hearing this king of Magadha sent a messenger to Acariya Dhnammpala whether
agreed to participate in the debate or not. Acariya Dhammapala gave his consent
and got ready to go to Magadha immediately. His disciple Shilabhadra was then
in Nalanda. He politely requested Acarya, 'Give me the permission’. He was then
only thirty years. Acarya Dhammapala was very pleased. Already he has heard
the analysis and explanation of the theories made by Shilabhadra. So he had
much confidence in him. He gave him permission. At this time many young
disciples became perturbed at the decision of Acarya. Addressing them all, he
said, 'I am sure that Shilabhadra will be able to defeat this pundit.' Many peaple
attended the Dhammasabha (religious meeting). Shilabhadra defeated the pundit
excelled in spiritual knowledge. The erudition of Shilabhadra spread in all
directions. Being satisfied the king of Magadha gave him the revenue of a town
as a permanent scholarship. But’ Shilabhadra refused to accept it. He said that
'Ticivara' (three robes) worn by the Bhikkhus is sufficient. After the request of
the king, he agreed to accept the city and he established a Sangharama (monas-
tery) there. The monastery was named as 'Shilabhadra Sangharama Vihara.' All
the Bhikkus, Samanera addressed Shilabhadra as 'Saddhamma Bhandara (store-
house of true religion)' in great respect. In fact he was the best ofall in the com-
temporary time of Mahasthavira Shilbhadra. He was expert in s
g

Biographies 163
all kinds of learning and had fame as a pundit. Shilabhadra, the first among the
Bengalese, was able to attain this fame. The Bengalese feel proud of this
achievement till today.
After completing his study he joined as a Professor in the Nalanda Mahavihara.
After the demise (Nibbana) of Acariya Dhammapala, he was appointed in the
post of the Acariya unanimously. His demise occured at the age of 125 in 654
A.D.
Exercise
Where and from whom did Shilabhadra take initiation into Buddhism?
Why was Shilabhadra given the revenue of a town as a permanent Scholarship?
Exercise
Fill up the gaps
1. Seeing the dignified appearance of Assavaijita ................ was Charmed.
2. Moggallanaa was ............. psychic power.
3. You would rather wash the ................ of mind than wash your body.
4. The father of Visakha gave .................. admonitionss to Visakha.
5. «sss... Was the first Bengalese who earned fame in Nalanda Mahavihara.
Short Question
1. Which ism did Sanjaya Belatthaputta follow?
2. To whom did Visakha pray for the boons and how many were they?
3. Why was Punnika freed from the slavery?
4. Why are we proud of Shilabhadra?
Essay type questions
1. How did Sariputta and Moggallana obtain the post of Aggasavaka of Buddha?
2. Evaluate the importance of ten admonitions of Visakha’s in preserving
family peace.
x 3. Write about the contributions of king Prasenjit in the propagation of the
R Buddhism.

164 Buddhist religion and moral education
4. Write down elaborately about how Punnika became a Bhikkhuni from a slave.
5. Describe the life and works of Shilabhadra.
Multiple Choice Questions
1. In what Moggallana was the best of all?

a) in the worldly knowledge

b) in the spiritual truth

c) in the psychic power

d) in the physical strength
2. The purpose of king Prasenjit in marrying Sakya daughter —

i) as the Bhikkhu-sangha abstained themselves from taking meal.

ii) for the hope of getting Kasi state.

iii) to create family relationship with the clan of the Buddha.

Which one of the following is right?

a) i b) i&ii

c) i&iii d) i, ii & iii
Read the following passage and answer the question no 3 and 4.
Papiya Tanchanga is a pious lady. Because of her poverty she does the domestic
works in the houses of others. One day she inspired a superstitious man to be
ordained in her own religion by proving hollowness of his work by putting
arguments.
3. To which Theri of the Biographics is the above mentioned incident related?

a) Punnika b) Uppalavanna
ec
c) Potacara d) Khema 8

Biographies 165
4. Asaresultt of Papiya’s accomplishment of the work Papiya ....
i) will gain praise.
ii) will get good remedy.
iii) will attain Arhantship
Which one of the following is right?
a) 1&ii b) ii & iii
c) i& iti d) i, ii & iti
Creative Questions
1,
Attained Arhatship The sacred remain
in fifteen days at Venuvana
E Could explain the £ Preach the
gz speeches delined. gs Dhamma moving
is) delivered by the is) into Tribhuvana
Attained Nibbana The Aggosavak of
in his birthplace the Buddha.
a) When was Shilabhadra born?
b) Why was Punnika freed from slavery?
c) Which follower of the Buddha had the similarities described in chart?
Explain.
« 4) Analyse the contribution of the person described in Chart-2 as a
S Aggasavaka of the Buddha in the propagation of Buddhism.

166 Buddhist religion and moral education

2. Episode - 1
Rupen Barua was much eager in acquiring knowledge from his childhood.
He was named Dhammamitta after his ordination in the Buddhism. He
attained competency in many aspects of the religious knowledge by his
arduous practice and perseverance. He also attained competency in
explaining the difficult theories of the religion. Being satisfied with him he
was addressed as 'the storehouse of true religion."

Episode-2

Going to the monastery everyday Brin ta Barua serves the Tiratna ( the Buddha,

Dhamma and Sangha) and accepts the five precepts (Pancasila). She got married

when she was matured. She reflected her father's advice given to her in her

family life after marriage.

a) What is the present name of Savatthi?

b) Why was Moggallana attacked by the killer at the Kalashaila Mountain?

Explain.

c) Which character narrated in the incident-1 has the similarities with the

character narrated in the Biography? Explain.

d) Because of her influence of the activities described in incident-2 Brinta
Barua will be redeemed in the present life preceding-Do you agree with
the view? Show arguments.

=<
8

Chapter Eleven
The History of Buddhism

The Buddhism was originated in ancient India in the sixth century B.C. During
the advent of the Buddhism, most of the people were under the influence of
blind faith and false notions. They believed that all the disasters and accidents
happend becauase of the influence of the invisible divine power. So they tried to
remain peaceful and undisturbed by submitting themselves to the invisible
power. They arranged various types of worship, adoration and observed
scriptural rules. Sacrificial ritual and sacrificing of animals were the inevitable
part of these worship and adoration. These religious rituals were the way to get
rid of all kinds of problems. The Buddha advised that they would rather be
conscious about their own doing then worship invisible power. He told them to
give up there practices as these were not the right way to salvation and he
indicated the way to get rid of sufferings. At the call of his ambrosial, from
common people to kings and emperors, all were attracted. They realized that,
there is sorrow but there is also a way to stop it. Being inspired by the truth the
men were illuminated with new perception. In this way the Buddhism and its
philosophy started its journey. With the passage of time, it crossed the boundary
of ancient India and expanded to the outer world. This flow of the gradual
development of Buddhism and its philosophy is the history of the Buddhism. In
this chapter we will study about the history of the Buddhism.
By the end of this chapter we will be able to -
* Describe the social and religious conditions of pre-Buddha age
* Describe the sixteen Mahajanapadas (great townships) contempoprary of the

Buddha
* Explain the role of the kings of the Mauriya, the Kusan and the Pala dynasty in

the propagation of the Buddhism in Bangladesh
* Give idea about the history of the Buddhism along with the pre-modern era of

Bangladesh.

Lesson: 1
Social and religious conditions in Pre-Buddha Age
The Buddha was born in ancient India. Many sages of diverse kinds were born in
ancient India in different ages. Social customs and rules also moved onward
se continuously in different forms. There was the influence of Vedic Brahmanic religion
® in India in pre Buddha age. India was then divided into many small kingdoms.

168 Buddhist religion and moral education
The kings used to collect crops, domestic animals etc as revenues from the
subjects. The common people lived in villages. Kings, their oficers and the rich
people lived in the well-protectd towns. They got delight and amusement in
hunting, using weapons, dancing and singing. Though there were different types
of professions, most of the people used to earn their livelihood by
agriculture. Bamboo and wood along with bricks-stone were used for building
houses. During the time of festivals, the people sang, danced and prepared _var-
ious types of cakes. The men and women put on ornaments made of iron. The
system of slavery was prevailing in the society. The rich people bought slaves in
exchange of money. The war-captives and convicted criminals were turned to
slaves. Morever many were slaves by birth. The system of polygamy was also
prevailing in the society. The learners got education usually at the house of the
teachers.

Four kinds of caste systems were prevailing in the society. They are : Brahmana,
Khattiya, Vaisya and Sudra. At that time the Brahmins worshipped Brahma and
other gods with sacrificial rituals. They believed that worship and adoration bring
divine happiness. Brahma was considered the creator. Brahma has created the
human beings from the different organs of his body. So the religion, action,
thought and consciousness all were centered on Brahma. The Brahmins _ prop-
agated that the Brahmins were created from the mouth of Brahma, the Khattiyas
from the hands, the Vaisya from his thigh and the Sudra from the feet. The Brah-
mins were the privileged class and had the supremacy. The kings show special
respect to them. They had the topmost position. They proclaimed — themselves
to be the representatives of the gods. Worshipping, adoration and giving advice
were their main occupations. The Khattiyas were warriors. They had the power to
govern the country. The Vaisyas were merchants. Their chief occupation was
trade and commerce. The Sudras were working class people. They lead their live-
lihood by working for others. They belonged to the lower status.
At that time sacrificial rituals, sacrificing the animals, incantation, worship and
adoration were the parts of the religious rituals. Besides, the act of performances
like wandering in the forest, living in exile, practising austerities of body also
prevailed. To satisfy the gods and goddesses with the blood of the animals was
one of the common religious rituals. Because it was believed that by performing
the sacrificial rituals one can get health and wealth and can attain heaven.
Different types of incantations, rules of austere religious practice, exorcism were
S
AQ

The History of Buddhism 169
also prevailing. Men took refuge of these religious rituals to get rid of dangers
and diseases. But these religious rituals did not satisfy all. Because they realized
that sacrificial rituals and sacrificing the animals do not bring eternal happiness.
They searched for emancipation in another way. As a result, different types of
religious doctrines were originated. The wandering ascetics propagated these
religious doctrines.
Exercise
Give an idea about the four types of caste system of Pre-Buddha Age.
Describe the religious conditions of the Pre-Buddha Age.
Lesson: 2
Religious Conditions during the time of Buddha

Gautama Buddha was born in 623 B.C. At that time 63 religious tenets alongwith
the Buddhism were prevailing in India. This information has been described in
the Brahmajala Sutta of Digha Nikaya of the Sutta Pitaka included in the
Tipitaka. At that time there were six large Samana Sangha (group of ascetics)
except the Bhikkhu-sangha. The chief of these six sanghas were: Purana
Kassapa, Makkhali Gosala, Ajita Kesakambali, Pakuda Kacchayana, Nigantha
Nathaputta and Sanjaya Velatthaputta. They were famous as Saratirthankara or
six heretics. They had many followers.
During the time of Buddha, Mahavira, founder of Jainism, was very popular.
There were some differences between them. Rajageha was the main area of his
preaching. But there was no meeting of Buddha with him. Mahavira, like the
Buddha propagated 'Ahimsa' (non-violence).
Besides, the wandering in the forest, austerity, physical torture, sacrificial rituals,
and different types of incantation, austere religious practices and exorcism were
also prevailing during the time of Buddha. Buddha had given the opinion that
prevailing religious doctrines contemporary to him were not the right ways to get
rid of sufferings.
Buddha presented ‘Kammavada' (theory of kamma) while in the doctrine before
the age of Buddha Kamma and Kaammaphala (result of kamma) had been
ingnored and human beings were under the control of fate. According to His
opinion, human beings are controlled by Kamma. As one sows, so one will reap.
Forma-22, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

170 Buddhist religion and moral education
India was divided into sixteen great teritories during the time of Buddha. Each
territory was called Mahajanapadas. In the history of ancient India these were
known as 'Sixteen Mahajanapadas'. Buddha had preached his doctrine through
travelling many of these trritories. As many places of these territories are
associated with important events or memories of Buddha, they have become the
places for pilgrimage.
Exercies
Who were the chief of the six Samana Sanghas during the time of the Buddha?
What do you mean by Adhittasamuppannavada?
Lesson-3
The short descriptions of the sixteen Mahajanapadas at the time of Buddha:
All the territories of the sixteen states during the time of Buddha were not histor-
ically famous. Many states lost their identity because of the arggression of the
other states. Still many states have special significance in the continuity of the
history. The sixteen states are:
1. Anga 2. Magadha 3. Kasi 4. Kosala 5. Vajji 6. Malla 7. Ceti 8. Vamsa 9. Kuru
10. Pancala 11. Matsya 12. Surasena 13. Assaka 14. Avanti 15.Gandhar and 16.
Komboja
The short descriptions of these sixteen states are given below:
1. Anga: The kingdom of Anga was in the east of Magadha. The borders of
Magadha and Anga state were divided by the river Champa. The Champa river
separated the two states. This river was lying in Magadha. The Champa city was
the capital of Anga. It is known that Mahagovinda, the minister of the emperor
Disampati, established the city. The Champa city was situated in the coastal area
in the confluence of the river Champa and the river Ganges. A king named
Brahmadatta ruled Anga during the time of Buddha. Queen Goggora was very
fond of Buddha. She dug a large pond in the Champa city. She built a monastery
by the side of it. It is known from the Suttapitaka that Gautama Buddha visited
the place eight times. Bimbisara, the prince of Magadha occupied Anga by
defeating the king Brahmadatta. At that time this state united with Magadha was
known as Anga-Magadha. s
g

The History of Buddhism 171
2. Magadha: Magadha was situated in the districts of Patna and Gayas of the
present India. It was surrounded by the river Ganges on its north, by the river
Sona on its west, by a part of the Bindya Mountain on its south and by the river
Champa on its east. Buddha observed the 'vassavasa (rain-retreat)' here for sever-
al times. Bimbisara was the king of Magadha during the time of Buddha. He was
a lay follower of Buddha. He donated the Venuvana garden of Rajageha to
Buddha and the Bhikkhu-sangha. King Bimbisara did many noble acts for the
welfare of Buddha and the Bhikkhu-sangha. The name of king Bimbisara has
been mentioned in different Suttas of the Tipitaka. Being instigated by others the
prince Ajatasattu imprisoned his father and occupied the throne while Buddha
was living. In his early life, he was malicious to Buddha. Later he understood his
fault and being repented, he sought the shelter of Buddha. He was also a lay
follower of Buddha. Ajatasattu shifted the capital of Magadha to Pataliputta. At
that time Pataliputta earned fame as the seat for learning.

3. Kasi: Kasi was a developed and rich state in ancient India. Kasi was
tenowned for the development of education, crafts and arts. Varanasi was the
capital of Kasi. It was the renowned city at that time. Buddha delivered his first
sermon 'Dhammacakkapavattana Sutta' (Foundation of the wheel of the Law) to
the fisrt five disciples (Pancavaggiya Sissa) at Migadava of Isipatana of
Saranatha in Varanasi. Buddha delivered his sermon for ten times in the different
places of Varanasi. Buddha observed his first rain-retreat (vassavasa) here. Many
kings of this state were termed as Brahmadatta. During the time of Buddha this
state was included in Kosala and became renowned as Kasi-Kosala.

4. Kosala: Kosala was a kingdom surrounded by rivers. It was surrounded by
the river Sumati on its west, by the river Sappika or Sandika on its south, by the
river Sadanira on its east and by the hilly areas of Nepal on its north. The capital
of Kosala was Sravatthi. In the Pali language it is pronounced as Savatthi. A saint
named Savatha was here. According to the opinion of many it was called
Savattha as it was his birthplace. Again according to the opinion of many, it was
called Savatthi as everything was available in this town. It stood on the bank of
the river Aciravati which is presently known as river Rapti. King Prasenjit ruled
here during the time of Buddha. He had much contribution in propagation of the
Buddhism. A renowned merchant who was the follower of the Buddha lived in
the capital Savatthi of Kosala state. Their names were Anathapindika and

S Visakha.

172 Buddhist religion and moral education
The merchant built Jetavana Manastery and the great devotee Visakha built the
Pubbarama Vihara and donated to Buddha and his Bhikkhu-sangha. Buddha
observed twenty five rain-retreats (vassavasa) in Savatthi. He delivered many
sermons in Savatthi. Ayoddha and Saket, the famous cities of ancient India, were
situated in Kosala.
5. Vajji: This kingdom was extended to the north of the river Ganges up to the
hilly areas of Nepal. It was surrounded by the river Gandaka in its west and by
the rivers Kosi and Mahananda on its east. Vesali was the capital. Vesali was a
very prosperous city during the time of Buddha. The Vajjis were a very
disciplined nation. They accomplished all the works unitedly. Buddha praised
this sort of behaviour of the Vaijjis.
Once upon a time everybody in the capital Vesali of Vajji kingdom became puz-
zled in fear of epidemic, famine and ghosts. Even the king himself could not take
any step. Being helpless they invited Buddha who was the welwisher of all living
beings Buddha accepted the invitation of the people of Vajji. The king of Vajji
took all the initiative to bring Buddha in his kingdom with due respect. It rained
heavily at the arrival of Buddha. This caused the flow of water. The rotten dead
bodies, bad smell and waste were washed away. Lord Buddha ordered Ananda
Thera to move round the four sides of Vesali and to recite Ratanasutta. After the
recitation of the Sutta, they were relieved of the three fears. On the occasion of
the arrival of Buddha shrines ( cetiyas) were built in different places of Vesali.
Lord Buddha preached here Satta Aparihaniya Sutta to the inhabitants of Vajji for
the prosperity of the kingdom. Buddha observed the last rain-retreat in Vesali.
6. Malla: Malla kingdom was situated in the east ofVajji kingdom and in the
west of Kosala kingdom. Buddha had travelled many times through the
kingdom of Malla. The road to Magadha and Kosala was through the kingdom
of Malla. The capital of the Mallas was Kusinara. It is also called Kusinagara. It
was situated on the bank of the river Hirannavati. The present name of the river
is Sona. Gautama Buddha attained the Great Passing Away (Mahaparinibbana)
in the Sal forest of Kusinara. After performing the funeral ceremonies Drona
Brahmin divided Buddha's relics into eight parts and built shrines ( cetiyas) on
them. Afterwards Emperor Asoka built a large Parinibbana statue of Buddha
here. %9
ES

The History of Buddhism 173
7. Ceti: Kingdom Ceti or Cedi was situated by the side of Kuru kingdom on the
bank of the river Jamuna. The capital of Ceti was Sotthivati or Svastivati. It is
now Situated in the Northern Province oflndia. 'Sibi' described in the Vessantara
Jataka was closely attached to it. There was a close relationship between the
kingdoms of Kasi and Ceti. Traces are not found about the incidents associated
with the life of Buddha.
8. Vamsa : Vamsa kingdom was situated on the south bank of the river Ganges.
Kosambi or the present Kosama near Allahabad was its capital. A king named
Udayana reigned here during the time of Buddha. He was very ease-loving and
pleasure-seeking. He knew the incantation of entrapping elephants. He became
the lay disciple of Buddha through a Bhikkhu named Pindala Bharaddvaja. The
chief queen Samavati and chief nurse Khujjattara of king Udayana were the
followers of Buddha. Queen Samavati built a monastery in this garden and gifted
it to Buddha and his disciples. The name of the monastery was Ghositarama. Out
of respect to Buddha king Udayana built a statue of red sandal wood here in the
life time of Buddha.
9. Kuru: Indraprastha was the capital of Kuru kingdom. It is now situated in the
Indrapat area of the present Delhi. A king named Pouravya reigned during the
time of Buddha. Buddha visited the town of Kuru many times. Buddha delivered
sermons here for four times. Ratthapala, the distinguished rich young man of
Kuru initiated into Bhikkhuhood by Buddha.
10. Pancala : Pancala comprised Rohilakhanda and a part Middle Doara. The
river Ganges divided the kingdom into two parts. One was North Pancala and the
other was South Pancala. Ahicchatra or Chatravati was the capital of North
Pancala. It is now known as Ramanagara. Kampillya was the capital of South
Pancala. It seems that the kingdom had little imfluence during the time of
Buddha. No references about the people and the city are found in the Pali
literature.
11. Matsya: Matsya kingdom comprised the hilly areas of Cambala beside Ceti
kingdom and the forest situated on the bank of the river Sarasvati. At the middle
was the 'Virata Nagara (biggest town)’ having the dignity of the capital. It is now
Bairat of Jaypur. It is known that Buddha had visited this kingdom several times.
Some famous stone inscriptions of Emperor Asoka have been found in the town
5 Bairat.

174 Buddhist religion and moral education
12. Surasena: It is the kingdom situated on the bank of the Jamuna. Mathura
was the capital of it. King Avantiputta reigned during the time of Buddha. He
was contemporary of Mahakacchayana, the disciple of Buddha. He was one of
the worshippers of Buddha. Buddhism developed in Mathura region under the
patronage of this king.
13. Assaka : Ashmaka or Assaka was situated on the bank of the river. Potali,
Potana or Padona was the capital of the state. It is not known much about. An
ascetic named Babari lived here. He alongwith his disciple took initiation into
Buddha's religion.
14, Avanti: Avanti kingdom was comprised the area from Mandhata of Normada
Valley to Mahesvara and adjacent districts. Ujjayini was the capital of it.
Candrapajjota was the king during the time of Buddha. No information is found
about the number of the visit of Buddha here. But Mahakacchayana, the son of
the priest of the king, was a renowned disciple of the Buddha.
15. Gandhara: Gandhar had the reputation as the breeding centre of art and
culture in ancient India. Taxila was the capital of Gandhara. A king named
Pukkussati reigned here during the time of Buddha. Leaving his kingdom in the
old age, he went to Rajgeha on foot and entered into the Bhikkhusangha of
Buddha. Taxila, the capital of Gandhara was the centre of various learning. The
renowned physician Jivaka studied medical science here. The university of
Taxila was the most ancient and renowned university. Taxila is now in Pakistan.
16. Komboja: Comboja kingdom was situated near Gandhara to the north and
west of present India and Pakistan. Two names are mentioned as the capital of
Komboja. They are Dvaraka and Rajpur. Monarchy was prevailing in the
kingdom of Komboja. The names of two kings, Candra Varmana and
Sudakkhina in this kingdom are known so far. It is not known about the king who
reigned during the time of Buddha. There was a town named Kukkutavati.
Mahakappina was the ruler of the town. He was also titled as king. Realizing the
quality and greatness of the teachings of Buddha, king Mahakappina with his
councils went to the bank of the river Chandrabhaga and became the disciples of
Buddha.

Exercise

The History of Buddhism 175
Lesson-4
A short introduction to different kings and their contributions

Among the kings who were contemporary with Buddha and contributed much
for to the welfare of the Buddhism and became famous, king Bimbisara was one
of the most worthy of them. He was the king of Magadha. He met Siddhartha
Gautama before the enlightenment. At that time Siddhartha was observing a vow
of asceticism and was trying to find out the way to get rid of sufferings.
For that he was wandering India. Seeing the beautiful, well formed body of
Siddhartha Gautama, king Bimbisara wished to offer him the post of the
commander-in-chief. In reply Gautama said, 'I am the son of king Suddhodana
of Kapilavatthu comprised in the kingdom of Kosala. I have taken asceticism to
find out the way to get rid of sufferings.' Then king Bimbisara told him that he
would take refuge in him if he obtained enlightenment. Truly the king Bimbisara
took refuge in him after attaining his enlightenment. He circulated a decre in his
kingdom to provide appropiate honour to Buddha and his disciples. As a result
hospitality and honorarium of the Bhikkhus increased. Many people accepted
the life of the Bhikkhus to avail themselves of this opportunity. King Bimbisara
informed Buddha of the matter. In this situation, Buddha advised not to give
ordination to royal servants, thieves, robbers, convicted criminals and debtors.
At the request of king Bimbisara, Buddha introduced Uposatha and religious
discussion in the time of Amavasya, Pumima and Astami.
There is a reference in the Mahavagga that once Pilindavatsa Thera was cleaning
a hill at Rajageha. Seeing this king Bimbisara asked Pilindavatsa Thera about it
and he came to learn that he was preparing the dwelling places for the Bhikkhus.
King Bimbisara said that he would make arrangements for this if Lord Buddha
gave his consent. In due time Buddha gave the consent. But the king was
forgetful of this promise. He suddenly recalled it after many days. Then he called
the main councillor and asked him, 'I told the Bhikkhus that I would build
dwelling houses for them. Had this work been finished?’ The councillor
answered 'no'. Then the king said, 'How many nights have passed after the
promise?’ Counting the days the councillor said, 'Five hundred nights.' Then he
ordered to build five hundred Aramas (monasteries) for the Bhikkhus. With the

co passage of time that place became famous as 'Pilindavatsa Village.’

S

aq

176 Buddhist religion and moral education
Ajatasattu became the king after Bimbisara. Being instigated by Devadatta he
was malicious to Buddha. After his father's death he became repentant and took
refuge in Buddha. The first great Buddhist Council was held under the patronage
of Ajatsattu after three months of the Parinibbana of Lord Buddha. The
teachings or words of Buddha were compiled in that council. Because of that,
the name of Ajatasattu has become immortal in the history of Buddhism.
Afterwards, the second great Buddhist Council was held under the patronage of
king Kalasoka of Magadha after one hundred years of the Parinibbana of Lord
Buddha and the third great Buddhist Council was held under the patronage of
Emperor Asoka after two hundred and eighteen years. The importance of these
great Buddhist Councils is much in collecting, preserving and compiling the
teachings of Buddha. These great Buddhist Councils have special contributions
in the propagation of Buddhism. It was never possible to arrange the great
Councils without the patronage of the kings. The followers of the Buddhism still
remember the contributions of the kings in arranging the Councils with respect.
Besides, among the other kings, king Prasenjit of Kosala and king Prodyut of
Ujjayani were the worshippers of Buddha. They were contempories with
Buddha. At that time, they assisted in developing the religion and philosophy of
Buddha in many ways with due respect.
Exercise
Make a list of the names of the kings who patronized the Buddhism.
Lesson: 5
The Maurya Period
Chandragupta was the first king of the Maurya dynasty. He was the founder of
the Maurya Empire. Mauryas belonged to the clan of Surya. The Maurya dynas-
ty originated from the prince Mandhyatri of Surya clan. The Mauryas were dem-
ocratic rulers in the six century B.C. They alongwith the other territories of East
India were under the kingdom of Magadha. Then the king of Magadha was from
the clan of Nanda. At that time Chandragupta developed a relationship witha ,,
famous Brahmin. Named Kautilya who was also known as Chanakyaor &

The History of Buddhism 17
Vishnugupta. with the assistance of Chanakya Chandragupta defeated the king
of the clan of Nanda and obtained the throne of Magadha. King Chandragupta
was an efficient warrior as well as an efficient ruler. He specially followed the
principles of economics written by his minister Kautilya.

Chandragupta took the first intiative to evict the Greek rulers from the Indian
Sub-Continent after the death of Greek Emperor Alexander. He declared a war
against the Greeks. He occupied many kingdoms by defeating the Greeks. At
first, he created a conflict and then established friendship with Seleukos, the
follower of Alexander. Seleukos sent an envoy named Megasthenes to the court
of Chandragupta to establish friendship, Seleukos handed over Kandahar, Kabul,
Hirat and Beluchistan to Chandragupta Maurya. Chandragupta Mauraya gifted
Seleckos five hundred elephants. Megasthenes later wrote a book about these
historical events. The name of the book is Indica'. The main copy of the book is
not available now. The famous biographers Plutarch, Justine and Arabian the
writers who wrote on historical matters of the second century had used
quotations from Indica’ in their writings.

Chandragupta was the follower of Jainism. He reigned for twenty four years. It
is said that once the kingdom was stricken with famine. Chandragupta enthroned
his son and went to Mahishur. He died there. Bindusara was the son of
Chandragupta Maurya. He ascended the throne as an heir of Chandragupta. He
was a good ruler. Kautillya performed the duty of the minister for some days
during the reign of Bindusara. Bindusara did not take arms in his hands being
fascinated by the desire of extending the kingdom. Following his father he kept
intact the friendship with the Greeks. Bindusara was peace-loving and had
passion for education. During the reign of Bindusara the subjects revolted in
Taxila. King Bindusara sent Prince Asoka there. Asoka managed the revolt
peacefully. Except Asoka king Bindusara had many sons and daughters. He
reigned for twenty five years. Afterwords son Asoka ascended the throne as he
died of old age complications.

Asoka, the son of Bindusara, became famous as Emperor Asoka' because of the
extension of the kingdom and heroism and strength. At first emperor Asoka did
not pay much attention to the Buddhism. After the Kalinga war he showed
interest in the precepts and principles of Buddha. More than one lakh people
were killed in the Kalinga war. A change came in the mind of Asoka after
Forma-23, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

178 Buddhist religion and moral education
this tragic war. Then hearing the precepts and sermons of Buddha from Nigrodha
Samanera, he became one of the worshippers of Buddha. He was then named
Dhammasoka. There was another title also ‘Devanam Piya Piyadasi' meaning
king Priyadarshi a favourite name to the gods. He followed the teachings of
Buddha properly.

The contributions of the Maurya Dynasty in the propagation of the
Buddhism :

After being the follower of the Buddhism, illustrious emperor Asoka of the
Maurya dynasty paid close attention to the welfare of the mass people. He
appointed the officers named Dhammamahamatra for the propagation of the
religion among the people. He wrote the teachings of Bhuddha everywhere in the
kingdom to preach religion and to educate. These were inscribed in the slopes of
the mountains, at the top of the hills and in the caves. In this way he disseminated
the inscriptions throughout his empire. These are known as Asoka Rock Edicts.
So far 34 Rock Edicts of Emperor Asoka have been discovered. The essence of
these inscription were : to respect the elders: to show compassion to living
beings: to donate the poor, Bhikkhu sramonas; to behave well with the relatives,
friends and servants, to speak the truth etc. He was generous to all religions.
People of all religion lived happily in his Empire. He donated eveyone liberally.
He identified the sacred places intertwined with the memory of Buddha and built
monasteries, shimes and pillars there.

He arranged tour in the kingdom with a vow to serve and for the welfare of the
people. This was called Dharmayatra (religious tour). During the religious tour
he collected the sacred relics of Buddha from different places of India. Then he
constructed 84,000 stupas in the whole India and took step to conserve them. The
purpose of this was to attract the people of the country to the ambrosial words of
the Buddha. Another contribution was to arrange third Buddhist Council. This
council was held in Pataliputra, the capital of Emperor Asoka's kingdom. The
Buddhist sangha was purified through this council. After compiling the real
teachings of Buddha he propagated then in both the native country and foreign
countries through the Dharmaduta (Missionaries). Asoka sent his son Mahinda
and daughter Sanghamitta for the propagation of the Buddhism in Ceylon. King
Tissa of Ceylon also took the title Devanam Piya in the honour of Asoka. The
inscription of Asoka records that he sent missionaries to central Asia, Europe, S

The History of Buddhism 179

African continent and also Afganistan. His messages were translated in Greek

language for the propagation. His empire extended upto Kandahar of

Afganistan. The Rock Edicts of Emperor Asoka have also been found there.

Except India, the Buddhism spread in Java, Sumatra, etc. Missionaries were sent

to Tibet also.

The Mauryas reigned for about 13 7 years in Magadha. After the end of the

Maurya Empire, the Sungas ascended the throne. They did not patronize the

Buddhism. But still the Buddhism had its existence. Huen Tsang, in his travel

account, has recorded of having witnessed the stupa constructed by the emperor

Asoka in Bangladesh also.

Exercise
Which king’s contribution do you think greater in the propagation of the Buddhism
of the Maurya dynasty and why?
Lesson : 6
The Kushana Period

The empire of Kushana dynasty was established in the first century A.D. Kujala

Kadphises was the first king of the Kushana dynasty. This empire was formed

with a region from Magadha to north-west India, some areas of the Middle Asia

and Afganistan. The greatest of all kings of this dynasty was Kanishka. Like

Asoka he was not atracted to the Buddhism at first. He came in contact with

Parshvaka Thera and became highly devoted to the Buddhism. He became very

interested in propagating the Buddhism.

The contribution of emperor Kanishka in the propagation of the

Buddhism :

During the reign of Kanishka, the Bhikkhu-sangha was divided into many

nikayas. Emperor Kanishka tried to bring unity among the Bhikhus. He

convened a council by advising his preceptor Parshvaka. He brought all the

monks representing different Buddhist sects together at Jalandhara. Among
= them five hundred monks were selected for holding the council. Emperor
“Kanishka built a beautiful house for them. The Council was held in this building

180 Buddhist religion and moral education
which was afterward named Kundalavana Monastery. The precepts and sermons
of Buddha were compiled in Sanskrit instead of Pali in this council. A book of
commentaries was written on the compiled Tipitaka. The name of the book is
Vibhasasastra. This council is called Kanishka Council or Sarvastivadi Council.
Kanishka built many stupas and shrines for the expansion of the Buddhist
religion. He sent missionaries to China and Middle Asia for the propagation of
the Buddhism. The great poet Asvaghosa and famous philosopher Basumitra
wrote many books during the reign of Kanishka. Kanishka himself was a very
scholarly and learned person. He inscribed advices on Rock Edicts in the
different places of his empire. A large Rock Edict of this type has been found in
Afganistan. In the Rock Edict the references of building monastery is found.
After Kanishka, Fa-Hien came to visit India during the reign of Gupta Empire.
He mentioned the flourishment of the Buddhism in Bangladesh. An image or a
statue of the Boddhisattva was found at Mahasthangar of Bogra district. At the
same time a statue of Buddha was also found at Vihara of Rajshahi. It proves that
the Buddhism was also spread in Bangladesh.
Exercise
Which contribution of Emperor Kanishka do you think important? Write down
with your arguments.
Lesson: 7
The Pala Period
Anarchies were created in the ruling system of Bengal in the eighth century. At
that time there was no king in the country. The situation was under the control of
the powerful people. This situation of anarchy and confusion was called
"Matsaneyaya'. 'Matsaneyaya' means the worst condition of having no rules and
regulations. That is to say, the large fishes devour small fishes indiscriminately
and like this the strong people oppressed and exploited the weak people in
Bengal during the eighth century. This situation is called 'Matsaneyaya’. Being
desperate, the people of Bengal made Gopal their king. He was the founder of =
the Pala dynasty. He became king in 750 A.D. ES

The History of Buddhism 181
The name of the father of king Gopal was Bappata Deva. He was the grandson
of Dayitavishnu of Gaura. Gopal reigned for about twenty years. He was the first
elected democratic king of Bengal. After his death his son Dharmapala became
the king. Vikramsila monastery, Sompura Monastery and many other Buddhist
religious institutions were established by Dharmapala. Devapala became the
heir of Dharmapala. In this way the Pala Dynasty ruled Bengal for four hundred
years. Eighteen kings of the Pala dynasty ruled from one generation to another,
the names of Mahipala, Rampala, Nayapala and Madanapala are especially
renowned among the kings of the later generaions. Govindapala was the last
king of the Pala dynasty.
All the kings of the Pala dynasty were the followers of the Buddhism. But they
were respectful to other religions and gave necessary support. At that time
Bengal established communication with Java Sumatra and Bali Islands in Asia.
The Buddhism spread in these areas earlier. During the Pala dynasty, the
religious and cultural ties became stronger with these regions.
The contributions of the Pala dynasty in the propagation of the
Buddhism:
The mentionable monasteries established during the beginning of the Pala
dynasty were Odantapuri Vihara, Vikramasila Vihara, Sompuri Vihara, Pandit
Vihara and Jagaddala Vihara. King Mahipala renovated many monastaries in the
regions of Saranatha and Buddhyagaya and built new monasteries.
In this period Atisha Dipankara Srigyana, a Bengali scholar, wrote two hundred
books on different topics. He went to Tibet to propagate the Buddhism at the
invitation of the king of Tibet. He delivered the ambrosial teachings of the
Buddha to the superstition-ridden people of Tibet and led them to the path of the
religion. The great monastery Nalanda was enriched much during the reign of
5

182 Buddhist religion and moral education
Dharmapala. The glory of the great monasteries established by him spread in
other countries. Many Bhikkhus and Sramanas came to the monasteries to get
education from Tibet and China. The monasteries were the roaming places for
many famous Buddhist scholars. Staying in the monasteries the Tibetan and
Indian scholars translated the books on Buddhism and carried them to Tibet,
Kashmir, Nepal and China.
Bengali language originated during the Pala period. The first specimen of
Bengali language - 'Charjapada' or 'Bauddha Gan O Doha’ were written during
this period. It is assumed that these were written from 8th sculptures and arts
developed much in the Pala period. At this time Shakta, Vaisnab and Brahmanna
religions also flourished. Though the kings of the Pala dynasty patronized the
Buddhism, they also supported the other religions. Different religious and
cultural traditions of Bengal flourished together in the Pala period.
Make a list of the famous monasteries established in the Pala period.
Lesson: 8
Buddhism in Bangladesh
Pre-Modern Age: No specific information is found about when and how the
Buddhism spread in Bangladesh. The hearsay is that the Buddhism spread in
Bangladesh during the time of Buddha. It is known from the hearsay that
Buddha stayed for seven days in Kamasuvama and Samatata; three months in
Pundravardhana and propagated the religion. Kamasuvama, Samatat and
Pundabardhan were the ancient names of the different regions of Bengal. It is
learnt from the books of 'Mahavamsa' and 'Dipvamsa' that Sona and Uttara Thera
went to Myanmar to propagate the Buddhism. It is supposed that they went to
Myanmar through Bangladesh and on the way propagated the Buddhism in
Chittagong. It is assumed that Pundravardhana was under the rule of Emperor
Asoka. It is known from the book 'Asokavadana' that a Nigrantha drew a picture
of Buddha and dishonoured it by trampling. Hearing the news Emperor Asoka
gave him a severe punishment. Emperor Asoka propagated the Buddhism in the
whole empire. It is assumed that the Buddhism spread also in the
Pundravardhana regions for these reasons. An inscription was discovered at
Sanchi, the famous archaeological place of the Buddhists. It is supposed that the S
inscription was of the second century B.C. From this inscription it is known that %

The History of Buddhism 183
two inhabitants of the region Pundravardhana named Dharmadatta and
Ishinandana (Rishinandana) donated money to build decorated gateway and the
walls of the stupa at Sanchi. An inscription has been discovered from
Nagarjunakunda a Buddhist archaeological sight. It is assumed that this Rock
Edict is of the second century A.D. It is inscribed on the Rock Edict that Bengal
was one of the centres of the Buddhism at that time.
The Chinese traveller Fa-Hien travelled the Tamralipti region of ancient Bengal
in the early fourth-fifth century A.D. In his travel account he has mentioned that
many Bhikkhus lived in 22 monasteries. Some other Chinese travellers visited
Bengal at that time. Many copper inscriptions of the Gupta period have been
discovered. The descriptions that the is found in the copper inscription about the
condition of the Buddhism is similar to the description found in the accounts of
the Chinese travellers. It is mentioned in the copper inscriptions that the great
king Rudradatta donated eleven pataka lands for maintaining the monks and
worshiping Buddha with incense, candles and other things in the Asramavihara
established by Mahayani Acariya Shantideva for getting virtue. The Chinese
traveller Huen Tsang visited Bangla in seventh century A.D. and studied
Buddhism and translated many books staying in various monasteries. It is known
from his travelogue that there were 20 Sangharams and 3000 Bhikkhus both
Mahayany and Hinayany in Pundrabardhana; 1000 Hinayany Bhikkhus at the 10
Sangharamas of Kamasubama; 10 sangharamas and 2000 Bhikkhus in
Tamralipti; 30 Sangharamas and 2000 Bhikkhus lived in Samatata. There were
many famous monasteries in these areas. He also saw many stupas and tombs in
these areas built by the Emperor Asoka.
The Buddhist dynasties such as the clans of Khagga, Deva, Chandra and Pala
reigned Bengal from the seventh to twelfth century. The Buddhism expanded
much in Bengal because of their patronization. At that time Esoteric (Tantrik)
Buddhism was very popular in Bengal. Many ancient monasteries; statues of
Buddha, Bodhisattva and gods and goddesses have been discovered because of
digging. It is realized from this that the Buddhism was a very popular religion in
Bangla till the Pala period. From the above description it is realized that the sects
of Hinayana, Mahayana and Tantrik Buddhism were prevailing in Bangladesh.
The Tantrik Buddhist practitioner wrote the Charyapada-the first specimen of
Bengali language.

2

8

184 Buddhist religion and moral education
The history of the Buddhism in Bengal from the Pala period to the 18th the
century is obscure. At that time the Buddhists lost their glory due to political,
religious and many other reasons. It is known that the Buddhists then lived in
Chittagong, Chittagong Hill Tracts, Noakhali, Comilla and Patuakhali. Besides
Rajshahi, Bogra, Naogon, Dinajpur were inhabited by the Buddhists.

There are many large and small ethnic groups among the Buddhists. They are
Barua, Chakma, Marma, Rakhain, Tanchangya, Khiyang, Chak etc. These
Buddhist ethnic groups live in Chittagong and Chittagong Hill Tracts regions.
The other ethnic groups except the Barnas live mainly in Chittagong Hill Tracts
regions. Besides the Chak, Khiyang, Tanchangya also live in this region. From
the study of the history, it is assumed that the Buddhists titled ‘Barua; came to
Chittagong from Magadha through Assam, Comilla and Noakhali and started
living there. In 1201 Bakhtiar khilgi attacked Magadha (presently the state of
Bihar). Laksman sen was then the ruler of Bengal and Magadha. Laksman sen
was defeated by Bakhtiar Khilji. Then a group of Buddhists went to the east side.
It is learnt that they were the ancestors of the Buddhists of Comilla, Noakhali and
Chittagong. Comila region was then under the rule of Pattikera kings. The
Pattikera king Ranavankemalla was a Buddhist. He reigned from 1204 A.D. to
1220 A.D. Lalmai Mainamati of Comilla was then a prosperous kingdom. The
name of that region was Samatata. The glory of Salban Monastery and Pattikera
monastery in Mainamati was intact.

At present the Buddhists of Comilla use titled as 'Singha' which means the most
superior. The word Singha is used with the names of the Sakyas. Buddha was
called Sakya Singha. The Buddhists of Comilla think that they are the
descendants of Sakya Singha Buddha. The titles Choudhury, Talukder and
Mutsuddi are also prevailing among the Buddhists.

In the 18th century the Buddhists of Arakan ruled Chittagong. Chakma king
Shermusta Khan was the ruler of Chittagong then. He was under the Arakanese
king. Chakmas believe that Champaka Nagara was their first dwelling place and
they came to Chittagong from there. Though there are controversies, the
Chakmas believe that Champaka Nagara was in the region of Magadha in India.
Again according to the opinion of many it is somewhere near Comilla. Some
others believe it to be somewhere in the east of Myanmar. Shermusta khan
reigned from 1737 A.D. to 1758 A.D. In 1757 the British defeated Sirajadoulah ,,
in the Battle of Palassey and got the jurisdiction of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. S$

The History of Buddhism 185
The Chakma king was engaged in Battle with the Britsh upto 1787. His kingdom
then was extended upto Lusai hills on the north, Dhaka Trunk Road on the south,
the river Shankha on the east and the river F eni on the west.
During this period, Chakma, Chak, Khiyang, Tanchanga and Barua Buddhists
lived in Chittagong. All of them were the followers of the Buddhism. Besides
the Hindu, the Muslim and the Christians also lived there. Chittagong and Cht-
tagong Hill Tracts then were one single entity.
Around 1774 Marmas settled in Ramu and Matamuhuri region. After 30 years
they established their kingdom in Bandarban. Around 1784 Rakhain Buddhists
from Arakan started settling in Patuakhali area of Barisal. Some Marmas and
Rakhains came to Dhaka as Chittagong region was under the influence of the
Buddhists. Bara Maghbazar and Maghbazar in Dhaka bear the testimony of this.
The name of Dhamrai of Dhaka has been originated from the word
Dharmarajika. The ancient name Savar was Sahor. The ruins of an ancient
monastery have been discovered here. Atish Dipankara studied in this
monastery.
In the eighteenth century the Barnas lived in the regions of Rangunia, Rauzan,
Phatikchari, Sitakunda, Boalkhali, Patiya, Satkania and Banshkhali. The Barua,
the Manna and the Rakhain together had the dominance in Cox's Bazar and
Tekhnaf regions.
The capital of Chakma kingdom in Chittagong was at first somewhere near
Satkania or Ramu. The word 'Satkania' had been derived from the 'Sat Konna'
(seven daughters) or 'Chakma Rajkonnya' (Chakma princess). There is still a
place named 'Chakma kula' in Ramu.
In 1785, the capital of Chakma kingdom was established in the village
Rajanagara of Rangunia Police Station. In 1869 the capital of Chakma kingdom
was shifted to Rangamati from Rajanagar as the District Headquarters of
Chittagong Hill Tracts was shifted to Rangamati from Chandraghona.
Exercise

Write down the names of the Buddhist ethnic groups.

Forma-24, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

186 Buddhist religion and moral education
Lesson-9

The Modern Age
The Buddhism like the other religions is practised in Bangladesh with due
honour. The followers of the Buddhism of this country, like other religious
communities, are the citizens of an independent and sovereign country. To
follow the religion by keeping fraternity and friendship with all is one of the
traditions of the Buddhists. Following this tradition the Buddhists have been
observing the social and religious rituals with due respect.
It is essential to know the history of the Chakma, the Marma and the Barua
Buddhists if we want to know the history of Bangladesh. The Buddhists ethnic
groups live in the three hilly districts - Rangamati, Bandarban and Khagrachari,
some Rakhains live in Patuakhali and Barguna regions. The Buddhists titled
Barua, Chaudhury and Singha live in Chittagong, Noakhali and Camilla regions.
The history of them is the history of the Buddhists of Bangladesh.
The Chakma king Janbakhs died in 1800 A.D. He fought against the British
throughout his life. Dharam Bakhs Khan became the king after the death of
Janbakhs Khan. After his death Rani Kalindi reigned. The British did not
acknowledge her as the Queen for a long time. In 1844, being the head of the
hilly circles, she was acknowledged as the Queen officially by the British. She
reigned till 1873. In 1860 the British formed Chittagong Hill Tracts comprising
the hilly regions.
During the time ofthe British rule, the Buddists showed interest in English
education like the other comunities. They even started visiting Kolkata to get edu-
cation. Many of them went Myanmar (Burma), Sri-lanka and Thailand to obtain
religious education. The Buddhists left for Arakan, Rengun, Kolkata, Tripura
and Assam for the purpose of trade, business and jobs. In the 19th century
the Buddhists of Bangladesh departed for the regions enriched in economy and
industry-under the rule of the British. By engaging themselves in business as
well as government and non-government services and in the professions
of doctors, engineers, lawyers, and teachers, the Buddhists of Bangladesh
have been attaining the economic prosperity. As a result they start practising
religion with a new vigour in order to develop their moral and human qualities. FS
The Buddhist monks play a very important role to make it successful. >

The History of Buddhism 187
During the British period an urge to be self-reliant was created among the
Buddhists, and it developed much more in the Pakistan period. The main reason
of this was the right instructions given by the prudent Buddhist monk
and the spontaneous participation of the Buddhists household. ‘Unity is
strength’ - realizing this truth they have started to work together. But they felt that
it is not possible to prosper being dependent. So they were united with the people
of all religions and took preparation for participating in the liberation war. They
participated in the liberation war of 1971 to establish an independent
Bangladesh. For their service and help offered to the freedom fighters, They fell
under the wrath of the Pakistani soldiers.
They destroyed the monasteries and the statues of Buddha. During the middle of
Liberation War, a lot of heinous incidents occurred such as set fire on Buddhist
monasteries, looting, killing Buddhist Monks, destroying statue of Buddha etc.
according to the source of different publications. At that time, many valuable
Buddas’ relics (Buddhasti) were looted from Dharmarajik Buddhist Monastery,
only Buddhist Monastery in the then Dhaka, from Sudarsan monastery at
Hoarapara village under Raojan thana and from Zoara Sharbozanin Monastery of
Patia in Chittagong. Besides this many golden Buddha statues were looted from
different monasteries preserved for a long period and many residential Monks
were tortured in different monasteries. Among them, the important were the then
Sangharaj Shreemot Avoytisya Mohathero, principal of Mirzapur Buddhist
Monastery, Shantopad Mohathero and Shakkobodhi Mohathero of Domkhali at
Raojan were physically tortured. The Principal of Gandhakuty Monastery at
Pachria in Patia Shreemot Ginananda was kidnapped and was killed taking from
his own monastery.
The residence of Buddhist Monks and the seated statue of Buddha at Boroigaon
of Comilla were destroyed. "Sitakundo Buddhist Temple" beside Dhaka
Chittagong highway, "Rarnkot Buddhist Temple" at Ramu, the historical
"Aaggagmedha Buddhist Temple" of Cox's Bazar etc. were attacked and looted
many times by the Pakistan occupation Millitants and their collaborators this
land. As a result, the Buddhists were hurt mentally and economically. But being
inspired with the spirit of independence and infused with a new life, they
engaged themselves in constructing the country again. With the urge of living
freely in a free country they have been participating in all creative activities and
have been enriching the country in many ways. The Buddhist Monks and laities
- have formed different organizations and they are contributing to the development
S of the country. The government of Bangladesh is cooperating in many ways for
the development of the religion and culture of the Buddhists.

188 Buddhist religion and moral education
In 1984 the Bangladesh government has constituted the 'Buddhist Welfare Trust’
for the welfare of the Buddhists. There are also arrangements for the certificate
examinations on the Pali language and literature from the Board of Sanskrit and
Pali Education, Bangladesh. There are almost 115 Pali toles and colleges under
it. There are opportunities for studying BA (Honours), M.A., M.Phil and Ph.D
courses at the University level.
The Buddhists have many religious and cultural organizations. Chittagong
Buddhist Association is the oldest one. It was established in 1887. In 1950 the
Buddha Kristi Prachar Sangha was established. Moreover; there are some
other Buddhist organizations such as Parbatya Buddha Sangha, Bangladesh
Sangharaj Bhikkhu Mahasabha, Bangladesh Buddha Bhikkhu Mahasabha,
Rakhain-Marma Sangha Council, Bangladesh Buddha Juba Parishad,
Bangladesh Buddhist Federation, Bangladesh Manna Buddhist Association,
Uttarvanga Bauddha Parishad, etc.
Because of the archaeological excavations, the ruins of many ancient
monasteries have been discovered in Comilla, Bogra, Dinajpur, Naogaon,
Rajshahi, Savar, Narsingdi, and Chittagong of Bangladesh. They bear the
testimonies of the past glories of the Buddhists. The archaeological significance
of them is great. Among them the Sompura Vihara has been declared as the
‘World Heritage Site' by UNESCO.
Tourists from different countries of the world visit Bangladesh to see the ruins
of the ancient monasteries. As a result the acquaintance and honour of
Bangladesh increase in the world. The government of Bangladesh has been
conserving the ancient Buddhist relics with importance. There are many
monasteries in different areas of Bangladesh now. Many monasteries have
become renowned for many reasons. Among them Thegorpuni Bura Gosai
Monastery of Patiya in Chittagong, Pahartali Mahamuni Monastery, Unainpura
Lankaram Monastery, Pharachin Monastery of Bagwan, Nandan Kanan
Monastery in Chittagong City, Nava Pandit Monastery, Raojan Sudarshan
Monastery, Kaptai Chitmaram Monastery, Rajban Nonastary at Rangamati,
Cox's Bazar Aggamedha Budandarban Rajvihara, Ujanipara Buddhist
Monastery at Banderban, Swarna Mandir at Bandarban, Romkot Bihar at Ramu,
Manikchari Rajban Monastery, Dharmarajik Buddhist Mahavihara in Dhaka are
mentionable. Fairs are closely associated with the Buddhist religious tradition.
Now many fairs are held centering on the Buddhist Monasteries. The %
S
N

The History of Buddhism 189
fairs are considered unique source of the Buddhist culture as religious
functions songs and the Buddha Kirtanas (Buddhist devotional song) are held in
these fairs. Among them the noteworthy are : Chakrasala Mela, Rangamati
Rajban Vihar Mela, Manikpur Parinirvan Mela, Masadia Chaitya Mela,
Thegorpuni Buragosai Mela, Binajuri Parinirvan Mela, Icchamati
Dhatuchaitya Mela, Lathichari Buddha Mela, Shilghata Parinirbbana Mela,
Aburkhil Kendriya Jogendra Bauddha Vihara Mela, Paucharia Gandhakuti
Vihar, Silabuddha and Baish Buddher Mela, Dhemcha Sakyamuni Mela etc.
The practice of the religion and culture of the Buddhists started in Dhaka in
1950. The Buddhists who lived in Dhaka for the sake of service observed
different religious programmes. Later in 1960 the renowned Dharmarajik
Buddhist Monastery was established in Dhaka. The atmosphere of practising the
religion and culture of the Buddhists in Dhaka was created permanently through
this. Now-a-days many monasteries have been established in Dhaka and they are
contributing much to the development of the Buddhist religion and culture.
Among them Shakyamuni Bauddha Vihara, Antarjatik Bauddha Vihara,
Bangladesh Bauddha Mahavihara, Dharmajyoti Bauddha Vihara, Savar Rajban
Vihara are mentionable. Many Buddhist monks and domestics played an
important role in building the Buddhist society during the British, Pakistan and
Bangladesh period. The Buddhist community is playing a very significant role
in the development of art, literature, culture and economy of Bangladesh side by
side other religious communities though they are small in number.
Exercise
Write down the names of the monasteries where the fairs are held.
x
&

190 Buddhist religion and moral education
Exercise

Fill in the gaps

1. During the time of Buddha there were ...................... territories or
kingdoms in India.

2. Gautama Buddha was born in .................... A.D.

3. ......0e.2+-+ had a great fame in the development of education and art.

4. The language ................... was originated in the Pala period.

5. Leeeeeeeeaeeeeeee WaS the last king of the Pals dynasty.

Short Questions

1. What did the kings receive from the people as revenue during Pre-Buddha
Era?

2. Which branches of learning were prevailing in India during Gautama
Buddha?

3. What is religious tour?

4. What is Charyapada?

Essay type questions

1. Give a short description of Pre Buddha Era.

2. Give a description of the sixteen teritories.

3. Give a description of some of the Buddhist archaeological sites in
Bangladesh.

4. Write down the names of the titles used by the Buddhists.

Multiple choice questions

1. Which one is the capital of Kasi?

a) Champa city b) Vesali
c) Varanasi d) Savatthi S

The History of Buddhism 191
2. The reason of the fame of Gandhara territory —
i) as it was the centre of learning
ii) as it was the centre of rearing art and culture
iii) as it was for the beautification of the capital.
Which one is correct?
a) iandii b) ii and iii
c) iand iii d) i, ii and iii
Give answer to the questions no 3 and 4 from the following chart:
; To Contribution Collecting the sacred
? remains of Buddha
3. The contribution of which dynasty has been meant by the sign ‘?’—
a) Pala b) Maurya
c) Modern 4d) Kushana
4. Arruler of that dynasty arranged a Council and that is —
a) 1st Council b) 2nd Council
c) 3rd Council d) 4th Council
2
8

192 Buddhist religion and moral education
Creative Questions
1. Name of the dynasty Ruling Period
Pools | 400 years
137 years

a) Who was the most superior king of the Kushana dynasty?

b) Describe any one territory of the sixteen great territories.

c) The king of which dynasty described in the chart played a role in
alleviating ‘the rule Matsa Neyaya’? Explain according to the text.

d) The contribution of the kings of this dynasty has become memorable
in the history of the Buddhism-Do you agree with the view? Provide
arguments.

2. Sudarshan Chowdhury, the Poura Mayor of Rangunia was incomparable in
truthfulness and charity. He had respect for all religions. He liked to donate
freely. He always made inquiries about the conditions of the poor people in
his area. He tried to solve the problems.

a) Who was the first king of the Mauraya dynasty?

b) Why did Ajatasattu become repentant after killing his father?

c) The characteristics of which king during the time of Buddha had the
similarity with Sudarshan Chaudhury-Explain.

d) The purpose of the activities of Sudarshan Chowdhury was to attract the
people of the area to the benevolent teachings of Buddha. Justify the
statement in the light of the textbook.

ES
8

Chapter Twelve
The Daily Activities and Duties of the Buddhist
Bhikkhus and Devotees

Everyone has to perform some daily duties systematically in order to live a
beautiful life. Some of the works are related with the physical fitness. Some are
for living religious and moral life. Some are related with education and earning.
These are commonly known as daily work and daily religious rites. There are
some daily religious rites for the monks and the Buddhists to be performed.
Besides, there are some instructions of Buddha which are mandatory to perform.
In this chapter we will learn about the daily religious rites and mandatory
instructions for the monks and the Buddhists.
By the end of this chapter we will be able to-

* Describe the daily religious rites and instructions for the monks

* Mention essential doings of the monks

* Describe the obligatory daily religious rites and instructions

* Explain the contents and teaching of the Sapta Aparihaniya

with its background.
Lesson: 1

The Daily activities and the duties of the Buddhist Monks
The persons who have accepted the order of the religious mendicants giving up
the domestic life, are known as the Bhikkhus (monks), Samaneras (ascetics) in
the Buddhism. Their object is to maintain the state of continence and chastity
and to seek the way to Nirvana. It is also the duty of the Bhikkhus and the
Samaneras to propagate the Buddhist's doctrine to all people. Tathagata Buddha
summoned this in His Dhammacakra Pravartana Sutta. He instructed many rules
and regulations for the Bhikkhus and Samaneras for living a beautiful life. These
have been depicted in the Vinaya Pitaka.
Anyone can have the entrance to the Buddhist Sangha by becoming Bhikkhu or
Samanera. But they cannot be Samanera until the age of seven and cannot be the
Bhikkhu if his age is less than twenty. Samanera means apprentice. To become a
Samanera one has to be ordained in Samaneradhamma and take order of a
religious mendicant. He has to be introduced to the rules of the continence and
Forma-25, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

194 Buddhist religion and moral education
chastity and has to be complied with them. After that one can be the Bhikkhu
from the Samanera. Buddha has directed some deeds and instructions as
mandatory for the Bhikkhus and the Samaneras. These are known as daily
religious rites and instructions. The description of the daily religious rites and
instructions of the Bhikkhus and the Samaneras is given below:

The Ten Precepts or Dasasila :

The Samaneras have to accept Ten Precepts (Dasasila) with Trisarana everyday.
The observance of the Ten Precepts is compulsory daily religious rites for the
Samaneras. The Ten Precepts are to avoid the following habits of: 1. killing,
2. theft, 3. adultery, 4. telling lies, 5. drinking of wine, 6. eating food in the
afternoon, 7. passion for music and dance, 8. using perfumes and garlands, 9.
lying down in luxurious bed, 10. acceptance of gold and silver.

The thought of supervision :

The Bhikkhus and the Samaneras should think about the food, dwelling
places, clothes and medicine-the four basic elements essential for maintaining
life before taking them. These are known as the thoughts of supervision. There
are:

1. The thought of supervision about Civara : the Bhikkhus and the
Samaneras have to think about the wearing of Civara in that way : 'Iam wearing
this Civara to protect from the bites of the insects, reptiles; to prevent cold
and hot, dust and shame not to create Pancakamaguna.'

2. Thought of supervision about Pindapata : the Bhikhus and the Samaneras
have to think during eating food in that way: 'l am eating food only to
maintain life, not to beautify the body and to encrease physical strength.'

3. Thought of supervision about Sayanasan : The Bhikkhus and the
Samaneras have to think in this way while lying down : 'This lying down is
only to prevent cold and heat, to protect from the attacks of insects, bites, dust,
sunrays, reptiles and to accomplish the concentration of the mind not to pass
time unnecessarily in idleness or sleep.

4. Thought of supervision about 'Gilano Prottoy Bhikkhus and the Samaneras
have to think in that way while taking medicine: 'I am taking this medicine
according to the requirement to cure disease. There is no other bad intention.’
The thoughts of supervision while taking the mentioned basic elements are iS
called 'the present thought of supervision.' >

The Daily Activities and Duties of the Buddhist Bhikkhus and Devotees 195
One should do the thoughts of supervision before the sun rising, after eating
mid-day meal and during the evening prayer. These will be considered into
theft and debt if any person enjoys these without thinking so. The thought
of supervision produces the cause of destruction of greed malice and illusion.
The four things which should not be done:
The Bhikkhus and the Samaneras have to abstain themselves from doing four things
which are known as 'Cari Akoroniyo'. These are 1. not to commit adultery, 2. not to
commit theft, 3. not to kill living beings, 4. not to claim as having supernatural
power, the fourth instruction was introduced during the famine at Vesali. At that
time some Bhikkhus claimed themselves to be the possessors of god gifted power.
By circulating this they drew the attention of the householders and collected
food. So Buddha ascribed some rules and regulations to keep them away from
circulating and showing the supernatural power.
Food:
The Bhikkhus eat single meal a day. But they have to finish eating meal before noon
or before 12 o'clock. Generally the Bhikkhus and the Samaneras live on begging. But
the Bhikkhus and the Samaneras can take meal going to the house of the common
people if they are invited on the occasion of religious festivals.
The articles of everyday use:
The three robes (three Civara) such as Sanghati, Uttarasangha and Antorbas
(under garments), alms bowl, razor, needle and thread, girdle and water strainer
are the eight daily necessary articles that can be used by the Bhikkhus and the
Samaneras. Buddha has directed that these articles are sufficient for the
Bhikkhus and the Samaneras to live.
The Practice of Self-Cotrol:
Reciving of gold and silver is absolutely forbidden for the Bhikkhus. If any
laity offers those, the Bhikkhus can not possess them. Either he has to return it
to the giver or donate it to others. If he donates these to the laymen, he can take
other articles of daily necessaries in exchange. But the Bhikkhus can not take
them for themselves. He can take these things for other Bhikkhus or the
Bhikkhusangha. The Bhikkhusangha can take the immovable things like land,
monasteries for the development of the rule of Buddha. The kings, emperors
and laymen donated in this way during the time of Buddha. But these

s% properties will be counted as the properties of the Sangha.

S

x)

196 Buddhist religion and moral education
Panca Bhavana (The Five Thoughts): The Panca Bhavana or five thoughts
is a Bhavana or meditation that is to be done everyday by the Bhikkhus and
the Samaneras. Metta Bhavana (Meditation of Loving-kindness), Karuna
Bhavana (Meditation of compassion), Mudita Bhavana (Meditation of
sympathetic joy), Asubha Bhavana (Meditation of Profane things), Upekkha
(Meditation of neither attachment nor aversion) - these are known as ‘Panca
Bhavana or Five thoughts’. The Bhikkhu-Samanera practises this meditation
day and night sitting in a solitary place. Panca Bhavana or Five thoughts
abstain themselves from greed, lust, malice, hostility and sexual appetite.
Panca Bhavana or the Five Thoughts are :

Metta Bhavana (Meditation of Loving-Kindness) : Let all living beings be
free from enemies, danger, disease, fear and live in happiness - this benefactory
thinking is known as Metta Bhavna.

Karuna Bhavana (Meditation of Compassion) : Wishing emancipation from
sufferings being sad at the sufferings of others is called 'Karuana Bhavana’.
Mudita Bhavana (Meditation of Sympathetic joy): To feel happiness in
mind seeing the beauty, honour, profit, wealth and fortune of others is
known as Mudita Bhavna. No living being may be deprived from the
property that he deserves is the main thing of Mudita Bhavana.

Asubha Bhavana (Meditation of Profane things) : The human body is the
container of diseases and impurities and subjugated to impermanence and
death. Meditation on those things is called 'Asubha Bhavana’.

Upekkha Bhavana (meditation of neither attachment nor aversion) : To
think about the eight types of worldly matters such as loss and profit, honour
and dishonour, disrepute and praise, happiness and sorrow with a calm mind is
called Upekkha Bhavna.

Jhana and Samadhi :

Jhana and Samadhi are the parts of everyday activities of the Bhikkhus
and the Samaneras. The concentration of mind is not possible without the
practice of meditation. Men are easily entrapped by desires. greed, malice,
illusion and longing always chase us. Human mind remains restless due to
these. Mind is restless by nature and is allured both by good and evil. If it is not
possible to control that kind of mind, the emancipation from craving is not 3%
possible. For that reason, wise men try to control their minds. The object of “

The Daily Activities and Duties of the Buddhist Bhikkhus and Devotees 197
meditation is to control the mind. The restless mind is to be made settled and
concentrated through the meditation. The Bhikkhus and the Samaneras have
to attain the concentration of mind through the daily practice of meditation.
This is the first stage of meditation. To attain salvation one has to surpass four
such stages. The practice of meditation instructed by Buddha is known as
Vipassana’. The ceaseless practice for the purpose of attaining salvation being
free from illusion is known as Samadhi. 'Samadhi' starts from the second stage.
In that stage only the memory remains surpassing the happiness and sorrow. Six
types of knowledges are gained through Samadhi. These are divine vision, divine
hearing, to know the attitude of others, to recollect the memories of the previous
births, to gain the power to control passions and to attain supernatural or psychic
power. Arhant Bhikkhus possess these special knowledge. They have perceived
the salvation and will never born again.

Obligatory duties for the Bhikkhus :

The Bhikkhus have to comply with 227 precepts or ‘Silas’. An elaborate
explanation of these precepts which are obligatory for the Bhikkhus is found in
the 'Patimokkha'. The Bhikkhus have to recite the Patimokkha' at least twice in a
month, on a full-moon day, on the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight. Most of
the precepts described in the Patimokkha were delivered at Rajageha. These
precepts are known as 'the Precepts for the Bhikkhus' or 'the Bhikkhusila' as these
are instructed for the Bhikkhus. The precepts have been divided into eight types
according to the importance. These are: Parajika (Defeat), Sanghadisesa
(Requirement of the Sangha in the beginning, the middle and the end, Aniya
(Uncertainty), Nissaggiya (Abandonment), Pacittiya (Expiation), Patideseniya
(Confession), Sekhiya (Leaming) and Adhikarana Samatha.

The Bhikkhus have to maintain the rules and regulations depicted in the
Patimokkha. Lord Buddha in his last advice before the Great Passing Away
directed to perform duties without losing self-control. He also said that so long
the Bhikkhu sangha will follow the right path having self control, the
Saddhamma (true religion) will be continued. Advising the beloved disciple
Ananda not to lament he said, 'Be yourself your lamp, be your own shelter, don't
be dependent upon others, attain superiority by taking refuge in religion. 'Buddha
has given the highest priority to the Dhamma and Sangha, the carriers of the

5 Dhamma, in his absence.

198 Buddhist religion and moral education
~ SS eee ee a
——- \ [A LY ALY) = ff ye JE eb Le - ~
eiedck) . pe az) [RL eed = <a
2 NANO AF oe
rN es SAT : = WN =>
Travelling of the Bhikkhus for the Alms
Exercise
Write a report on the daily activities of a Bhikkhu collecting information from a
Monastery (Group work)
Lesson : 2
Daily activities and duties of the Laities
Buddha had delivered many religious advices for the ordinary devotees so that
they could live a gracious, beautiful and peaceful life. These religious advices
are found in different books of the Tipitaka. These religious advices of Buddha
addressed to the laities are known as 'Gihi Vinaya’ or rules for laities.
These advices are mainly found in the Sigalovada Sutta, Kalahavivada Sutta,
Parabhava Sutta, Mangala Sutta, Vyegghapajjha Sutta, Khaggavisana Sutta,
Lakkhana Sutta, Gihipatipada Sutta, Dhammika Sutta, Gahapativagga, Vidura
Pandita Jataka. These sermons or instructions of Buddha are compulsory to
perform for the laities. The daily activities and duties narrated in the Tipitaka are
briefly described below.
vs)
Ss

The Daily Activities and Duties of the Buddhist Bhikkhus and Devotees 199
1. Sigalovada Sutta :
While staying at Venuvana Vihara at Rajageha, Buddha met a son of a Brahmin
named Sigalaka. After bathing in wet dress Sigalaka was paying homage to the
six directions : east, west, north, south, up and down. When Buddha asked about
this, Sigalaka said that he is making obeisance to the six sides being advised by
his father and because of the paternal custom. Buddha realized that Sigalaka has
not realized the underlying implication of the homage to the six sides. Then He
explained the underlying meaning of making obeisance to the six sides and gave
some instructions about the duties of the laities. These are given below :

The avoidance of the four types of troubled work (Klistakarma) : A pious

householder should avoid four types of troubled works such as killing, theft,

adultery and falsehood.

The avoidance of the four types of sinful acts: A religious householder should

avoid the four types of sinful acts such as wilfulness, envy, fear and committing

sinful acts being ignorant. These sinful acts destroy fame and honour.

The avoidance of six offences : Taking intoxicating drugs, travelling at an

unsuitable time, involvement in amusement, gambling, bad company,

idleness-these six offences should be avoided by the pious laities because :

a) One has to suffer from six bitter consequences for taking drugs: They
are - 1. loss of wealth, 2. quarrels increase, 3. different diseases are
originated, 4. disreputation spreads, 5. becomes shameless, 6. devoid of
knowledge of ascertaining or differentiating good and evil. For these reasons
one may also lose one's life.

b) Because of the untimely travel : 1. one may be unprotected 2. the wife and
sons may be unprotected, 3. the properties may be unprotected, 4. fear will
always be active in the mind, 5. may be scandalized for sinful acts, 6. may
have to face unexpected incidents.

¢) If one is always involved in amusement and delight, one has to pass time in
fear always.

d) Gambling, that is to say, playing cards, playing dice : 1. increase enemy
for the winner, 2. the person defeated feels repentance, 3. honour is
destroyed, 4. no importance is given to the words in the meetings, 5. harras-

° ments from the friends and relatives and 6. becomes unable to sustain the
s family members.

200 Buddhist religion and moral education
e) For keeping bad company: 1. deceitful, 2. characterless, 3. drug addicted, 4.
imposter and 5. robbers may be friends : As a result, the character is defiled
and life may be lost.
f) Becase of the idleness riches do not and grown riches are destroyed.
The Signs of a friend : A person who dissuades a friend from doing sinful acts,
engages him in good deeds, makes him hear unheard, give the directions towards
heaven is known to be a real friend. One should make friendship with them.
The Signs of an enemy : The person who always plunders the wealth of others,
excells only in words and imcapable of action, is a sycophant and inducer is an
enemy in the guise of a friend. He should be abandoned.
The six sides of a householder : The religious householders should perform
six types of duties and responsibilities. These are called to keeping the six
side.
a) Making obeisance to the east indicates to perform the duties and
responsibilities toward the parents. The duties towards parents are done in five
ways. These are 1. to support the parents in their old age, 2. to complete their
tasks before the task of self, 3. to keep the honour of the clan, 4. to be heir of their
properties by being obedient and, 5. to give gifts in memory of the dead
ancestors. Parents also have five duties towards their children to perform. These
are 1. to dissuade them from sinful acts, 2. to engage them in good deeds, 3. to
educate them in proper time, 4. marry them off at the proper age, 5. to make them
heir of the properties judging their eligibility.
b) Making obeisance to the west indicated to performance of the duties towards
the wife. One has to perform five types of tuties towards the wife. These are 1.
showing respect to the wife, 2. to be courteous, 3. to be satisfied with own wife
and not to be involved with others wife, 4. to have the authority over property
and wealth and 5. to provide her with clothes and amaments to the best of one's
capacity. The wife also has five duties towards her husband to perform. These
are 1. to do the household chores properly, 2. to greet the family members and
the guests cordially, 3. to have profound love for the hosband, 4. to be skilful in
household work and be free from laziness. S

The Daily Activities and Duties of the Buddhist Bhikkhus and Devotees 201
c) Making obeisance on the north indicates the performance of the duties toward
the relatives and the friends. One has to perform five types of duties towards
them. These are 1. to donate and to provide temporary monetary help, 2. to use
sweet words, 3. to do them well, 4. express profound sympathy and 5. to treat
them well. One has to perform five types of duties towards relatives and sons of
the family. These are 1. to protect them when they lose self control, 2. to protect
their property and wealth, 3. to assure him in fear, 4. not to desert him in danger,
5. to honour him.

d) Making obeisance on the south indicates that one has duties towards his
teachers. One has to perform five types of duties towards the teachers. These are
1. not to sit in the high seats in the presence of the teachers, 2. nurse them, 3. to
obey their orders, 4. to pay attention to their advices and 5. to practise learning.
The teacher also has five types of duties towards the students. These are 1. to
submit beautifully, 2. to teach in detail, 3. to select the textbooks, 4. to praise the
students to the friends and 5. to protect them from danger.

e) Making obeisance to the up indicates the duties towards the Samaneras and
the Brahmins. One has to perform five types of duties towards the Samaneras
and the Brahmins. They are 1. to serve respectfully by giving food, clothings,
medicines and dwelling places, 2. to make the public respectful to them, 3.
to wish their welfare, 4. to greet them respectfully and 5. to entertain them
with the best food. The Sramanas and the Brahmans also have their duties
towards the householders. These are 1. to dissuade them from sinful acts, 2. to
engage them in good deeds, 3. to wish them good, 4. to reveal the unheard to
them and 5. to correct the known things and to show the good way.

f) Making obeisance to the down means to perform the duties towards the staff.
One has to perform five types of duties towards the staff. These are 1.to han-
dover the duties according to their abilities, 2. to give them sufficient fees, 3. to
nurse them during the diseases, 4. to divide among them the best food and 5. to
give them rest sometimes. The staff have also five types duties towards their
masters. These are 1. to get up from the bed before their master gets up, 2. to go
to bed later, 3. to take only the given things, 4. to complete the work rightly and
5. to praise their master.

Forma-26, Buddhist Religion and moral education Class-9-10

202 Buddhist religion and moral education
2. Vyegghapajja Sutta
Once the Buddha was staying in the village Koliya. A Koliya named
Vyegghapajja requested Buddha to give some advice to the househonders who
are confined to the earthly matters for the welfare in this world. Buddha direct-
ed them to follow four auspicious rules in the earthly life. These instruc-
tions have been depicted in the Vyegghapajja Sutta. The instructions are:
Enthusiasm : One should have the zeal to earn with labour and honesty for
one's livelihood. One must be enthusiastic about the completion of the work
nicely.
Preservation : One has to conserve the money and the property which have
been earned through honest means so that the thieves, abductors, jealous rel-
atives or fire can not destroy them.
Connection with the honest people : One should mix with the persons who
are respectful to Triratna, wise, Virtuous and Wellwishers. One should follow
their honest qualities, Only they are good friends. Their contact is essential to
build an honest life.
To live a disciplined life : to cut his coat according to his cloth is the sole
duty of the householders. They should be frugal in expenditure. They also
have to avoid miserliness. Leading a life in accordance with the income and
expenditure is called a disciplined life. In this regard Buddha has also said that
if one possesses the four good qualities, he will be highly benefitted in this
world and the world hereafter. These four qualities are respect, precepts,
donation and wisdom.
3. The instructions of Buddha about the income and expenditure :
Buddha has advised to use the earnings or the profits by dividing it into four.
These are:

1. Keep one fourth for yourself. Donate one part from this part

2. Employ two fourths in agriculture or trade.

3. Save the fourth part so that you can use it in adversity.
Besides, Buddha has given many religious instructions for the householders. By
following these the domestic life can be happy as well as one can advance
towards the way to Nirbana. So all the householders should abide by thes ~
instructions. SI

The Daily Activities and Duties of the Buddhist Bhikkhus and Devotees 203
Exercise
Write down the underlying significance of householders keeping the six sides.
How many qualities of the householders have been mentioned in the Gahapatibagga ?
How far is the advice of Buddha regarding the income and expenditure logical ? Justify.
Lesson : 3
Rules for the Householders
The good conduct denotes humanity. Good conduct and self-restraint are the
preconditions to live in a society. Venerable Dharmapala Thera of Sri Lanka
has written a book titled 'Gihidina Cariya' in the Ceylonese language. The book
contains the code of conduct to be practised by the householders. Some rules as
mentioned in the book are quoted below :
Duties to be done in the morning :
After rising from the bed a Buddhist has to wash his face and hands and worship
Buddha. It is his ardent duty. One should go to the Bihar to worship and adore if
the monastery stands at the nearest distance. If it is not possible, this can be
performed at home. Having finished adoration he has to clean the furniture and
fittings. Thereafter eating breakfast he has to meditate on Metta Bhavana. After
that he has to payattention to the usual work.
Meal : One has to wash face, hands, legs properly before eating meal. One should
eat food delightfully. One should not eat food having the remains in the hand.
One should not take food inathentively. The food should be chewed properly.
One has to leave the seat after taking the permission of the companion, parents or
brothers and sisters if necessary. One should not talk and walk while eating. One
should not make sound while eating. After eating meal one should wash face and
hands properly. One should eat meal everyday at proper time.
Rules for bathing and wearing :
One should not wear dirty clothes. Thought small in quantity one has to wash
and clean the clothes timely. One should not wear the perspirated clothes. One
should not bath without wearing clothes. Nose, hair and feet should be cleansed
properly. One should pare the nail before they become long.
Rules for walking on the roads :
One should follow the locally prevailing rules while walking on the highways.
One should be careful not to touch the body of othrers with the umbrella if one
has any. While walking one should not be inattentive. While crossing the road
look carefully to the right and left. One should be careful about eating food on
S the way. One should help the blind, old and children in crossing roads.

204 Buddhist religion and moral education
Code of conduct in the meeting :
One should participate in the meeting properly dressed. One should present one's
opinion with arguments by showing honour to the opinion of others. It is improp-
er to speak in one voice. By maintaining the highest civility and courtesy one
should stay in the meeting. Punctuality is the precondition of participating in the
meeting as well as running it.
To visit a patient :
It is a social and moral duty to see the ailing relatives, friends and neighbours.
One should show sympathy and has to encourage him. One may take necessary
medicine and diet as far as possible. One should sympathize and encourage
the persons who attend the patient. One should take precautionary step before
visiting the patients attacked with contagious diseases. One should not stay in the
room of the patient for a long time. One has to change the dress after visiting the
patients and wash face, hands and legs. It is one of the important health rules.
To have a glance at the deadbody :
It is a social as well as a religious duty to see the deadbody of relatives and
neighbours. One should go there wearing clean dresses and the dresses should
be put off and washed after returning. One should condole the bereaved
members. Birth and death are two common events. All living being are subject
to death. In this way one can console them and express sympathy. One should
have to attend the religious performances done for the dead. To help if it is
needed is a good work.
The duties of the children in the family:
In a family the children have to perform many duties. Except studies, they have
to help the family in different works within the range of their capability. They
have to participate in the family works in a particular time and during leisure.
They should help the parents in their business. They have to keep their eyes on
all matters though the help is not needed. This increases the knowledge and
experience. Bookish knowledge does not serve in the real life without the
working experiences. They should keep in mind that any honest labour is full of
dignity.
Nomenclature : The persons should be named according to the religious
faith. This increases the intimacy and familiarity with their own religion.
Names can be given according to the tradition of own country, customs and
tradition of the forefathers. ES
N

The Daily Activities and Duties of the Buddhist Bhikkhus and Devotees 205

The performance of daily religious rites :

Every Buddhist household has a Buddhasan for the performance of the daily

religious rites. A statue or an image is kept there. The householder Buddhists

generally worship three a day before the family Buddhasana. Rising early in
the morning and after cleaning the face, hands and feet the Buddhists worship

Buddha with flowers, drinks, food and fragrant incense. In that same manner,

Buddha is worshipped with food and drinks before 12 clock at noon. In the

evening in the same manner Buddha is worshipped again' with lamp, fragrant

incense and drinks. By reciting the fixed verse, one has to dedicate the offerings
with devotion. It removes the darkness from the mind and creates love for the

Buddhists.

Prepare a day-to-day record according to the rules for the householders.
Lesson : 4
The Seven Conditions for Welfare

There was a prosperous kingdom named Vesali during the time of Buddha. The

Vajjis and the Licchavis, were the followers of Buddha. The Licchavis built in

magnificent Kutagarasala Monastery for Buddha and His Sangha. Buddha

observed the rain-retreat (vassavasa) for five times there. Buddha delivered
more than one Suttas and instructions while. He was staying at Vesali. The 'Satta

Aparihaniya Dhamma! for the householders is one of them. ‘Satta Aparihanyo

Dhamma! means the seven indispensable duties. While staying at 'Sarandada

Cetiya' Lord Buddha delivered these instructions to the Vajjis. The Vajjis proved

themselves to be unconquerable and prosperous nation in ancient India by

following these seven indispensable duties. Any nation or society that follow
these seven indispensable conditions are never defeted. These are :

1. Taking decisions through the meetings unitedly.

2. To edit together the decisions that have been accepted and if a new cause
arises, to solve it unitedly.

3. Not to introduce any kind of corruption in the society or in the state level. Not
to discard the good policy of the ancestors and should abide by the ancient
principles and instructions.

& 4. To respect, honour, feel proud of them and adore them. To follow their
“commands.

206 Buddhist religion and moral education

5. Not to misbehave with the wives and young girls that is to say to preserve the
honour of women.

6. To preserve the monasteries, cetiya built by them and their given properties
properly and to follow the Buddhist religion.

7. To serve and protect the Arhants and virtuous Bhikkhus by providing them
with necessary donations, to arrange their happiness and facilities and to
ensure their safe stay.

The Satta Aparihaniya Dhammas for the Bhikkhus : Lord Buddha

delivered seven indispensable duties for the permanence of the Buddhist Sangha

and these have been compiled in the Mahaparinibbana Sutta. Buddha delivered
these instructions for the future welfare of the Bhikkhusangha and He said that
by following these they will never be defeated. The seven indispensable rules for
the Bhikkhus are :
1. The Bhikkhus will be united.
2. The Bhikkhus will perform duties of the Sangha being united together.
3. The Bhikkhus will follow the instructed Shikkhyapadas.
4. The Bhikkhus will honour, adore and serve the senior monks.
5. The Bhikkhus must not be under the control of the desire for the cause of
rebirth.
6. The Bhikkhus will pay close attention to austere ascetic practices for Nib
bana in the forest or in a lonely place.
7. The Bhikkhus will make arrangements for the ease and comfort of the
Bhikkhus who have come and who have not yet come.
In this way Buddha has delivered the obligatory principles and instructions to be
observed in His absence for the welfare of the householders, the Bhikkhus and
the Samaneras and also for the practice of the Buddhists religion
uninterruptedly.
Exercise
=<
8

The Daily Activities and Duties of the Buddhist Bhikkhus and Devotees 207
Exercise
Fill up the gaps
1) The wish for the deliverance from sorrow by being sympathetic with destitutes is
called the thought of «0.0...
2) One has to suffer .............. results for taking drugs.
3) False ................. is attributed for sinful acts.
4) One has to perform ................ types duties towards the teachers.
5) The.............. persons commit sins because of the excitement.
Short Questions
1) Explain the present thought of supervision.
2) Differentiate between the Bhikkhus and the Samaneras.
3) What are the signs of friends?.
4) Describe the duties and esponsibilities of learners towards their families.
Essay type Questions
1) Describe the daily religious rites and instructions of the Bhikkhus and the Sramanas.
2) Describe the obligatory daily religious rites and instructions to be performed by the
householders.
3) What is ‘Sapta Aparihaniya Dhamma’ ? Write in detail.
Multiple Choice Questions
1. What does ‘Nisaggiya’ mean ?
a) one should confirm __b) one should notice
c) one should abandon d) one should perform.
2. Why are meditation and self-absorbed spiritual meditation obligatory to
the Bhikkhus and Sramanas?
a) forcontrolling the mind b) for getting praise
c) for fame and distinction ) to be free from crime.
Read the passage below and give answer to the questions no 3 and 4
Amit Barua was ordained in the Buddhism. While he was eating food, the
chief of the monastery asked him, 'Why are you eating meal ?' In reply he
said, 'only to live’. Then the Bhikkhu said, 'Do you think in that way while
you accept the four basic elements?’ In reply he said, 'Yes, I do think in that
way.’
3. What is called this type of thought of Amit Baua according to the daily
religious rites and instructions for the Buddhist monks ?
oo a) thought of friendship b) _ five thoughts
g c) thought of supervision d) thought of sympathetic joy.

208 Buddhist religion and moral education
4. By accepting that thought Amit will dissuade himself.
i) from greed
ii) from malice
iii) from desire of sexual urge
Which one is right ?
a) _iand iib) ii and iii
c)  iand iii d) i, ii and iii.
Creative Questions
1. List
[| Side Daily Activities
Eats food to live on, not to increase physical
Practice learning strenght and beau
| Respectelders | Meditates all the living beings be happy, be
Respect elders free from all the sorrows
Active to obey order Wears yellow robe, not to create
Pancakamaguna
a) Who should avoid six offences?
b) Why do the Bhikkus and the samoneras observe self control?
c) Why do the domestics observe the activities described in the list above?
Explain with reference to the Sigalobad Sutta.
d) For whom the clues in the list above are applicable? Analyse according to the text.
2.
Event- 1
Woking early in the morning Dipak Barua serves the Tiratana after having
breakfast. He crosses the roads carefully. He always helps in the funeral
activities if someone dies in the locality and also very active to perform the
responsibilities and duties of the family as he is the head of the family.
Event- 2
Reverent Aryapriyo Bhikkhu shows respect to the elder Bhikkhus as the part of
the teaching of Vinaya. He remains united in Sangha and engaged himself in the
practice of Nibbana.
a) What are the compulsory daily services for the samonera?
b) Why do the Bhikkhus practise Panchavavana?
c) Explain the behaviour of Dipak Barua in the context of the rules for the
householders.
d) 'The event-2 is taken from the Satta Aparihaniya Dhammas for the
Bhikkhus' -give reasons. bo
3
THE END *

ANA TAS AAA 1A
— TOT IX
WITS Seeicwl WwVTS Acer PT Aal Paco Acs
— TANT AeA Oe AAA
sist @ fle fretocra Xba oer efoto eforaiced GAT ATT HANSA OPO
Sod AR-4 (GIT BR, 28 ST ASH) CHIT PT
x. ° eN
UU:
Trencn*
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh

