as Nine-Ten
—  Mryr e. hd
¢ us 3) NATIONA RRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK B GLADESH

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a Textbook for Classes Nine-Ten from the Academic Year-2013
Business Entrepreneurship
Class Nine-Ten
Written by
Dr. A. H. M. Habibur Rahman
Sheikh Shahbaz Riad
Edited by
Dr. M. A. Mannan
Translated by
Mohiuddin Khan
H. M. Ahsan Kabir
NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka
[All rights reserved by the publisher]
First Publication : December, 2012
Revised Edition : November, 2014
Reprint : September, 2016
Co-ordinator
Kaniz Fouzia Khanom
Cover Design
Sudarshan Bachar
Sujaul Abedeen
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
Computer Compose
Color Graphic
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Government of Bangladesh
Printed by :

Preface
Education is the pre-requisite for the holistic development in our national life. To cope with the
challenges of the fast changing world and to lead Bangladesh to the doorstep of development
and prosperity, a well educated and skilled population is needed. In order to build up a nation
imbued with the spirit of the Language Movement and our Liberation War, the secondary
education aims at flourishing the talents and prospects inherent in the learners. Besides, the other
aims also include expansion and consolidation of the basic knowledge and skills of the learners
acquired at the primary level in order to make them fit for entry into higher education.
The aims of secondary education further emphasise on developing these learners as skilled and
competent citizens of the country through the process of acquiring knowledge at the backdrop of
socio-economic, cultural and environmental settings.
Keeping the aims and objectives of national Education Policy 2010 ahead, the curriculum at the
secondary level has been revised. In the revised curriculum the national aims, objectives and
contemporary needs have been reflected. Along with these expected learning outcomes have
been determined based on the learner’s age, merit and level of acquisition. Besides, efforts have
been made to raise, starting from the level of moral and humanistic values down to awareness on
history and tradition, the spirit of the Liberation War, passion for art-culture and literature,
patriotism, feelings for nature and equal dignity to all irrespective of religions, caste, creed and
sex. Efforts have also been made to apply science in all spheres of our life in order to build a
nation advanced in science. Attempts are also there to make the learner capable of implementing
the goals envisioned in Digital Bangladesh-2021.
In the light of the present curriculum almost all the textbooks at the secondary level have been
introduced. While introducing the textbooks, the capacity, aptitude and prior knowledge of the
learners have been taken into utmost consideration. While selecting the contexts and their
presentation special attention has been given on the expansion of the learner’s creative faculty.
Adding learning outcomes at the beginning of each chapter, hints about the achievable
knowledge of the learners have been given. By adding variety of activities, creative and other
questions evaluation has also been made creative.
The Book, Business Entrepreneurship for class Nine-Ten is developed at the beginning of 21"
century to change the demand and mindset of the students along with the changing span of time
under revised curriculum.
Considering the challenges and commitments of 21s century and following the revised
curriculum the textbook has been written. Recently the rational evaluation and tryout program
has been completed to make correction and revision of the textbook. I hope the outcomes of the
program will be reflected in this revised edition. We will continue our effort to make the next
edition of this book more beautiful, decent and free from any types of errors.
We appreciate the endeavours of those who assisted very sincerely with their merit and hard work
in the process of writing, translating, editing, revision, illustration and printing of the book. We
hope the book will ensure joyful reading and achievement of expected skills from the learners.
Professor Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

CONTENTS
oe [imines | |
Entrepreneurs

CHAPTER ONE
Introduction to Business
The reason behind the emergence of business was the feeling of want of human
beings. To meet up this want, men engaged themselves for earning a living
through various economic activities. In fact, business evolved on the basis of
economic activities and transactions. From this chapter we will be able to know
the different aspects of business like its definition, origin, features, classification
and business environment.
oe CCl oe ae OSS
b PAA oe ee we he ly >. : oe ae La
wale’ ss q cas } ee Sake si ’
Aa ee oe CE
UG eRe Wd ie ye. eee ee
Py ae Lf EP ae
Span PA ec a
ae ies wt 17 @< te %e Cee. oS :
aia dl \ My Reh Z en @ © Seo Sel UX Pe
* SR er ) 2 eer
By the end of this chapter we will be able to
e describe the concept of business, its origin and its stages of development.
e explain business scope and features.
e describe different types of business.
e explain the importance of business.
e describe the concept and various categories of industry.
e explain commerce and its classification.
e describe the concept of services and its various nature with examples.
e identify various elements of environment affecting business.
Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-1

2 Introduction to Business
CONCEPTS OF BUSINESS
Mr. Asaduzzaman, a Business Studies teacher, came to his first class of Business
Entrepreneurship of students of class nine. All the students cordially greeted
him. After exchanging greetings, he asked an open question to all the students,
"Among all of you, who has come from a business family?" One student replied
that his father has a business of rice trading. Another student replied that his
father has a Poultry Farm. One student said that his father owns a Pharmacy.
Another one said that her mother has a Beauty Parlor. The teacher listened to
every one carefully and said that Trading of Rice, Raising Poultry, Selling
Medicine and operating Beauty Parlor each of these represents an economic
activities. All the economic activities of your guardians will be included in
business if it is done for the purpose of earning a living and with the intention of
making a profit.
Generally, economic activities with a view to make a profit are termed as
business. Producing food for the family members, rearing poultry, cultivating
vegetables etc are not business. But, when a farmer cultivates paddy or grows
vegetables to make a profit then it will be treated as business. Then, all the
economic activities operated to make profit will be treated as business if it is
done legally and in right ways.
Business has some more features which separates it from other professions.
Goods or services related to business must have monetary value. Risk factors are
another feature of business. Mainly, a business person makes investment to earn
profit. However, he must have the feeling for services besides generating profit.
Another significant feature of business is its sense of morality and social
responsibility.

R

Business Entrepreneurship 3
Origin and Evolution of Business
Over time, the scope of economic activities increased on the basis of human
demand. As a result activities like hunting, farming producing, exchanging
goods (barter system) got was started. But, exchanging goods or products could
not meet up all the needs. Because of this, in place of barter system uses of coins
of Gold/Silver (bullions), and later paper note was introduced as a medium of
exchange. The evolution of business can be classified as Primitive age, Middle
age and Modem age.
Steps of Business Evolution
| Primitive Age} Middle Age | Modern Age |
e Hunting e Using scarce snail,/e Industrial revolution
e Fishing shell, Kori and stones |e Development of Information
e Collecting as medium of and communication technology.
fruits exchange e Spread of different industries
e Cultivation |¢ Using coins of metal e Introduction of large scale
farming like gold, silver etc. production and distribution
e Bartering e Introduction of paper process ;
notes e Expansion of the business of |
e Formation of market Banking and Insurance
and towns e Introduction of ATM card
e Establishment of business ¢ Introduction of Mobile banking)
organization |
Scope and Classification of Business
Today's business is not limited to buying and selling goods only. Business is the
combination of production of goods and services, exchanging and other
activities associated with it. Transportation, Insurance, Banking,
Warehousing/Storing and Advertisement plays significant role in exchanging
products and goods. Modem business can be classified in the following three
types:
e Industry
e Commerce
a * Direct Services
Ss
Q

4 Introduction to Business
Business

Breeding Industry e Exchange of goods (buying and selign) « Lawyer

Extractive industry © Transportation e Doctor

¢ Construction industry e Warehousing #Biiginger

© Service oriented Industry ¢ Banking © Audit Farm

e Manufacturing Industry Insurance

e Advertisement

Industry
Industry is considered as the means of production. Industry is the process of
collecting natural resources, converting it to raw material and through
processing the raw materials finished goods are prepared for uses. Industry is
mainly divided into five categories:

e Genetic Industry: Product produced in this industry are used for
further production. Example nursery

e Extractive Industry: Through this industry natural resources are
collected from the enviorment such as earth, air and water. For
example - mmmg.

e Construction Industry: Through this industry roads and highways,
bridge, culvert etc are constructed

e Manufacturing Industry: In this type of Industry where laboir and
machine is used to process raw material to make finished goods. Such
as textile mills,

e Service Industry: This industry includes those economic activities
which make life of individual's easy and comfortable. For example,
production and distribution of Electricity, Gas, Banking and Health
Services etc.

oo
Ss
N

Business Entrepreneurship 5
Activity — 02 : Four examples of each Industry
"Genetic | Extractive Construction Manufacturing Service
Industry Industry _Industry ___ Industry _ Industry
e Nursery ¢ Mining  e¢ Construction e¢ Garments e Electricity
e e of Roads & Industry e
e e Highways e e
e e e e e
e e e e e
e e
Commerce
Commerce is the branch of business that distributes products and services.
Commerce includes all the activities from delivering raw materials to the
producer for the purpose of manufacturing or delivering goods and services to
the consumer. While buying and selling various problems regarding finance,
risk, place, time and information may arise. To remove these obstacles, the help
of various departments of Commerce such as Transportation, Storage, Banking,
Insurance, Distribution and Advertisement are needed. In modem age commerce
is termed as Business to Business.
Roles of various elements of commerce is depicted in the following chart —
Various Constraints in Elements of Role
| Business | Business |
Possession Exchange of goods Removes the constraints of
| _and services _ ownership
Placement Transportation Removes the constraints
| | _ related to place
Timing Storing Removes the constraints
| | _ related to time
Finance Banking Removes the constraints
| is _| related to money
Risk factors | Insurance | Removes the risk factors
Information Advertisement Removes the abstacles related
to information and circulation.
o9 |
>
NX

6 Introduction to Business
Direct Services
Various self employed professionals like doctor, lawyer, architect provides their
specialized services in exchange of money as a mode earnings. These sorts of
activities are called direct services or profession, Such as chamber of a doctor,
lawyer's chamber, Architect farm, Audit farm etc. Direct Services is a significant
part of modem business.
Importance of Business
Though business is considered as economic actrvmes, it contributes to the
development of the socio-economic and political condition of a country. From
small shops to large industries all have been set up with assessing the necessities
of business. In the modem world the importance of business is infinite. The
countries that are at the peak of development are developed in the sectors of
business as well. Through business, proper utilization of resources is possible
and it quickens the development of the economic condition of a country.
Business contributes in savings, Thus formation of capital happens and national
income increases. Business helps to creates employment for the unemployed.
Business develops the research and creative activities. Business helps to
exchange cultural views in addition to exchange of goods and services.
After passing SSC, Halima started a business with a small capital. Day by day
her business grew as a successful business in the area. At present, nearly 50
men and women work in her organization. Most of the workers are the
homeless from river erosion. At the very beginning, Halima arranges to train
them simply. They make clothes of artistic design, designe saree, three piece,
Panjabee, fatua etc with needle and yam and sale them. Halima decided to
enlarge her business. But, she moved to village rather than city. She wishes to
utilize the village women. Day by day, most of the women of her village got
involved in her business. As a result, their economic condition started
changing in addition to their changes of standard of living.
Activity-3: Write down your concept of importance of Business
after reading the story of Halima’s Business.
Importance of Business

e

e

e

e co)

° | 3

Business Entrepreneurship 7
Business Environment:
Environment influences our life style, behavior, learning, culture, economy and
business. Environment is the combination of all the elements influencing the
lifestyle and economic activities of the people of a particular region. The
elements include - Geography, Weather, Rivers, Mountains, Forests, Nationality,
Religion, Education etc. Business environment thus can be defined as the
combination of all the natural and artificial elements; directly or indirectly
influencing the formation of business organization, its activities and
development or deterioration.
Chittagong port

Though there is various types of business environment, but they are classified
as the following six main categories:

e Natural Environment

e Economic Environment

e Political Environment

e Social Environment

e Legal Environment

e Technical Environment

5

8 Introduction to Business
BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT
Natural Economic Social Political Legal ,
Environment
1. Weather 1. Savings & 1.Nation 1, Government 1. Commercial |} 1. Technology
2. Landscape Investment 2, Religious 2, Sovereignty Law Learning
3.Natural 2. Capital Belief 3. Law and} | 2. Industrial !|> Technical
resources Money & 3. Consumers Discipline Law Efficiency
4, Rivers Banking Perception 4. Political 3. Environment 3. Technology Based
4, Human Stability Protection Law |} J. stitution ey "
Resources 5. Government || 4. Consumer
5. Education Policy Interest  and|| 4- Opportunity of
& Culture 6. International | | Protection Law || Importing
6. History Relation Technology
5. Information and Com-
munication Technology
Business Environment in Bangladesh
Bangladesh is an agro based country. But the contribution of Business to
economy specifically industry and commerce have been increasing every year.
Once upon a time, this area was famous worldwide for trade and commerce.
Reputation of Sonargaon for making 'Moslin cloth' and Chittagong for ship
building, spread all over the world. Moslin clothes made in Sonargaon and its
adjacent areas used to be exported to countries in Europe and Africa. Our
country has always been well known for its trade and commerce. Long ago,
allured by the reputation of business of this region, the Arabs came here and
established business relationship with our ancestors. Business in this area was so
developed that it used to direly compete with the historically famous Tamrolipto
and Shaptagram. The fame of this region spread around Europe and beyond the
countries of East. The Portuguese arrived here on 1600 AD and started business.
They used to call Shaptagram as 'Porto Piqueno' or small port and Chittagong as
‘Porto Grando' or big port. It is mentionable that Shaptagram of West Bengal was
also famous as a commercial port. Business with Shaptagram used to be
maintained through Bhagirathi river and Sharswati canal with Bay of Bengal.
Sea going ships were also built in this country. As per statement made by
Chinese tourist Mr. Mahuyan that Roman Emperor did not like the Dock and
Ship of Alexandria and had selected to make his ships from Chittagong
perceiving its superiority of construction technique. There were a number of x
ship building dockyards of efficient local architect at Halishahar and Patenga of Ss

Business Entrepreneurship 9
Chittagong. The place then, buzzed with the sound of hammer. The then
‘businessman! of this country owned hundreds of ship. Famous historian WW
Hunter stated that those ship building dockyards maintained their reputation till
1875. . ;
a —_
——_—" —le “he |
Sonargaon: the ancient capital of Bengal and
famous center for trade and commerce
In this competitive world, it is difficult to sustain in business if the
environmental elements are not supportive. The environmental elements of
business are discussed below in context to Bangladesh:
Natural Environment : Most of the elements of natural environment in
Bangladesh are supportive for business. There is river in most of places in the
country. As a result, raw materials for various agro based industry and consumer
products can easily be grown. We have natural gas for business and industry.
Existing Coal, Lime Stone, Hard Rock, and Crude Oil is helpful for establishing
industry. Though our forest is decreasing, we are still rich in forest resources.
Since we have numerous rivers and bounded by sea, suitable environment for
development of fisheries industry also prevails here.
Economic Element: Prevailing effective money and banking system,
contribution of agriculture and industry, savings and investment mentality of
people and government assistance, work as a strong element for economic
environment. In Bangladesh, some of the economic elements have strong base
but most of them are very weak. Lack of sufficient capital, insufficient
availability of banking facility for village people comparing to those of city
dwellers, administrative complexity and upward inflation, if all these
constraints are removed, Bangladesh can advance more rapidly for development
in business.
Social Element: Nationality, religious belief, consumers perception, education
and culture, science and technology most of these social elements in Bangladesh
Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-2

10 Introduction to Business
are positive for expansion of business. From national, historical and cultural
context people of this country are liberal, industrious and creative. The past,
people of this country have marked their brilliance and industry by making
Maslin cloth and building ship. Sonargaon was best in the world for trade,
education, agriculture, literature, culture, industry and handicrafts. At present,
Jamdani Saree making and ship building has been able to catch the eye of world.
The future generation shall be able to show their brilliance in industry,
commerce, trade, research etc. if it is possible to break the system of
memorization and make them competent and efficient by coming out from the
present education system. Besides, use of technology should be emphasized in
all sectors of trade and commerce.
Political Environment: Sound law and order situation and positive industry and
trade policy, good relationship with neighboring countries and others help to
expand business. On the other hand, political instability, frequent government
changes, Hartal, strike and lack of business friendly industry and trade policy
etc. are negative elements of political environment which hinder the
development of industry and trade. Foreign investors also become disinterested
to invest in such environment. The above mentioned elements of political
environment in Bangladesh are not in a position of optimum level. By removing
all the negative elements, such as labor unrest, strike and hartal etc. the political
elements for business can be improved in Bangladesh.
Legal Elements: Though some of the elements of legal environment in
Bangladesh are modem and up to date, most of them are primitive and old. The
business development of our country can be improved by designing and strongly
implementing law relating to preservation of environment and consumer law.
Preparing industry and investment friendly law and through strong
implementation of laws for anti Corruption, anti Nepotism, anti preparing law
friendly to industry and investment, tolling can also be ensure to develop our
business and trade.
Technological Environment: For the development of business and trade, it is
necessary to have efficient labor, high tech machineries and technology. It is
evident that the countries that are highly developed in science and technology
are also developed in business. Technological development makes the
production process easier. As a result, both quantity and quality of production
also increases. In Bangladesh, most of the elements of technological
environment are positive. Use of technology is increasing gradualy. S
N

Business Entrepreneurship ni
Activity — 4: Give opinion about which of the environmental elements
in your area are positive/negative for business
Climate/Weather ee

[Electricity |

[Land

a

[Rivers
Religious belief __

[Consumersperespion———SS*SSSCSC~S~S~S

[Communicaionsysen | SCS

Tadton SSS

[Lawandorders |

In conclusion, we can say that it is necessary to develop the environmental

elements for business and industry. We all have to come forward along with

government to make a supportive and positive environment for industry and
trade.
EXERCISE
Multiple Choice Question
1. Uses of scarce snail and shell as a medium of exchange is the attribute of
which era?
a. Primitive b. Middle age
c. Moghul Era d. Modern era.
2. Which port used to be called ‘Porto Grando’?
a. Chittagong b. Khulna
c. Kolkata d. Shaptagram
3. Commerce helps to reach goods to the consumers through —
i. removing constraints of placement
~ ii. providing social assistance
8 iii removing constraints of monetary problem

12 Introduction to Business
which of the following is correct
a. i & ii b. i & iii
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
Answer the question No. 4 & 5 after reading the following stem:
Shakila has a family nursery. They grow and sell various plants of flower and
fruits. Soil of their house is suitable for growing and nurturing plants. Since
the nursery is situated near a pond, water is also available. As a result, the
quality of the plants from this nursery is very good.
4. The nursery of Shakila is what kind of industry?
a. Manufacturing b. Genetic
c. Service d. Construction
5. What is the main reason for better quality of the plants from Shakila’s nursery?
a. Natural b. Social
c. Economic d. Cultural
Creative Question
1. Nafis, a student of class ten of Akhitara village. His father is a trained village
doctor. Besides treatment, he also sells medicine of good quality. Though there
is huge demand for various medicines in the village, he can not sell all kinds of
medicine because of some limitations. Medical representatives can not supply
the necessary medicines in time because of the lack of proper communication
system. On the other hand, many medicines get damaged since there is no
preservation system in the village.
a. What is the main objective of the business?
b. What do you understand by industry? Give example.
c. What kind of business Nafis’ father has? Explain
d. What is the main reason you think of Nafis’ father’s inability to
supply medicine as per demand of the people of that area. Give
reason for your answer. S

Business Entrepreneurship 13
2. Once, Bangladesh was famous all over the world for Business. Such a cloth in
this country used to be made which had reputation among countries. The
environment and humidity of Meghna and Shitalakhya river was suitable for
making the yam for this cloth. This was accompanied by the workers cordial
effort and creativity. If all the sectors associated with business environment can
be developed, trade and commerce will develop as well and the lost glory of
business will return.
a. For which cloth the fame of Bangladesh had spread around the world?
b. What do you understand by business environment? Explain
c. By developing which environmental elements, creativity of the
above mentioned workers and labors is possible? Explain.
d. What elements of business environment you think are necessary to be
developed for the development of Trade and Commerce in the country.
Give reason far your answer.
he)
§

CHAPTER TWO
e LJ
Business Entrepreneurship and
Entrepreneur
For the economic development of a country the role of entrepreneurship and
entrepreneur is very important. The active participation of the entrepreneur is
the basis of the economic affluence and development of the developed countries
of the modem world. They are contributing through using the natural resources
as well as human resources of the country along with their creativity. In a
country like Bangladesh that has a huge population the role of entrepreneurship
and entrepreneur in economic development and in creating employment is
undeniable In this chapter we will know about the various aspects of Business
entrepreneurship, importance of business entrepreneurship for socio economic
development, features of a successful entrepreneur and details of removing
constraints of entrepreneurship development.
ot we i: \ *,
——— =< : on eae
re =~ % ———¥ -
After completing this chapter, we shall be able to
e Explain the concept and features of entrepreneurship and business entrepreneurship
e Differentiate between entrepreneurship and business entrepreneurship
e Describe the features and activities of business entrepreneurship
e Identify the attributes of a successful entrepreneur.
e Explain the importance of entrepreneurship in socio economic development
e Relate between business entrepreneurship and risk
e Describe the development of positive environment for business
entrepreneurship
e Identify the obstacles in Bangladesh for development of business
entrepreneurship.
e Identify the way to remove the obstacles in Bangladesh for development x
of business entrepreneurship. 8

Business Entrepreneurship 15
Entrepreneurship and Business Entrepreneurship
In Your school, the Victory Day on 16th December is always celebrated by
arranging some kind of functions. The Victory day of this year is almost near to
us. One of you has proposed that this year a drama can be staged. He also said
that he will give all kinds of help regarding the staging of the play. Staging a play
is an arduous and creative job. In this case, selection of drama, characters, place
and time was fixed after discussion. One of you came forward with the idea of
staging a play, this is one kind of entreprenership. In general world, any kind of
work afford initiative can be termed as entrepreneurship. So, entrepreneurship
can be on anything
One more example can be given- a kind hearted person is setting up a school for
creating educational opportunity for the boys and girls of your area. He
established the school from his own savings and collecting funds from other
people. This is the result of his strong determination and entrepreneurship. In
this way, all kinds of work of public welfare like establishing school, college,
hospital and club etc. are the results of some one's entrepreneurship.
Any kind of business is the outcome of the initiative of an individual or a group.
Business entrepreneurship is identifying the business concept, establishing the
business and operating it successfully. In particular, Business entrepreneurship
is setting up business with a view to make profit knowing the inherited risk of
loss and successfully operating the business.
Story of Aminul
Mr. Aminul islam used to think about doing something different from his
boyhood. He attended his family business of clothing after completion of
degree from a local college. But he could not be satisfied with this business. He
used to visit the market by the highway near his house. One day he realized
that very often the vehicles stop here for simple repairing. Realizing the
necessity of repairing, Aminul formed capital from his own saving and some
borrowings and established a workshop. Since he did not have the expertise in
this job, he undertook three month training from the local Youth Development
Center. Initially the earning from the business was not mentionable. But,
because of hard working, efficient service and honesty, reputation of his
business spread around and income started to increase as well. Having
benefitted from this business, he is now planning to set up a petrol pump at the
S adjacent area.
S
N

16 Introduction to Business
Mr. Aminul has taken risk to fulfill his desire and worked hard with strong
determination. These effort is his business entrepreneurship.
The person who knowing the uncertainties of results, establishes business with
strong determination and courage and runs the business successfully, he is a
Business entrepreneur or Industry Entrepreneur. Business entrepreneurship and
business entrepreneur these two words are closely related to each other. Business
entrepreneur is he who attempts business entrepreneurship. Henry Ford of
American Ford Company, Konoke Matsusita founder of Japanese electronic
manufacturing company Matsusita were are world famous entrepreneur. In
Bangladesh famous entrepreneurs Mr. Jahurul Islam, Ranoda Prashad Saha,
Janab Ali, Samson H. Chowdhury. Form the biographies of the entrepreneurs
from home and abroad, it can be seen that most of them started business in a
smaller scale. With the help of strong mind set, hard work, perseverance, and
work effort gradually they became owner of large industries.
Difference between entrepreneurship and business entrepreneurship:
Entrepreneurship can be for anything. But, business entrepreneurship is the
investment of money and labor to earn profit knowing the presence of risk. For
example, suppose you can make beautiful things from bamboo and cane. You
tried to make a new kind of cane chair, this is your entrepreneurship. If you start
a shop for making things of bamboo and cane and successfully run the business
then it will be business entrepreneurship. The primary objective of business
entrepreneurship is profit and other entrepreneurship is for public welfare.
Activity 1: Find out which one of the following is entrepreneurship & which
oneis_ business entrepreneurship
| 1. Arranging adebatingprogram |
2: Establishing and operating a photocopy shop. =|
| 3. Establishing and operating business of toy manufacturing |
|4.Efforttokeep schoolclean |
| 5. Manufacturing leather goods andselling |
| 6. Arranging and operating cricketmatch |
|7.Running business ofJewelry, |
[|8.Planting trees aroundthehouse |
‘fomseeh = “nas He fans ei mee
from steel
[| 10. Manufacturing food products | | w
[ 11. Maintaining operation tocamproft | |

Business Entrepreneurship 17

Characteristics of Business Entrepreneurship

By analyzing the concept of business entrepreneurship the following

characteristics and attributes are identified:

1. This is the work effort to establish business.Business entrepreneurship helps
to successfully run all kinds of activities related to establishing a business.

2. Doing business knowing the existence of risk with a view to earn profit.

3. The result of business entrepreneurship is a business organization. The
meaning of this is that the concept of business entrepreneurship helps
to execute the thoughts in to reality.

4. Another outcome of business entrepreneurship is goods or service.

5. Running the business successfully

6. Generating creating employment for self. An entrepreneur can generate his

own source of income.

7. Generate employment for others. Business entrepreneurship can
generate employment for others along with the entrepreneur himself.

8. Making of new asset resources. Business entrepreneurship helps to develop
human resources and the formation of capital.

9. In general it helps to develop the overall economy of the country.
Business entrepreneurship can contribute in other areas also besides income
generation and solving unemployment problem of the country.

10.Taking social responsibility along with earning profit. Business
entrepreneurship encourages the entrepreneur to participate in various
development work of the society.

Qualities of a Business Entrepreneur
From the discussion of business entrepreneurship, some idea can be inferred
/formed about the qualities of an entrepreneur. Some believe that the
entrepreneurs are entrepreneur by born. This means that form the birth they
inherit some qualities which help them to be famous and _ successful
entrepreneur. At present days entrepreneur can be groomed up through
education, training and providing various opportunities. Main qualities of an
entrepreneur are-

Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-3

18 Business Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneur

e Confidence e Creativity

e Independent mentality e Inventing capacity

e velocity e Ability to work hard

e Organizing capacity e Ability to take risk

e Courage e Ability to collect capital

e Perseverance e Desire for success

e Sensibility e Mentality of facing challenge

e Attentiveness e Mentality of taking lessons from

e Flexibility failure
The entrepreneurs are capable to identify and utilize the prevailing economic
opportunities in the country. They show their sign of efficiency in availing the
facility from the government for industry development. They plan on the limited
resources to achieve their desired goal and take effective steps to execute those
plans. Successful entrepreneurs take well informed and planned decisions They
assess the constraints against execution of their plan and try to remove them
beforehand. Capability of coping up with the change environment and having
influence on other people is also termed as special quality of an entrepreneur.
Taking calculative risk is another characteristic of a successful entrepreneur.
Making adjustment with the changed environment and desired goal is also a
major characteristic of entrepreneurs.
Business risk is the uncertainties of earning profit form business. A successful,
entrepreneur assesses the reasons of possible risk and their extent and takes
preparation to face them beforehand. A successful entrepreneur has the quality
of leadership. A successful entrepreneur accumulates capital, arranges financing
for the organization and ensures their proper utilization in the business. He
shows the efficiency in coordinating the general resources with the human
resources of the company. He owns in depth knowledge of management. They
have the up to date knowledge about coordinating with the technologies of ages.
They innovate different production process and successfully implement them.
They open new arena for industrial revolution.
An entrepreneur enjoys dealing with challenging works. They provide untiring
effort and sacrifice self comfort and luxury for achieving their business goal.
They are so confident about their own decision that they continuously work to
achieve their desired goal and keeps working until achieving the result. If they
fail, they start again after analyzing the reason of their failure. Strong desire for 2
achieving goal is a mentionable feature of their character. Real entrepreneur &

Business Entrepreneurship 19
acknowledge their fault and take lessons from them. Leaming from own
experiences and experience of others, and application of those learning in work
place is another special quality of their character. Successful entrepreneurs get
satisfaction and pleasure from their success.
Importance of Business Entrepreneurship in Socio-Economic
Development
Importance of Business Entrepreneurship in Socio- Economic Development
Bangladesh is a developing Country. According to Bangladesh Economic
Review-2010, 50% of our national income comes from service, 20% comes
from agriculture and 30% comes from industry. Industrial sector plays a vital
role in the development of any country. The development of all the sectors
including industrial sector is possible through development of business
entrepreneurship. Business entrepreneurship can contribute to our socio
economic development in the following way:
e Proper utilization of resources
Business entrepreneurship ensures the uses of natural resources and
human resources of our country. Besides, increase of investment
and proper utilization of resources is possible through establishing
new industry.
e Increase of national Income and Production
The national income increases through business entrepreneurship. As a
result attaining government’s target for national income becomes possible.
e New employment generation
Entrepreneurs establish industry, operate and expand it along with
government. As a result new employment generation becomes possible.
e Development of Efficient Human Resources
Bangladesh is a populous country. This large population can become
our asset. Because, a successful entrepreneur turns the inefficient
people to efficient through engaging them in productive works.
e Reduces Dependability on others
We can reduce dependability on others through business entrepreneurship.
We can become economically self sufficient with proper utilization
& of business entrepreneurship.
S
N

20 Business Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneur
Favorable Environment for Developing Business Entrepreneurship
If we look at the developed countries, then we will see that the main reason for
their advancement is the positive environment for establishing business,
operation and expansion. In our country we do not have deficiency in brilliance,
mentality and efficiency. Our advancement is hindered only for the lack of
positive environment. The following positive environment aspects are necessary
for development of business entrepreneurship:
e Developed Infrastructural Element
There are some necessary elements for operating business such as
electricity, gas, communication etc. These elements are necessary for
existence of positive environment for business entrepreneurship.
e Government Assistance
With the help of business entrepreneurship, the business of the
country can grow more rapidly and be enriched. Various government
decisions like tax rebate, supplying capital with or without interest, etc
can make a positive environment for business entrepreneurship.
e Socio-Economic Stability
Economic, Social and Political stability has a positive impact over
creating positive business environment, instability in these sectors
create a negative impact.
e Supportive Law and Order Situation
Establishment and operation of business is easier, if the law and order
situation of the country is positive. On the other hand negative law and
order situation is a threat to business entrepreneurship and business
operation.
e Arrangement of Sufficient Capital
To successfully implement any kind of business entrepreneurship,
sufficient capital is necessary. In this regard, banking system of the
country needs to be developed so that supply of capital to the
entrepreneurs is ensured.
e Opportunity of Training
Some times correct steps can not be taken though opportunity prevails
only because of lack of training. Through training positive elements
for business environment can be created. S
N

Business Entrepreneurship 21
Activity 2: Identify the positive and negative elements for establishing
and operating business in your area:
infasructualFacllty | CS
GovemmentAssisanes
Socio Economie Swbiliy | Sid
LewandOrderSituation fT
Supply of Sufficient Capital | |
Opportunity of Training | —~S~SSSSSSSS
Relationship between Entrepreneurship & Risk
Ms. Ishta Akter, the owner of. Ishta Fashion House at Rapa Plaza in Dhaka is a
successful entrepreneur. She helps her family and buys all the necessities with
the income from this business. Mainly, she started this business as a hobby, but
now she earns mentionable amount from the business. But, she realized that
more profit can be earned from the business of mobile phone considering its
demand. Her family warned her that this business will be risky since she has no
knowledge of the business. But, without paying any heed to these concerns of
her family members, she took a bank loan. Besides, she took some money from
her running business and decided on importing mobile phones from abroad.
Y fe Be ey Bye:
S Picture: Buying and selling in a shop
N

22 Business Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneur
On the other hand her competitors imported mobiles at lower price. As a result
she incurred huge loss. The main reason for such a failure was that she started
the business without considering the risk associated with it.

There is always a relation that exist between business entrepreneurship and risk.
In some business, there is less risk and in some cases risk are high. Business
associated with high risks have higher possibility of profit as well. And the
business having a lower risk has low return. For example, we can say that
groceries have less risk thus profit is also limited. On the other hand like the
above mentioned case study if there is probability of high profit, there is also
higher risk associated.

There are various types risk in business. The demand of a product or service can
decline at any time. Profit can be reduce for that reason. This possibility is
business risk. On the other hand it may happen that the businessman expected a
certain profit from the business, but in reality he earned less profit. This is called
monetary risk.

Establishing a business and running it properly is a risky job. Besides, with the
help of business entrepreneurship earning more is also possible through
investing in profitable ventures. But one has to keep in mind that a successful
entrepreneur always assesses the associated risk beforehand and tries to reduce
that and always takes tolerable risk. Excessive risk and over confidence may
tum any plan into a disappointment.

Obstacles to Entrepreneurship Development in Bangladesh
Prevailing environment in Bangladesh for development of business
entrepreneurship is not positive. Because of some obstacles, business
entrepreneurship development can not reach to the optimum level in our country.
The obstacles for business entrepreneurship development in Bangladesh are
discussed below:

e Lack of Proper Planning: For entrepreneurship development disciplined
planning that can be achieved gradually is needed. Though it is a matter of
regret that in our country there is huge lack of such good planning.

e More Interest towards Job: People of our country are dependable on
agriculture from ancient time. As a result we have less interest in industry
and business. Traditional educational system in our country make people
more interested towards employment. For entrepreneurship development it _
is one of main obstacles. s

Business Entrepreneurship 23
e Lack of Technical and Vocational Education: General education
system in our country is based on memorization and theory. For a long
time this system has been continuing. Though there is separate
technical and vocational education system, meritorious students are not
interested in this. On the other hand, in general education there is no
clear idea about the technical and vocational education and the student
fails to get a good idea about this. As result, habit does not grow for

business entrepreneurship.

e Lack of Campaign: To implement any step, campaign plays a
significant role. Lack of campaign for various private and public steps
regarding business entrepreneurship development, lots of meritorious
students from towns and villages, unemployed people remains ignorant
about it. As a result, business entrepreneurship development activities
remain unsuccessful.

e Lack of Financing Arrangement: There are many people who are
interested in entrepreneurship but lack of sufficient capital and money
they can not step forward. Lack of sufficient fund arrangement is
another important obstacle for entrepreneurship development.

e Lack of Training: Being an entrepreneur though is a by born quality,
it is possible to make entrepreneur through proper training as well. But,
in our country there is lack of training institutions for entrepreneurship
development.

e Political Instability: Political instability is a major obstacle for the
economic development and growth of any country. Because of political
instability, law and order situation in the country deteriorates and
business activities get obstructed. As a result, potential entrepreneurs
mislay their interest for doing something new.

Ways to Overcome the Obstacles of Entrepreneurship Development
in Bangladesh
In Bangladesh obstacles prevailing against development of business
entrepreneurship can be removed by adopting the following steps:
e Effective and Realistic plans to be taken on
e Huge training activities to be implemented
S e Massive campaign to be arranged all over the country

24 Business Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneur
e Technical and Vocational education system to be expanded.
e Entrepreneurs are to be provided with investment advice.
e Supply of required capital to be arranged.
e Business Entrepreneurship subject is to be included in the secondary
and higher secondary level in a substantial manner.
e Political stability needs to be ensured
If the above noted issues are ensured with certainty, in that case, hopefully the
door of entrepreneurship development will open to a significant level.
EXERCISE
Multiple Choice Question
1. Which one of the following is not a quality of a business entrepreneur?
a. Confidence b. Innovativeness
c. Capability of arranging capital d. Mentality of avoiding Risk
2. The young generation can be made interested for business entrepreneurship-
i. Through expanding technical and Vocational education
ii. Huge campaign in the mass media
iii. Introducing this as a mandatory course
Which one of the following is correct-?
a.i& ii b. 1 & iti
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
Give answer to the question No. 3 & 4 after reading the following
paragraph:
Mr. Enayet took training on fish cultivation from the local Youth Training
Center. He decided to start fish cultivation with his brother, in their family
owned pond. But, some of their friends wanted to make them disinterested by
telling them about the risk associated with it. They didn't pay any heed to it and
they moved on with their plan.
3. What can you call Enayet’s Fish Cultivation steps?
a. Entrepreneurship b. Business Entrepreneurship -
c. Business d. Hobby s

Business Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneur 25
4. What quality of an entrepreneur is shown by Enayet in not listening to
his friends about the risk?
a. Patience b. Courage
c. Generosity d. Mentality to take challenges
Creative question
1. Mr. Mehdad and Mr. Nuhash, two friends returned home after staying abroad
for ten years. They are not willing to go back. Mehdad's area is famous for
making pressed and puffed rice. For this reason, Mehdad united the efficient
workers of his village and decided to make pressed and puffed rice in a large
scale. For this, the workers also become solvent along with Mehdad. On the
other hand, Nuhash established a Library and Museum in his house to keep the
tradition of his village. The villagers are very happy with their activities.
a. Matsusita Company is from which country?
b. What do you understand by Business Entrepreneurship? Explain.
c. Establishing library and Museum in Nuhash’s village is what type of
concept? Explain.
d. “Mehdad’s initiative can be pursued by others” — Evaluate this statement.
2. Kajol likes drawing from the very boyhood. He used to draw and write on
banner for various occasions in school. The teachers and his friends praise him
for his flawless and attractive works. After the exam, Kajol makes some poster
and banner for an NGO. He gets some money for this in return. But, Kajol could
not take his activities to a larger scale because of some problems.
a. How do you explain Entrepreneurship?
b. What is the difference between Entrepreneurship and Business
Entrepreneurship?
c. What quality do you indentify in the character Kajol? Explain.
d. A large number of Entrepreneurs can be developed in the country
through motivating entrepreneurs like Kajol. Evaluate this in your own words.
Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-4

CHAPTER THREE
Self-employment
Bangladesh is a developing country. According to Population Census and House
Counting - 2011, estimated population of the country on 16th July, 2012 is 15
crore 25 lac 18 thousand 15. 80% of this total population lives in village. As per
Economic Review 2011, contribution of agriculture in the economy is 20%,
Industrial Sector contributes 30% and service sector contributes 50%. But, the
unemployment problem in the country is increasing day bay day because of high
birth rate, under developed economy and less employment opportunity in
comparison to high demand. Bureau of Statistics Report 2010 states that
Bangladesh has 26 lac unemployed people. Number of total eligible worker in
the country is 5 crore 67 lac. This large number of work eligible unemployed
population can not be engaged in salaried job. Self-employment is necessary. We
will learn about the various nature of Self-employment in this chapter.
hay P A at ES ete,
Tas meh “Sas -
my = . \ 5
No Jit e i
om re ! ss ,
* ¢ ‘re ‘A me
a =~
After completing this chapter, we shall be able to
e Explain the concept of Self-employment
e Explain the relation between Self-employment and entrepreneurship
e Explain the necessity of training for Self-employment
e Select the suitable and profitable sectors for Self-employment considering
the socio economic condition of Bangladesh.
e Describe the activities and importance of training institutions for
Self- employment. =
e Describe the ways for motivating Self-employment s

Self-employment 27
Concept of Self-employment
ees) SM

Hafizur of Bhandaria-an example of defeating poverty through cultivation of bitter gourd.
After completing SSC, Mr. Hafizur Rahman started working in a ship. Low
grade job but involves a lot of hard work. But, wage is very poor. He could
hardly maintain his family. He was forced to resign from his job in the ship and
come back to his village. He failed to join a pharmaceutical company after trying
hard. He could not manage it since he did not have the BA pass certificate. But,
industrious Hafizur was not demoralized. He started to think about doing
something on the bare land beside his house. Having advice from the Upazila
Agricultural Officer, he started growing Bitter Gourd (Korola) in that bare land.
Now, he grows seven mound of Bitter Gourd per week. He is now solvent in
maintaining a family of six members from the income from selling Bitter Gourd.
Educated farmer Hafizur of village Matibhanga of Bhandaria Upazila at Pirojpur
District has removed unemployment and has become self sufficient by growing
Bitter Gourd and other vegetables. He has won against poverty.
Hafizur informed that he has cultivated vegetables in two acres of land. He has
grown Hybrid Tia type of Bitter Gourd in half of this land. In rest of the land he
has grown Indian Spinach (Pui Shak), String bean (Borboti), Wax Gourd
(Kumra), Brinjal (Begoon), Snake Gourd (Chichinga), and Okra (Dherosh). He
sells the Bitter Gourd to the local wholesaler at a rate of Taka 30 per kg.
Wholesalers come to his land to buy the Bitter Gourd. He is hopeful to earn
nearly Taka three lac this year. But, he spent fifty five thousand taka for growing
this Bitter Gourd. Since, Hafizur is a motivated farmer, he has become
successful. Mr. Narayan Chandra Majumder from the agricultural office says in
this regard that many people have been motivated to grow vegetables seeing the

e success of Hafizur. This is a matter of inspiration for any unemployed youth.

~)

N

28 Business Entrepreneurship
The way Mr. Hafizur Rahman has managed to be employed by himself is called
Self-employment. Now, we can understand that Self-employment is the process
of earning a living by self effort through using own capital or borrowed fund,
own thinking, knowledge, intelligence and efficiency and taking minimum risk.
Self-employment is a popular profession among various techniques for earning
a living. Various retailing, repairing, poultry farming, AP culture etc are included
in Self-employment
Relationship between business entrepreneur and Self-employment is very close.
In case of Self-employment, an individual starts working after thinking about the
job. A Self-employed person becomes an entrepreneur, when he thinks about the
employment of other people in the society and steps forward against risk and
forms an organization. In that case all the entrepreneurs can be called
Self-employed but all the Self-employed persons are not entrepreneur.

Activity 1: Find out ten Self employing profession near your school

and house
ER
Se
Es
a
a
Ee
Necessity of Self-employment
Sanjida Islam from Noakhali failed to mange a job after completing her honors
degree from the local college. After remaining unemployed for a period, she
decided to undertake training on horticulture from the local Youth Development
Office. After completion of the training she grew flower in one acre of land.
During the first season she earned fifty thousand taka. She became severely
interested gaining the profit. Then, she went to Dhaka to join a daylong
workshop on growing flower and visited a Flower Fair (Pushpo Mela). She

N

Self-employment 29
collected seeds of various local and foreign flowers and earned a lot of money
from growing them. Because of hard work and proper utilization of opportunity
her business grew very large within five years. Recently, she received the Best
Women Entrepreneur Award from her district. While receiving the award she
spoke about the following necessities of Self-employment to the present mass:

e Employment can be divided into three groups - Wages or Salary based
Self-employment and Business.

e Public and private organizations are the main source for employment.

e The number of work eligible people increases. with increase of
population.Employment opportunity does not increase comparing to
the rate of demand for employment.

e Inother profession earning opportunity is limited. But, in case of Self-
employment, earning at the beginning is low and uncertain and
possibility of earning afterwards in this profession is unlimited.

e At present, opportunity for self-employment has vastly increased.
Social status for self employed people has increased comparing to the
previous time.

e The major capital for self employment is self efficiency. It is
comparatively easier to arrange capital required for raw materials and
machineries.

e Self-employment is an independent profession. Since, one can do this
from ones own home and land, extra cost can be avoided.

e The youth of the country engaged in self-employment can contribute
to the development of the country rather engaging in anti social
works.

e Wages in Bangladesh is very poor because of large population. More
over, in our country seasonal unemployment problem is acute. To
solve such problems, self-employment can contribute significantly.

e Through self employment migration to towns can be controlled and
development of village society and economy can be ensured.

e The self employment mentality motivates the youth for patriotism and
encourages willful works.

= e Age is never a burden for self employment. A person of any age can
8 earn through self employment as per his/her efficiency level.

30 Business Entrepreneurship
What are the significance of self-employment you have realized from the speech
of Sanjida Islam? More over, write down five important reasons for self-
employment that you think are important : Acitivity-2
a
a
a
a
FE
Suitable and Profitable Areas of Self-employment in Socio-
economic Context of Bangladesh
It is possible to earn a respectful living being engaged in any small business
from the motivation of self-employment of ownership and own management,
similarly contribution can be made to the economic development of the country.
One can earn by producing and selling goods or providing services that have
demand. We have to keep in mind always to earn respectfully from our limited
resources. Analyzing all these, we can identify several suitable and profitable
areas for self-employment.
Suitable and profitable areas for self-employment:

e Hand loom (weaving) e Live Stock and Poultry Farm

e Mat Making e Making things from Cane

e Pottery e Making Utensils of Glass

e Making goods of Bamboo e Ring (for well) Making

e Growing Salt e Making things of Copper &

e Tailoring Titantum

e Making Clothes e Making Fancy goods of Jute

e Making Nets to catch fish ¢ Making T shirt

e Carpentry e Making Leather Goods

e Making Furniture of Steel e Making Goods from Shell

e Plate Making from Clay e Bakery

e Blacksmiths e Making Flour

e Seri Culture e Making Oil for Cooking =

8

Self-employment 31

e Boat Making e Producing Food Products

e Drying Fish e Making Knitting Goods

e Making Flour from Potato e Embroidery

e Making Mat from Jute e Yarning

© Making Utensils e Making Toys of woods

e Making Banana Chips e Printing & Publishing

© Making Potato Chips e Making Plastic Goods

e Repairing Bi-cycle e Making things from Bee wax

e Making Toys ° Jewelry

e Making Rubber Goods and Ball| ° Snacks Making

¢ Cultivating Rubber e Making Cake (Pitha)

e Butter Making e Making Cornflakes

Pen (Ball point) Making e Making Toothpick from Bamboo

© Processing of Hay & Woods

« Repering Dizitrelis e Making Ice Cream Spoon

: . e Pad Thresher
° Making Bicycles e Making Agricultural Instruments
e Growing Vegetables = Milking Thaw Bene
e Photostat Business
Activity-3: Select any ten of the above mentioned areas
chronologically according to your choice:
a ee Ce
ee
Ea
a
SE
Ss

32 Business Entrepreneurship
Process of aiming before self-employed profession
Before selecting self-employment as a profession, one should properly specify
his/her goal. To set the objectives, following question is necessary to be
answered:
What is your long term goal? How do you want to achieve this?
In what specific date you want to achieve this?
What is your short term goal?
Why is short term goal important?
Have you taken any steps to achieve that?
What obstacles can rise against achieving the goal?
How to overcome those obstacles?
What is your plan to solve problems?
What are the helps/supports necessary to solve the problem?
Whom you will select as the helper?
The correct goal can be identified within finding the answer of the questions.
Factors to be Considered for Selecting Suitable Field for Self-employment
The correct goal can be identified within finding the answer of the questions.
Factors to be Considered for Selecting Suitable Field for Self-employment The
success or failure of a self-employed business depends largely on selecting a
suitable field for self-employment. Thus, selecting the suitable field for
self-employment, the following issues need to be considered:
e Selecting the Right Goods
Selecting the appropriate goods for business is the pre-requisites for getting
success. Before selecting the product, demand and acceptability of the
product in the market should be properly justified.
¢ Initial Capital Utilizing
To run the business successfully, it is necessary to arrange sufficient fixed
and working capital. Utilizing the maximum capacity of the business is
not possible if one fails to assess and arrange necessary capital. For lack of
working capital many industry in Bangladesh can not run to their
maximum capacity.
ho}
Ss
NX

Self-employment 33
e Assessing the Demand for Goods
The perfect measurement of demand for goods through market research and
other techniques is one of the major preconditions for success of business.
Besides, market size and marketing strategics must be assessed beforehand.
e Experience and Education
The past experience in business and proper education regarding
management is helpful towards success of business. Research shows that in
most of the cases the reason for failure in business is having no prior
experience or knowledge about management strategies.
e Awareness about Self Weakness
Troubles in business can be avoided if the entrepreneur is alert and
aware of his/her strength and weakness.
e Joint Effort
Family support and joint effort is a significant element to achieve
success in business. Joint ventures are more successful.
e Selecting Right Worker
The worker to be employed in business must be qualified and efficient in
their own job. So, in case of recruiting worker, their academic qualification,
professional efficiency, trust worthiness must be justified on the ‘basis of a
yardstick. There should be an arrangement for training for the employed
workers. The employee should not be recruited for emotional reasons.
e Selecting the Place of Business
To select the place for a business, raw materials availability, marketing
opportunity, infrastructural facility etc. should be considered specially.
e Uses of Right Technology
The use of right technology in the production process and combination of
local and imported technology increases the possibility of success. The
entrepreneurs should provide special emphasis on this before starting a
business.
e To be Aware of the Socio-economic and Political Condition of
the Country
The economic condition influences the success of a business. Small
entrepreneurs have to assess the existing socio-economic condition of the
country and have to take business decision on the basis of the assessment
continuously. More over, entrepreneur should always be aware of the
influencing elements of business to become successful in business.
Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-5

34 Business Entrepreneurship
e To Find Ways to Face Business Risk
Business can be protected from uncertain risk if the business related risk
is assessed before hand. Thus, assessing the business risk with a suitable
method and face those risk with a predefined way, are the pre-condition
for success in business.
e Take Lessons from Failure
One should not get frustrated for failure in a business rather he/she must
analyze the reasons meticulously and start in a new way. The success of
business lies within learning from the previous business failure and
execution of the learning.
e Proper Business Planning
Proper business planning is another important issue to be successful in
business. Planning is thinking and specification of how, what and when
to do things before starting the business. Planning is the guiding paper
for operating the business. The richer the planning the more will be the
possibility of success in business.
Activity-4: Now, try to match with your selection of self-employment
areas and the above mentioned issues. Considering these issues,
select any five from your selected ten areas and give reasons:
Name of the Area Reasons for Selection
Es
es
BP
Es
SP
Ways to Motivate for Self-employment
For self-employment it is necessary to have personal efficiency and strong
willingness to earn a living on the basis of a self dependent profession. Self
employment is the only alternative since job opportunity is limited and
employments can not be generated through private and public initiative. in huge
number concept of self-employment is not clear and sufficient to the youth of 2%
this country. On the other hand, we think job is the only way of earning a living 8

Self-employment 35
because of our social value and bookish knowledge. As a result, the number of
both educated and illiterate unemployed people is increasing day by day. To
motivate the youth and the future generation for self-employment necessary
steps has to taken, such as-
e Students should be taught that no work is small or disrespectful
e Students to be lectured on the biography of successful self-employed
persons of the locality.
e List of suitable areas for self-employment to be advertized over schools
and union porished.
e The students who are dropped out or can not come to school regularly,
they should be trained in a suitable area and arrangement needs be made
for lending money to them.
e Sufficient vocational, technical and work oriented subject needs to be
included in the secondary and higher secondary level.
e Youth development bank and education bank needs to be established
for lending money to unemployed people.
e Exstudents of the school who are now successful entrepreneur and
business man, they should be invited for giving reception on their success.
Necessity of Training in Self-employment
Training is necessary for completing a special job and enhancement of
knowledge and efficiency. Training increases work efficiency and competency.
Training should be arranged in small organization to increase the efficiency level
of the worker like the large organization. It is not necessary to recruit from
outside if the existing workers have proper training. Training is a continuous and
regular effort to enhance the knowledge and efficiency of workers so that their
competency increases gradually and the organization is benefited Training
should be arranged for a worker before assigning him/her to any job. Training is
necessary for old and new worker of the organization including the entrepreneur.
Necessity of training is explained below:
e Introduction to Nature of work and Environment
It is necessary for the newly appointed staffs to be introduced with the
working environment and nature of work of the organization. Training
process helps the new workers to get introduced with the work environ-
20 ment.
&

36 Business Entrepreneurship
e Removes the lacking of Efficient and Experienced Worker
It is not possible for the organization to recruit experienced and educated
worker all the time. For this reason, after recruitment this necessity is
fulfilled by training the new workers.
e Increase the Efficiency of the Worker
Training increases the work efficiency of the worker. For this, trammg is
necessary for the new worker as well as old workers in the organization.In
this way demand of Skilled and experienced workers can be met in the
organisations.
e Proper Utilization of Resources
Training develops the efficiency of the entrepreneur and workers. As a
result better use of machineries, furniture and fixtures and other assets are
possible by the entrepreneur and workers.
e Enhancement of Moral Strength
Training enhances the morality of the entrepreneur and workers. As a
result moral strength increases. Training brings cooperation and
coordination among workers. For this, activities of the organization run
with optimum level of pace.
e Minimize Wastage and Accident
Trained worker can perform any job with higher efficiency and low cost.
As a result wastage is reduced in the working process in the organization.
Training gives the worker knowledge of security related various
techniques and it helps to avoid accidents of using machineries and other
factors.
At last, it can be said that the necessity for training is immense for the
development of work through efficiency and competency of the worker to
maintain the activities of the organization properly. Without proper training,
satisfactory work can not be expected from Staffs/worker, whether old or new.
So, making the worker efficient is a must for doing their job for an organization.
Training Institutes for Helping Self-employment
Society or country with large number of entrepreneur is more developed. In
Bangladesh, there are some institutions for supporting self-employment. These
institutions create opportunity of earning for the destitute people through %
motivating landless and ‘poor to self-employment, providing training for &

Self-employment 37
efficiency enhancement, arranging micro credit to set up small business, and
monitoring of uses of the borrowed fund etc. Among the institutions Bangladesh
Institute of Bank Management, Ministry of Women Affairs, Bangladesh Rural
Development Board, Employment Generation Project of Rural Women, Youth
Training Center, Notrams etc. are mentionable. The activities of these
organizations are mentioned below:
1. Bangladesh Institute of Management (BIM)
Bangladesh Institute of Management is an independent organization under
Ministry of Industry. This institution gives training on self-employment and
entrepreneurship development in exchange of specific fees. The major
programs include Process of Setting up Small Industry and Management,
Establishing New Industry, Development of Women Entrepreneur etc.
2. Ministry of Women Affairs
Ministry of women Affairs mainly undertakes various acnvities for the
development of women. Mainly, the major objective of this institution is to
generate employment for the destitute, uneducated and half educated village
women. It provides informal training on technical and technological issues
towards the motivated women for the development of their technical
efficiency.
3. Bangladesh Rural Development Board
Bangladesh Rural Development Board (BRDB) provides vocational training
to the impoverished village people for self-employment, so that they can
select a profession independently to eam a living. The activities of BRDB
cover all the districts and Upazillas.
a =~". | Sie
| = 55
ES A Self-dependent Woman by availing loan from BRDB
nN

38 Business Entrepreneurship

4. Employment Generation Project of Rural Women

Through this project, the rural women are provided with training and loan is

extended to the trained women. Only the trained are eligible to avail the loan facility.

5. Youth Training Center

Youth Training Center is operated by the Ministry of Youth & Sports. It has

center at every Thana of the country. From these centers training on various

professions are provided to the unemployed youths, Such as establishing poultry

farm, Fish Cultivation, Vegetable Gardening, Nursery, Sewing, Cottage

Industry, Computer Operation etc. The trainees can enjoy the opportunity of

self-employment after getting training in these

sectors.

5. NOTRAMS lex

Notrams is an institution operated cA Jie ‘ é

by the Ministry of Education. The ee fa ae

main job of this institution is to ey ae 4 Os: <P

provide training on computer a9 path; -

programming and computer

operation. A number of young P|) me Ags %,

boys and girls have become self- *

employed after having trained 3

from this institution. b* ‘

6. NGO’S: A old woman engage in self-employment

At present different NGO’S in the country are providing training to the unemployed

youth about life and life skills.

For example : BRAC, Ahsania Missiox, ASHA etc.

At last we can say that the

institutions discussed above are

playing a helpful role for creating self-employment through various training

activities. The result of their activities is developing the economy of the country.
&
§

Self-employment 39
EXERCISE
Multiple Choice Question (MCQ)
1. Total number of unemployed people in Bangladesh as per report of
Bangladesh Statistical Bureau -2010?
a. Six Lac b. Sixteen Lac
c. Twenty Six Lac d. Thirty Six Lac
2. In Selecting suitable area for self-employment it is needed to consider -
i. Right Product
ii. Certainty of Profit
iii. Demand for Goods
Which one of the following is correct-?
a.i&ii b.i & iii
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
Give answer to the question No. 3 & 4 after reading the following
paragraph:
SSC pass Shikha is expert in Computer. She teaches computer to some of the
girls at her house. Day by day, number of her students is increasing. She is will-
ing to have higher/better training on computer so that she can take this area as
self-employment.
3. From which of the organization Shikha can take training?
a. BIRDB b. BIM
c. BIBM d. Notrams
4. Why it is logical to select the mentioned work of Shikha as a way of
self- employment by her in future?
a. Social Status is good b. Market Demand is good
c. Request from the students d. Expertise in Computer
3
8

40 Business Entrepreneurship
Creative question
1. Oishee, Sadi and Sarni; three friends have completed B.Com recently. They
were discussing about their future planning. Oishee and Sadi is planning to get
admitted in M.Com. Sarni can not make a final decision yet. Because, his father
wants him to go to any country of Middle East. But, meritorious Sarni wants to
do something staying in the country. He took a two months training on poultry
farming. It strengthens his mentality. He set up a poultry farm in his house with
the money for abroad. He is now self dependent utilizing the knowledge he
gained from the training.

a. What is the contribution of Agricultural sector in to the national economy?

b. Why unemployment problem in Bangladesh is increasing? Explain.

c. Establishing poultry farm by Sami is included in what type of work? Explain.

d. What quality of Sami do you think has influenced him most to become
self dependent — Explain this statement.

2.School Teacher of Rangamati Mrs. Mamapru Manna gave the idea about the

huge demand and potentiality of clothes made by handloom to local tanti Marina

Manna. Considering the vast demand, Marina started to make Thami -a cloth for

the hilly girls and prospered rapidly by selling them. Because of Marina, several

girls became employed. She has been declared the Best Women Entrepreneur for
the last three years in her district.

a. What is the percentage of the boys and girls of the total eligible work force of
the country?

b. Describe one feature of Self-employment?

c. Which matter played the role for rapid prosperity of Marina? Explain.

d. ‘Following the advice of Mampru Marma has brought so much
acknowledgement in Marina Marma’s life.’ Explain the line in your own
words.

=
8

CHAPTER FOUR
Business Based on Ownership
We have already learned that business is the combination of all the activities
from manufacturing of various goods and services, distribution and all the
associated economic activities in a legitimate way. Various demand aspects of
the consumers, ownership, mentality of the businessmen, size and features are
the reason for formation of different types of business. In this chapter, we shall
know about various types of business organization and their aspects on the basis
of ownership. 3 i "Fy
ia af |
— a = ) tae 4
pe rE
— r x2} a
baal py ef
Shale 4 ii :
After completing this chapter, we will be able to
e Describe different types and legitimate features of business
e Explain the definition, features, and advantages and disadvantages of
sole proprietorship firm
e Explain the suitable area for sole proprietorship business and reasons for
the popularity of sole proprietorship business
e Describe the idea, features, and advantages and disadvantages of
partnership firm
e Explain the formation process of partnership firm
e Explain the contents of the deed of partnership agreement
e Explain the registration of a partnership firm and its advantages.
e Talk about different types of partnership.
e Explain the reasons for dissolution of partnership business
e Describe the definition, features, Kinds advantages and disadvantages of
a joint stock company
e Describe the formation process of joint stock company
e Differentiate between public and private limited company
e Describe the idea and features of cooperative society.
e Explain the formation and principles of a cooperative society
Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-6

42 Business Entrepreneurship
e Describe the importance of cooperative society in the light of the
socioeconomic aspect of Bangladesh.
e Give example of the idea of state run business and its features.
e Explain the Concepts and features of state enterprise.
Different Types of Business on the Basis of Ownership
Different types of business have been formed on the basis of ownership and of
various features to meet up different demands of the people over the decades.
Though, there is similarity in the objective of earning profit, there are some
differences on the basis of nature, feature, area, size and activity among various
types of business organization. On the basis of ownership business can be
classified as the following categaries:
1) Sole Proprietorship Business
2) Partnership Business
3) Joint Stock Company
4) Cooperative Society
5) State Enterprises
Concept of Sole Proprietorship Business
Sole proprietorship is the business formed, operated and controlled by single
person. Business in this world started at first on sole ownership. For this reason,
this is called the most ancient business firm. Considering the present scenario,
we can say that when a single person out of his own responsibility arranges
capital and forms and run business with the objective to make profit and singly
shoulders the profit or loss of the company is called a Sole Proprietorship
Business. Formation of sole proprietorship business is very easy. Any individual
can start this type of business with small sum of money of his/her own initiative.
Generally, size of this sort of company is small. But, the owner can employ more
than one individual and engage more capital if necessary. There is not so much
limitations for sole proprietorship business under the law. Any body can start the
business at any place whether it is in the village market, hat-bazar, road side or
in one's own house. But, in cities and towns the entrepreneur has to collect trade
license before starting business. Most of the business organization in our
country is formed as sole proprietorship. Not only this, 80% of the business is
based on sole proprietorship in Europe and America. Generally, in our country,
the groceries, tea stall, vegetable shop and most of the retail shop are formed as
sole proprietorship firm. =
N

Business Based on Ownership 43
Characteristics of Sole Proprietorship Business

Sole Proprietorship Business is such type of business where entrepreneur,
owner, operator and supplier of fund is the same person and he/she singly bears
the risk, liabilities, profit and loss of the business/company. The characteristics
of sole proprietorship firm are mentioned below:

e The owner is a single person in sole proprietorship farm who arranges to
supply the capital, operates the business and bears the risk.

e Formation of this kind of business is very easy. Since, there is no legal
complexity, any one can form this if he/she wants.

e This sort of business can be formed with less capital. The owner himself
supplies the capital. Generally, own savings, if necessary he/she can
borrow form friends, relatives and Banks and operate business.

e In most of the cases, sole proprietorship is of small size. Because of less
capital and ownership of a single person, the size of the business is small.

e Ina sole proprietorship firm, the owner has to bear all the risk of the
business.

e Sole proprietorship firm does not have a legal entity. Owner and the
business are same.

e The owner bears all the responsibilities in this business. Thus, his liability
is unlimited. If necessary, one may need to sell personal property to meet
up the business liability.

e Because of the single ownership of the whole business, the owner enjoys
the whole share of profit. On the other hand, he has to bear all the loss
singly.

e The existence of sole proprietorship business depends upon the
willingness of the owner. Because, to run the business or to close the
business solely depends upon the willingness of the owner.

Activity-1: Identify the advantages and disadvantages of sole proprietorship
business analyzing its characteristics
Advantages of sole proprietorship Disadvantages of sole proprietorship
business business
S

44 Business Entrepreneurship
Suitable Areas of Sole Proprietorship Business

Sole proprietorship business has been acknowledged amongthe under
developed, developing and developed countries of the world as the most ancient
form of business. Though it is the oldest business, it is still popular and has
survived the competition with large scale businesses. Sole proprietorship
business is popular to all because of the some its features and advantages.
Suitable areas of sole proprietorship business are depicted below:

1. There are many people who want to start a business but can not do so
because of not having sufficient fund in hand. Sole proprietorship is suitable
for the thousands of people interested in self-employment. Such as tea stall,
small food shop, cottage industry, pottery shop etc.

2. There are some businesses which do not require much capital. Those
businesses are considered more appropriate for sole proprietorship Like
Betel Shop, Vegetable Shop.

3. The business having very low risk is suitable for sole proprietorship.
Because, low income people want to avoid risk, thus they like this sort of
business. Such as Rice shop, pharmacy etc.

4. There are some businesses which provide goods and services with demands
stipulated to a particular region or particular group of customer. Sole
proprietorship business is more suitable for that kind of business. Like
library in front of school, restaurant in front of a industrial factory.

5. Sole proprietorship business is formed for the business of perishable goods
such as fruits, vegetables, fish, meat etc.

6. Profession based business like Doctors, Architecture and lawyers and direct
service based business like Laundry, Saloon, Beauty Parlor, etc. are formed
as sole proprietorship business.

7. There are some business which depend on the changed taste, interest and
fashion of the customer. Sole proprietorship business is more suitable for
this kind of business. Such as tailoring.

8. Sole proprietorship business is suitable for business of goods and services
involved with individual efficiency, art and fame. Such as painting,
photography, jewelary, furniture and sweet shop.

9. Sole proprietorship business is also suitable for agro based products. Such
as trading of paddy, potato and other raw materials. x

N

Business Based on Ownership 45
10. For publication of books, papers and news papers at local and national
level, business of sole proprietorship is more suitable
From the above analysis it is understood that sole proprietorship business can be
started at any time and at any place with individual initiative, independent
mentality and endowment of less capital and labor. This business is free from
legal complexity and risk is also a lesser amount. On the other hand, sole
proprietorship business can supply with goods and services from staying very
close to the consumers. As a result, though the business is the oldest one, it has
vast scope and popularity. In context of Bangladesh, considering the economic,
social, political and cultural condition, sole proprietorship business is the most
appropriate type of business. For which eighty percent of the business in
Bangladesh is formed based on sole proprietorship. So, it is necessary to make
the process of getting loan and other government assistance easier to eliminate
the prevailing unemployment in the country and creation of new job opportunity
by motivating the youth of the society to form sole proprietorship business.
Activity 2: Considering the Characteristics, advantages and suitability of
sole proprietorship business, find out the reasons for its popularity
Concept of Partnership Business
Because of all the stipulations of less capital, unlimited liability and narrow
scope of sole proprietorship business, despite of being the oldest and popular
business form it became necessary to establish business enterprises on
partnership basis with widening scope and reducing risk. For this, more than one
individual come together combine their capital and capacity and formed a new
type of business which is called partnership business. Mainly, partnership
business evolved to eliminate the deficiency of sole proprietorship business.
But, this business also has some problems. Dispute and man trust may rise
% among partners specially, for distribution of profit, decision making, division of
§ tasks and responsibilities, determining partners’ relations to each other. As a

46 Business Entrepreneurship
result, deed of partnership and partnership act had to be introduced. In
Bangladesh, partnership business is operated under the Partnership Act 1932.
Generally, when more than one individual willingly comes together to form
business on the basis of partnership deed is called partnership business. As per
Partnership Act 1932, 'more than one individual' means minimum two and
maximum twenty partners. If the partnership is for banking business, then
maximum number of partners should not be more than ten. According to the
Partnership Act 1932 in Bangladesh, Partnership business is the relation
between individuals based on a deed with a view to share profit of a business
operated by all or by one on behalf of all. Those who build this type of relation
is called "partner" and altogether their business is called partnership business.
Formation of Partnership Business

We have known that, Partnership business is one type of business with a
relationship between individuals based on a agreement where the business is
operated by all or by one on behalf of all. Formation of partnership business is
very easy like sole proprietorship business. There is no legal complexity in its
formation. At least two eligible persons entering into contract can start the
business. But there is no hard and fast rules that the agreement is to be written.
The existing partnership law of 1932 in Bangladesh did not make agreement and
registration mandatory. So, the business can be operated by oral agreement. But
to avoid legal procedures, contradiction, unreliability and mistrust among the
partners, the agreement needs to be written and registered. For this reason, the
agreement is treated as the main basis of partnership business. It is necessary to
collect a trade license from city corporation or municipality to start a partnership
business within existing rules of our country.
Characteristics of Partnership Business
In the present context, partnership business is as old as the sole proprietorship
business. But, partnership business has been evolved to eliminate some
limitations of sole proprietorship business. Though, it has some similarities with
sole proprietorship business in nature, partnership business has some
characteristics which has made it different from sole proprietorship and other
form of joint ownership business. The characteristics of partnership business are
analyzed below:

2

S

Business Based on Ownership 47
1. Formation of Partnership Business is very easy since there is no legal
complexity. More than one individual eligible to enter into contract can start
the business with a oral or written agreement. More than one individual
means minimum two and maximum twenty people. For banking business

the maximum number of member is ten.

2. The agreement between the partners works as the basis for the partnership
business. This business is formed, operated and controlled on the basis of
relation based on agreement. The agreement can either be oral or written,
registered or umegistered.

3. The partners in the business supply their fund according to the agreement.
Profit of business is also distributed according to the agreement. Profit is
distributed equally if there is no other indication in the agreement. Some
body may even become partner without any investment if it is mentioned in
the agreement. But, the liabilities of the partners are unlimited by jointly and
severely. This means, if the asset of the company is not sufficient to meet up
a particular liability then the personal property of the partners shall be liable
for this. If any partner becomes bankrupt, then other partners shall be liable
to bear his portion of liability.

4. The business is formed on the basis of reliability and trust on each other and
the success of the business is also dependent on this. On the other hand,
partnership business gets dissolved, if there is any unreliability, mistrust and
argument among the partners.

5. Registration of partnership firm is not mandatory. But, the registered
company enjoys some facility over the umegistered companies.
Registration does not make it a legal entity. So, the business can not be run
on its own name. It is considered that all the business transactions have been
made personally on behalf of the partners. The existence of this business
depends upon the willingness of partners since it has no legal entity.

business; find out advantages and disadvantages

&

48 Business Entrepreneurship
Deed of Partnership Business
Partnership Business is formed with an agreement between two or more people.
The agreement can be oral. Or the agreement can be written and registered. It is
mandatory to have an agreement to start a partnership business, it does not
matter whether the agreement is oral, written, registered or unregistered. For this
reason agreement is treated as the main basis for partnership business. As per
statement from Partnership Act -1932, ‘Partnership relation is build from
agreement, not from statuses. Written agreement is called Partnership Deed.
Partnership deed is such evidence that describes the objective of the business,
operational guideline, position of each partner, responsibilities, activities and
right and specific method to solve potential problem in future. The agreement is
to be signed by all the partners. This is to be kept in mind that business
conducted to make and distribute profit shall not be considered as partnership
business if there is no such agreement. If the children of a deceased person
become the heir and they operate the business and share the profit among them,
then it will not be a partnership business since there is no agreement with the
children.
Contents of the Deed of Partnership Business
Deed of agreement is treated as the guideline of partnership business. Various
important issues are incorporated in the deed to avoid the contradiction among
partners and let alone complexities in operational procedure of the business.
Generally the following issues are stated in the deed of agreement:

1. Name and address of the partnership business.

2. Nature, objective and scope of business

3. Expiration or validity of the business

4. Name, address and profession of the partners,

5. Total capital of the firm

6. Capital to be paid by each partner and payment method

7. Rules to run the business

8. Introduction of the partners who will directly run the business

9. Profit and Loss distribution method

10.Responsibilities, power and rights of the partners

11.Name of the bank, Address and nature of account to be opened. S

N

Business Based on Ownership 49
12.Name of the partners to operate the Bank account
13.Guideline to include new partner and exclusion of existing partner.
14.Estimation, reservation and repayment method for share in case of death
of a partner
15.Retirement and dismissal process of partner
16.Solution method for future contradiction
17.Method of dissolution of partnership
Registration of partnership Business
Registration of partnership business refers to enlistment of the name of company
with the government appointed office of the registrar. Registration of partnership
business in Bangladesh is not mandatory as per Partnership Act of 1932. But the
registered companies enjoy some additional benefits over the unregistered
partnership business. In a registered partnership business the partner can sue
against other partner for his rights as per partnership deed which is not possible
in case of an unregistered firm. Unregistered companies can not take any legal
measures against any third party as well for the rights as in the deed of
agreement. On the other hand, if any third party sues any unregistered
partnership firm or against its partners, it can not claim any receivables against
the plaintiff. Besides, unregistered partnership firm can not sue against any third
party to claim taka more than hundred. So it is more logical to register a
partnership firm since it can enjoy the benefit of some additional facility. The
following things are to be attached with the application for registration of a
partnership business:
e Name of the partnership business
e Address of the head office
e Address of the branches (if any)
e Objective of the business
e Date of business commencement
e Expiry or validity of the business
e Partners name, address and profession
e Date of joining as a partner in the business
The registrar will check all the paper submitted along with the application for
registration. If the registrar is satisfied, he will enlist the company and inform
the company in writing. The registration process ends with receipt of the letter.
Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-7

50 Business Entrepreneurship
business
1.
2
3.
4.
Classification of Partners
The partners in a partnership firm can select their role in a business considering
the various conditions of the business, advantages and disadvantages, duties
and responsibilities. The concepts and characteristics of different types of
partners are mentioned below:
of Partners
Ordinary Partner | e Partners invest capital in the business and actively
participate in the operational activities of the business
e Partners have unlimited liabilities
e Equally share the profit and loss as per deed of agreement
e Gets remuneration if mentioned in the agreement
Sleeping Partner | e Partners invest capital into the business
e Share the profit as per agreement
e Does not participate actively in the operational activities
of the firm having rights though.
e Sleeping partner has limited liabilities
e Is not liable to any third party for the activities of the
business
Nominal Partner | e Does not invest capital into the business
e Does not participate in the business operational activities
e Allows to use name/goodwill against profit sharing or in return
of particular amount of money as per deed of agreement.
e Nominal Partners do not have unlimited liabilities like
the ordinary partners
e But, if any body lends money tothe firm considering him as
a partner and is able to prove it, then the partner shall be
equally liable like others. S

Business Based on Ownership 51

Quasi Partner e This type of partner does not withdraw the money invested
as capital and retains in the business as a loan

e In fact, this sort of partners are the creditors to the business

e If, any ordinary partner remains in the business in such a
way without publishing notice, then he/she will be liable to
the third party for the activities of the business.

Limited Partner | e If liability of a partner is limited as per deed of agreement or
if any minor is taken as partner legitimately to facilitate him
with the consent of other partner is called a limited partner.

e The liability of such partner is limited to the amount of
invested capital.

e Does not take part in the business operation

e Any minor person can also be such partner on the basis
of deed of agreement.

Partner _ by e When any person introduces himself as the partner of a

Holding Out business verbally, written or in any other manner though
he is not a partner, he is called partner by holding out.

e If, any body being influenced by his attitude; lends money
to the business, then such partner shall be liable.
Dissolution of Partnership Business
Partnership business is formed for a particular time period or to complete a
specific task. As per Partnership Act 1932, Section 39, dissolution of the
relationship among the partner is the dissolution of the partnership business.
According to the partnership act dissolution of the partnership business can done
be in many ways:
1. Dissolution by mutual consent: According to Section 40 of Partnership
Act, all the partners ef the firm mutually dissolued the business.
2. Forced Dissolution: According to Section 41 of Partnership Act, because
of the following two reasons forced dissolution can happen:
a) All but one or one of the partners become bankrupt or
b) If the business becomes anti legal or illegal for any reason.
3. Eventual Dissolution: According to Section 42 of Partnership Act,
a) If specific time span of the business ends
b) If the specific task for which the business started is finished
- c) In case of death of any partner
Ss d) If any partner is declared bankrupt by the court

52 Business Entrepreneurship

4. Dissolution through Notice: Section 43 of the Partnership Act states

that Partnership business can be dissolued through the notice by any
partner of his desire to quit the business.

5. Dissolution by the Order form the Court: Section 44 of the Partnership
Act states that for any of the following reasons partnership firm can be
dissolved:

a) if any partner becomes insane,
b) Ifa partner becomes incapable forever,
c) If the trust and faith among the partners are affected by the misdeeds of
any partner;
d) If any partner transfers his share to any third party by violating the
terms and condition of the partnership deed.
e) If the business is incurring continuous loss and if it seems impossible to
tun the business without incurring loss.
The court may order for dissolution of a partnership firm for other
logical reasons.
Concept of Joint Stock Companies
The institutional journey of business did not remain stipulated in this world
which started through formation of Sole Proprietorship business. Partnership
firm evolved to remove some limitations especially short of capital and single
operation, and smaller size of sole proprietorship business. But, the partnership
business could not free itself from the limitation of law capital, law, existence;
liability etc. In this way demand of customer and business scope increase rapidly.
As a result, on a legal basis company is formed with more capital and larger in
size which is called joint stock business or company or organization. In fact, the
changes in the production process because of industrial revolution brought vast
changes in the organizational nature and scope of business. Production and
distribution system placed itself in factory coming out from the periphery of
family boundary. As a result, Joint Stock Company was born with more capital,
limited liability, joint management and legal entity and separate identity. It is
mentionable here that Industrial Revolution is the technological changes in
agriculture, factories, and coal mining and transportation system in Europe
during the mid eighteenth and nineteenth century. ES
N

Business Based on Ownership 53

Joint Stock Company is created and operated under the law. The first company

act was passed in Britain in 1844 which was known as "The Joint Stock

Company Act 1844". In the subcontinent of British ruled India first company act

was passed on 1850. In 1913, the Indian company act was again passed. In

independent Bangladesh the company act of 1913 was followed for long time.

The new company act in Bangladesh was introduced in 1994 with lots of

changes and corrections. At present in Bangladesh all the joint stock business is

running under the company act 1994. According to Company Act 1994,

company means-company formed and registered under the law or any existing

company. Actually, company is such an organization which is created under the
law, having separate legal existence, separate legal entity and limited liabilities
for the owner and where several people jointly invest money to earn profit.
—_— = sd
- Stream engines of James Watte :
Memorandum of Industrial Revolution

Features of Joint Stock Company

At present in the era of large scale business, the significance of this type of

business is inexplicable. This type of business possesses some features which

has given it separate status than all other type of business. The features of joint
stock company are described below:

1. Joint Stock Company is legally formed. This business is formed under the
prevailing law of the state. Since, it is formed legally; its formation is
complex and formal. Number of its member is limited by law. In case of
private limited company the number is minimum two and maximum 50 and

0 for public limited company the minimum number is seven and the maximum
 _ is limited by the number of shares.

54 Business Entrepreneurship

2. Joint Stock Business is an enthusiastic organization. Several people will-
ingly come together to form and operate company business. Any member
can leave the business easily through transfer of his share. And any one can
become a member through buying its share.

3. Since, it is legally formed, it has legal personality. Legal personality means
enjoying legal status and rights like a person being a nonperson entity. Com-
pany independently can enter in to contract, do transactions and can take
legal action if necessary. Other party also has the right to get to court against
the company.

4. Since, company is formed legally; its dissolution must be done under formal
legal system. In this way it owns the status of continued existence. The com-
pany does not dissolve with the death of any share holder, bankruptcy or
transfer of share.

5. The company has to use a seal of its own name because of it is a legal
personality. Use of this seal is mandatory for all the operations and papers
and documents of the company.

6. The total capital of the company is divided legally in to several small
portions. Each of the unit is called a share. Company accumulates capital by
selling the share. For this reason, it is called share capital. Any person aged
more than eighteen or any institution can become a member by buying its
shares. Because of more member and the opportunities to collect capital by
selling share, it can arrange huge capital.

7. Management is totally separate from the ownership in company business.
The owners of company business do not take part in the operational activi-
ties directly like the sole proprietorship firm or a partnership firm. Manage-
ment responsibility is mentained by another group of salaried people. The
directors or owners only take part in the policy level of works

8. The liability of the member of the company is limited. It is not unlimited like
the sole proprietorship business or partnership business. Member's liability
is limited by the share value or commitment. Limited by share means a
person shall be liable for the amount of share he/she has purchased. For
example, if a person buys 100 share of Tk.100.00 each; in that case his
liability shall be limited to Tk. 10,000.00. On the other hand, limited by
commitment means the amount of share is committed to be purchased by a
person and he/she will be liable up to his/her commitment x

S
A

Business Based on Ownership 55
9. In operation and management of company business, democratic culture and
values are followed. Share holders elect the board of directors through direct
vote and the business is run by the decisions of the board of directors.
Activity-1: Find out the advantages and disadvantages of Joint Stock
Classification of Joint Stock Company
Various changes of the socio-economic condition of the world society and the
developmental touch influence the business world. As a result, large scale of
business in the form of joint stock companies evolved to surpass the limitations
of sole proprietorship and partnership business. Limited company is well known
among all the business of joint ownership. In Bangladesh, limited companies are
mainly divided in to two categories: a) Private Limited Company; and b) Public
Limited Company
a) Private Limited Company
The company in which numbers of share holder are limited to minimum two
and maximum fifty and where the shares are not easily transferable is called
Private Limited Company. In Company Act 1994 in Bangladesh states that,
"Private Limited company is one which, by its articles, restricts the right of
the members to transfer their shares, limits the number of its members to fifty,
prohibits any invitation to the public to subscribe for any shares in or
debenture of the company' which means only the members can buy the shares.
The size of this type of limited company is usually smaller because of limited
members and capital. According to law, the minimum numbers of member
has to be at least two in this type of company. Gradually, the numbers of
so private limited companies are increasing in Bangladesh.
S
N

56 Business Entrepreneurship
b) Public Limited Company
The company in which minimum numbers of member is seven and maximum
is limited by the number of shares as mentioned in the memorandum of
association, can make invitation for subscription of shares and debentures,
and shares are easily transferable is called a Public Limited Company. Public
Limited Company can increase the number of members of the company by
changing the memorandum of association. As per law this type of company
must have at least three directors.
Activity-2 : Find five differences between Public Limited Company &
Importance of Joint Stock Company
In today's business world, like the sole proprietorship business company joint
ownership company is also very popular. Besides, forming large size of business
it is possible to create employment opportunity for a larger group of people.
Employment does not only eliminate unemployment but also enhances the
standard of living and per capita income. More over, because of unlimited
liability in case of sole proprietorship and partnership business, large scale of
investment in risky venture is not possible which is possible in joint stock
companies. Besides, Joint stock companies are more suitable for high
technology based industry. Because, the large amount of capital required to set
up this type of business which can be procured through selling shares to public
in the public limited company. As a result, involvement in the industrial
development of the country increases. Through Joint Stock Company business
can expand internationally and relationship among the countries is strengthened.
At present many Multi National Companies (MNC's) are running their business
world wide. Bata Shoe Company, Unilver, etc. Multinational Companies are
working in our country,. In this ways, company of one country develops
relationship with another through opening their business branch in that country.
During the last two decades many Joint Stock Companies have been established
in Bangladesh which are contributing in the economic development of the
country and creating employment. &

Business Based on Ownership 57
Make a list of Multi national Identify the importance of Joint

Companies working in Bangladesh Stock Companies for the socio-

connate ten | Soom bce

Process of Formation of a Company

Companies in Bangladesh are formed following some sequential process under

the prevailing Company Act 1994. Formation of a company is done through four

continuous stages. These are:

a. Taking Initiative
At this stage, people interested to form the company come together to take
decision about the probable name of the company, type of the company,
amount of capital, ways to raise fund, address of the company etc. The
entrepreneur fixes the possible name of the company and takes certificates
from the Registrar of Joint Stock Company.

b. Preparation of Documents
At this stage, the entrepreneur of the business prepares two important
documents for the business. One is called Memorandum of Association and
the other one is Memorandum of Articles. Memorandum of Association is
called the main document of limited company. It is also called the main deed,
certificate or constitution of the company. Various important issues like name
of the company, registered address, objective of business, amount of capital,
responsibilities of the share holders, minimum subscription etc. are
incorporated in it. On the other hand, Memorandum of Articles incorporates
all the necessary internal operational procedures of the business.

ce. Collection of Registration
At this stage, for registration of the company, application for registration is
collected but paying by a certain amount of fees.The application form is
submitted to the registrar of the Joint Stock Company along with other
necessary documents. If the registrar is satisfied after receiving the

Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-8

58 Business Entrepreneurship
application fee and all the related documents then he enlists the company in
the register book and gives certificate of registration. Private Limited
company can commence its business after receiving this document, but
Public Limited Company has to wait for the Business Commencement
Certificate from the Registrar to launch the business.

d. Business Commencement
To collect the business commencement certificate for launching business
operation of the public limited company, application to be made to the
registrar along with declaration of minimum subscription of capital by the
directors and Prospectus to issue share to the public with other important
documents. If all the documents are found correct and the registrar is
satisfied, then he provides business commencement certificate to the
company. Public limited company can commence business after receiving
this document.

Activity-4

Prepare a presentation in group on the basis of collected data from inter-net
about the formation,visions,functions, profit, opportunities of empolyment
and social responsi-bilities of a multinational company.

Concept of Cooperative Society

The word ‘cooperative’ refers to work with combined initiative or effort.

Cooperative has evolved to proceed with the inspiration and belief of combined

effort. Because of Industrial Revolution and technology base large scale of

business, the base of capitalism increases, the more the economic discrimination
in the society is amplified. Lower and middle income group of professional and
businessmen start to face economic destitution. Cooperative society starts to
evolve in different countries for emancipation from economic differences and
destitution created by capitalism. At first, Cooperative revolution started in
Western Europe, America and Japan. But, Rochdale Equitable Pioneers Society
established in 1844 at a place named Rochdale located at North England leads is
the pioneer in establishing cooperative society. This is considered the first
cooperative society in the world formed by 28 weavers with 28 pound sterling of
capital. The members of this society were not financially solvent. They were
incapable to buy food and other necessities with their small wages. With the help
of cooperative they collected the regular necessities at a lower cost and used to
sell among the members. S

Business Based on Ownership 59
‘ Pag -
Se * Sees *
jal ee Bir eel he _— = : :
Rochdale Pioneer Equitable Society : First Cooperative organization of the world
Established 1844
They had taken the policy of democratic mentality, trust and honor to each other
and honesty to operate this business. In this way the journey of cooperative
society starts.
In this subcontinent, government took initiative to form cooperative society in
1904. Kolkata Bengal Cooperative Society was established in 1918. The
campaign of cooperative society got huge popularity through establishing
Bangladesh Academy for Rural Development (BARD) at Comilla by renowned
Civil Service Officer Dr. Akhter Hamid Khan in 1959. National Cooperative
Bank started operation in independent Bangladesh in 1972. Afterwards, various
types of cooperative society have been formed in our country. 'Bangladesh Milk
Producers' Cooperative Union Limited' which is known as 'Milk Vita' is another
mentionable cooperative society of the milk producers in Bangladesh. Besides,
many other cooperative society at national level are working in Bangladesh like
‘Fishermen Cooperative Society Limited’, 'Bangladesh Auto Rickshaw Puller
Cooperative Federation Ltd.' 'Comilla Industrial Cooperative Society Ltd.
‘Bangladesh Women Cooperative Society Limited’. According to statistics on
2009, in Bangladesh there are 1,63,408 cooperative society with member of
85,05,038 person. At present all the cooperative society in Bangladesh are
operated on the basis of Cooperative Act 2001 and Cooperative Policy 2004.
e Cooperative business has been acknowledged as a popular business organization
$ in various developing and developed countries including Bangladesh.

60 Business Entrepreneurship

Swifts Prorsce serara” Seas aes

; FIRST DAY COVER noose
eT Sie

Hundred years of Cooperative in Bangladesh (1904-2004)
Characteristics of Cooperative Organization
Generally, several low and middle income group of people with similar
mentality willingly come together to form cooperative society to fulfill their
economic objective. They invest money equitably, operate the organization
democratically, and are agreed to justly bear the risk and share the advantages
and disadvantages of the business. Cooperative Society has some features which
are analyzed below:

1. Generally, lower class and middle class people of similar mentality and
profession willingly forms this type of organization. The objective of the
society is to enhance the socio economic standard of the members in a
legitimate way. The main objective of this business is to gain self depen-
dency, not profit.

2. Cooperative Act 2001 has delineated three types of cooperative business;
these are

a. Primary Cooperative Society which shall have minimum 20 members and
objective is to enhance the socio-economic condition of the members in a
legal way. Maximum number of member is not specified.

b. Central Cooperative Society which will be formed with the 10 primary
cooperative societies with the objective to cooperate and coordinate the
activities of the member society.

c. National cooperative society which will be formed by comprising 10 central
cooperative societies with the objective to cooperate and coordinate the
activities of the member society. 3

AQ

Business Based on Ownership 61
3. Cooperative society is formed under cooperative society Act having a
nonperson and separate identity which has fixed continuous existence,
shall have the right to acquire, hold, transfer assets and ability to enter into
contract. The society shall have a seal and has the ability to sue and be

sued.

4. The total capital of the Cooperative Society is divided in to small number
of shares. A person can be a member through buying a share, but, any
member can not buy more than one fifth of the total share of the
organization. Liabilities of the members are limited by the value of share.

5. Cooperative society is operated and managed by following democratic
rules and procedures. For all kinds of cooperative society, a member is
eligible to cast only one vote in decision making process of the society. To
cast the vote the member must be present because no proxy is allowed.

6. Ifthe cooperative society is not registered or approved as per Cooperative
Act 2001, any person, club, organization or cooperative can not use the
word 'Cooperative' in its name. It means, without registration, using the
word ‘cooperative’ is prohibited.

Though cooperative has similarity with other types of business, it has some
different features as well.
Classification of Cooperative Society
Cooperative is in fact an organization of the poor and destitute group of people
in the society. But, at present people from various profession and class with their
own initiative or government assistance form different types of cooperative
society to be self dependent economically and socially. However cooperative
Rules 2004 has stated the following profession based cooperative societies:
1. Agriculture or Farmer’s Cooperative Society
2. Fisheries or Fishermen Cooperative Society
3. Labors’s Cooperative Society
4. Potter’s Cooperative Society
5. Weaver’s Cooperative Society
6. Cooperative Society of Landless People (Maximum land owned by
the member is 40 decimal)
7. Poor Cooperative Society
x 8. Women Cooperative Society
N

62 Business Entrepreneurship

9. Cooperative Society of Auto Rickshaw Puller, Drivers of Auto

Tempo, Taxicab, Motor, Truck, Trunk Lorry, etc.

10. Hawker’s Cooperative Society

11. Transportation Owner or Labor Cooperative Society

12. Worker’s Cooperative Society

13. Milkmen Cooperative Society

14. Freedom Fighters Cooperative Society

15. Youth Cooperative Society (for the men and women aged from 18 to 35)

16. Housing Cooperative Society

17. Apartment or Flat Owners Cooperative Society

18. Shop Owners / Businessmen / Market Cooperative Society
The main objective of all the cooperative society is to develop the
socio-economic standard of its members. Though cooperative society evolved
for the lower class, at present various people of different groups or profession
has the opportunity to form cooperative society. As a result, we can hope that
thousands of educated and semi-educated young people of the country shall be
motivated to establish cooperative society to be self employed and shall
significantly contribute to the economic development of the country.
Formation Process of Cooperative Society
Since, Cooperative Society is formed and operated under a set of legal
procedures. As per Cooperative Society Act 2001, Cooperative Society is
formed at the following three stages:

a) Initiation Stage: To form a Cooperative Society, at least twenty people
must come together from similar class, profession, status or similar
mentality. Among these originators, a management committee of six people
is formed. This committee outlines a by laws to form the Cooperative
Society with the registration. The By-Laws consists the name of the society,
address, objective, full description of capital, value of share and number,
Method of selling share, initiators name, address and position, method of
operating the society, etc.

b) Registration Stage: At this stage, steps are taken for registration of the
society.For registration, Form -1 is to be collected from the government
approved local authority and to be submitted along with fees and three (3)
copies of By-laws to the registrar. To form the Primary Cooperative Society
by the Poor,Landless and Shelter less people under the government Poverty S

Business Based on Ownership 63
Alleviation Program, a treasury challan of Tk.300.00, for central
Cooperative Society Tk.1000.00 and for National Cooperative Society
Tk.5000.00 should be submitted along with the application form. Amount
of share capital for registration of Cooperative Society is fixed. For
registration of Primary Cooperative Society formed willingly to alleviate
poverty or under government program paid up capital of at least
Tk.3,000.00, Other Primary cooperative society except Credit Co-operative
Society Tk.20,000.00, for registration of Credit Cooperative Society paid
up capital of at least Tk.100,00,000.00 and for central and national
cooperative society paid up capital of Tk.1,00,000.00 is required. After
scrutinizing all the documents and By-laws in details, the registrar enlists
the name of the society in his Registration Book and returns 2 (two) copies
of By-laws with registration number to the society. The registration process
is completed in this way.

c) Business Commencement Stage: After registration, the society gets legal
existence. Without registration no association can use the cooperative word.
After getting the registration, the originators of the society can start various
economic and social activities.

Proprietorship, Partnership, Joint Stock Company and Cooperative Society

e
e
e
e
e

Basic Principles of Cooperative Society

Cooperative society is formed with a different ideology and objective than the

other business organization. Generally, people of same class, same profession,

primarily with the objective to develop their own socio-economic condition and
on the basis of some other principles cooperative society is formed. The basic
« Principles of cooperative are described below:
S
N

64 Business Entrepreneurship
1, The main principle of cooperative is the unity of the people of similar
mentality, profession and class based on economic condition. Actually,

the business was formed on the principle of unity is strength.

2. Another important principle of cooperative is equality or equal
participation of all the members. All the members are entitled of
similar honor irrespective of their economic, social, political and
religious status.

3. Another principle or ethics of cooperative is to cooperate among the
members. Member's cooperation and sympathy to each other
contributes significantly towards the development of the cooperative
society. It is the key to success of the cooperative society.

4. Trust and faith of each member on others is considered to be another
important principle of cooperative society. This makes them vigorous,
interested and confident.

5. Its democratic value and concept is another fundamental principle. All
the members of the cooperative society have the right to cast vote and
every member has a single vote. All the members have equal rights to
express opinion and cast vote irrespective of their paid up capital or
amount of share in the society.

Problems and Prospects of Cooperative Society in Bangladesh

If we consider the socio-economic condition of our country, we shall find that
eighty percent of our population is engaged in agriculture and village based
various profession to earn a living like Farmer, Labour, Weaver, Fishermen,
Blacksmith, Potter and various types of small and cottage industries like
Bamboo and Cane, Pottery, Shell, Handicrafts, and various types of sole
proprietorship business such as groceries, tailor, Pharmacy, Vegetable shop,
Saloon, Tea stall etc. Although, most of them are from small and low income
group of the society, they are deprived from various social benefits such as
education, healthcare etc. It is not possible to overcome these difficulties solely.
On the other hand, the farmers and agriculture in this country could not
contribute to the fullest extent because of primitive cultivation method, shortage

of capital, quality fertilizer, scarcity of seeds and pesticides and small pieces of
land. They become victim of deceit from various intermediations because of
lack of unity, cooperation, trust among themselves. Cooperative Society is the 2%
most suitable place for these type of different groups of small and low income &

Business Based on Ownership 65
farmers, labors and small traders for the development of their socio-economic
condition. They can also contribute for the economic development of the
country. There are many cooperative society has been formed after the
Independence which has enabled those groups to develop their own condition as
well as to the development of the economy as a whole. But, this is not sufficient
comparing the society and country. Everybody, specially the young generation
must be encouraged to be engaged in cooperative society with the help of
Government assistance, suitable training and huge campaign on mass media.
Activity-6
How can you encourage the farmers | How will you encourage yourself to
of your locality to form cooperative form cooperative society after
society? completion of your studies?
Concept of the State Enterprise
Generally, companies formed, operated and controlled by the state are called
State Enterprise. This kind of business can be established by the state. For the
necessity of the state, business formed in other criterias can also be converted in
to state enterprise trough nationalization. Normally, state enterprises are
established to ensure industrialization, employment generation, controlling
money and banking system, proper uses and distribution of all the assets
including natural resources and public welfare in some specific sectors. Besides,
state enterprises are also formed and operated to control Arms Factories for the
safeguard and security of the nation. At present, in all the countries of the world
there are some state run business operated.
Characteristics of State Enterprise
State Enterprises have some unique characteristics. These are described below:

e State Enterprises are formed by the ordnance of the Head of State of
passing bill in the National Parliament. Besides, this type of business can
also be formed by nationalization by state ordnance.

e The ownership of the state enterprises belongs to the state and the
government supplies all the required capital. But, in some cases partial
amount of share can be sold to the public. In that case, suppliers of
capital are government and public.

Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-9

66 Business Entrepreneurship
¢ This type of business is formed under specific law and has legal and
separate entity. Because of legal entity and separate entity, state
enterprises have eternal existence.
° Like other business, the objective of state enterprises are not earning or
maximizing profit, public welfare or public service is its main objective.
e The profit of this business are deposited to the government treasury and
spent for the public welfare. The loss has to be born by the government.
e For the success or failure of state enterprises, the government is
accountable to the parliament.
Activity-7 : Analyzing the concept and characteristics, describe the necessi
of state enterprises
State Enterprises in Bangladesh
After getting independence on 16th of December, 1971, the new government
nationalized many personally owned factories, commercial, financial and
insurance business with a view to form welfare oriented, equitable and fare
state. Besides, many state owned enterprises had also been established. There
are still a number of state enterprises are in operation in the country though
many of them has been left for the personally owned business. A list of state
enterprises with the name, type and controlling ministry of the business are
given below:
=
Bangladesh Bank. a

Business Based on Ownership 67
Name of the state enterprises | Type of Business | Controlling Ministry

Bangladesh Chemical Industries | Industry Industry

Corporation

Bangladesh Jute Mills Industry Industry

Corporation

Bangladesh Electricity Service Fuel & Mineral
Development Board

Bangladesh Bank
Bangladesh Road Transport Transport Communication
Corporation

Bangladesh Railway Communication
Bangladesh Tourism Corporation| Service —_—|_ Aviation & Tourism
Bangladesh Biman Aviation & Tourism
Bangladesh Inland Water | Transport Communication
Transport Corporation

Bangladesh Textile Mills | Industry Industry

Corporation

Bangladesh Telephone Industries | Service Telecommunication
Corporation

Bangladesh Machine Tools | Industry Bangladesh Army
Factory, Gazipur

Bangladesh Televison
Bangladesh Betar
Titas Gas Transmission & | Service Fuel and Mineral
Distribution Company Ltd.

Jiban Bima Corporation Finance

"a ae OR Cre eT HTT HTT mT eT”
FS oe a eT
s Titas Gas Transmission & Distribution Company Ltd.

68 Business Entrepreneurship
EXERCISE
Multiple Choice Question (MCQ)
1. Which one is the most ancient and popular organization?
a. Partnership b. Sole Proprietorship
c. Cooperative d. Joint Stock Company
2. When the crisis of faith rises in partnership business?
a. Decision making is delayed b. Deed of agreement is not written
c- Profit is less d. Trust worthiness to each other is lost
Answer the question number 3 & 4 after reading the following paragraph
Answer the question number 3 & 4 after reading the following paragraph To
change their lot, the women from Rasulpur formed a cooperative society. They
borrowed some money from a local NGO and started to make handicrafts to sell
in to the city. All their products are damaged while one of their members
incurred accident at the time of carrying them to the city. As a result, they faced
huge loss, but, they remained togather and their developmental work continued:
3. What is the type of cooperative which is mentioned in the above para?
a. Poor b. Landless
c. Business d. Farming
4. What is the reason for the success of the cooperative —
i. Faith on each other
ii. Mentality of cooperation
iii. Democratic Mentality
Which is one of the following is correct?
a. T&T bI& ll
ce. 1 & Ill d. I, 1 & IV 2
Ss
N

Business Based on Ownership 69
Creative Question
1. Abir the eldest son from a lower class family who lost his father when he
passed SSC.As a result, the burden of the family was imposes on him. This is
why his education came to end. In this circumstance, Abir opens a Tea stall at
Kaligonj Bus Stand to start his professional life.
a. What is the main objective of sole proprietorship
b. Explain one point of difference between partnership and sole
proprietorship business.
c. What will be the longevity of Abir’s Business? Explain.
d. Considering the type of business organization, Abir’s business is less risky
but has unlimited liability. Give your opinion in light of the above para.
2. Nafiz and his four other friends set up a food processing factory on the basis
of deed of agreement. The demand of their product is increasing day by day
because of the quality of their products. But, business expansion and
modernization is hampered due to shortage of fund. So, they changed the type of
their organization and started to work at a large state in the name of Nafiz &
Friends Co. Ltd under Company Act 1994. Within two years they opened two
branches at divisional level.
a. How many types of business organizations are there?
b. Ina sole proprietorship ‘Liability of the owner is unlimited’ Explain.
c. What was the type of Nafiz’s and his friends business. Explain
d. By changing the organizational form of Nafiz’s business shall contribute
to the economic development of the country. Evaluate the statement.
=
&

CHAPTER FIVE
Legal Aspects of Business
Everyone has the right to do any kind of business to earn a living and to make
profit. But, every business has to be permitted and legal as per law of the state.
In this chapter we shall learn about the legal aspects of busmess such as
licensing, Trade Marks, Franchise etc.
CS Department of Patents, Designs and Trademarks (DPDT}
After completion of this chapter we shall be able to —
e Explain the legal aspect of Business
e Describe the Concept of License and how to get it.
e Describe the concept of Franchise and how to get it.
e Describe the concept of Patent, Registration and its advantages
e Explain the concept and type of Trade mark
e Explain chronologically the steps for registration of Trade Mark
« Explain the concept of Copy Right and registration process
e Describe the advantages of registration of Copy Right
e Explain about BSTI
e Explain the concept and necessities of Insurance 2
e Explain the types of Insurance and process of insurance =

Legal Aspects of Business 71
Legal Aspects of Business
Since 1998, the Business Entrepreneurship course has been included in the
secondary level as an elective course in the commerce group. A teacher from
Commerce Faculty of the University of Dhaka wrote and marketed the book.
The students of this subject had been waiting for this book. As a result, the third
edition of 8000 copies of this book was sold out immediately after publishing. In
fourth edition only 4000 copies of this book had been published, but surprisingly
sales were nearly stopped. After searching the reason it was found that copy of
the book at a comparatively less price were sold in the market. Finding no other
way, the teacher went to the nearby police station. Police asked him about the
copy right of the book, whether it was registered. Though the writer was aware
of the necessity of registration of copy right, ignoring the importance of
registration of copy right, he abstained from doing it. Police regretted of their
inability to do anything in favor of him. Consequently the teacher incurred loss
financially and lost interest to republish the book.
What have you understood reading the above story?
If the writer would have registered the copy right of the book, he could be saved
from the financial loss. Business entrepreneurs have some intellectual property
such as copy right, patent, trade mark etc. They are the result of research in
business entrepreneurship and invaluable asset of business. To protect and
preserve these assets all the countries have legal bindings. The entrepreneurs
must have primary knowledge about these assets and the related law. Legal
concepts help the entrepreneurs to be protected from the legal problems of the
business.
1. License
To start any kind of business, approval should be taken or be registered from the
respective authority. Approval or registration process varies depending upon the
nature of business. Incase of sole proprietorship business, if it is within the city
corporation, trade license should be collected from the corporation authority and
outside of the city corporation, license to be collected from the district
administration. In our country registration of partnership business is not
mandatory. But, if the partners want they can apply to the registrar for
e registration following a particular procedure. Such application must be
S accompanied by particular fees.

72 Business Entrepreneurship
Registration of Joint Stock Companies
As per company Act, registration of joint stock companies in Bangladesh is
mandatory. In this case, registration is done by the registrar of the Joint Stock
Companies. The originators apply to the registrar along with other related
documents and specific fees. The registrar issues certificate if he finds all the
submitted documents satisfactory after detailed scrutiny. The company goes live
after having the registration. For registration application of the private limited
company there should be at least two originators and public limited company it
should be seven. Private limited company can start business after having the
registration certificate, but the public limited companies has to collect business
commencement certificate to start the business.
2. Franchising
Fes
SANS Sat Piz
fur.
At present, business established and operated under franchising has got
popularity. To use the name of a reputed business firm and making, selling and
distributing its products is called Franchising. Band Box, Pizza Hut, KFC
;Wimpi, Kentaki etc are the example of this type of business. There are two
parties in franchising:Franchisor and Franchisee. For example we can say that
the KFC of America is the Franchisor and Transcom Limited in Bangladesh is
the Franchisee. The main features of Franchising are:
1) Deed of Agreement between Franchisor and Franchisee
2) Branded Products or Service
3) Monitoring by the Franchisor to ensure the product quality and process
at the accepted level.
The Franchise Agreement
Franchising Agreement is the main element of franchising business which is
executed between the Franchisor and Franchisee. The clause(s) of the deed of
agreement may vary on the basis of amount of capital, training arrangement,
management help, franchising area is also very important. But, the following
issues are very common in most of franchising agreement: 20
S
N

Legal Aspects of Business 73

a) Franchisee has to pay a particular amount of fee initially and pays a

specified amount of monthly fee. In return, the franchisee gets right to sale
every day products.

b) Franchisee must agree to invest required amount of investment.

c) Both the parties shall have the objective to earn money from the business.
Profit is the yardstick for the success of business. The management should
be efficient and goods and services need to be of better quality.

d) Franchisor starts to earn from the day of receiving fees. In some cases,
franchisor can demand for the fee before allowing the franchising.

e) As per agreement, the franchisor may keep the right to place selection,
infrastructure development and ownership of these things to him.

f) Ifthe business is not to satisfactory level of the franchisor, he can cancel the
agreement.

g) Franchisee can sell only those items which are acceptable to Franchisor.

If the contents of the deed of agreement are acceptable to both the parties,

then they can sign it.
Franchising business can be operated on the basis of legal bindings in
Bangladesh through registration. For example, if the company is a private
limited company then it can start business in Bangladesh through registration
from the registrar of the joint stock companies.
There are many advantages of doing business through Franchising . Such as,
marketing of branded products, training of workers, getting business related
advice from the franchisor and having arrangement of financing facility. Among
the disadvantages, tight monitoring, probability of cancellation of agreement on
breaching of any terms or clause of the contract and requirement of large amount
of investment etc. are mentionable. Though having the difficulties, franchising
has been assisting in developing and setting new businesses. In many foreign
countries, franchising has gained vast popularity, but it is still not very much
popular and well known in Bangladesh. Gradually, it will become popular, if the
branches are increased in the district level along with the big cities.
1. Intellectual Properties
Works created from creativity and intellectuality is Intellectual Property.
Inventions applicable to business, industry or commerce, Arts and literature,
design, symbol, name etc. are included in intellectual property. The intellectual
Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-10

74 Business Entrepreneurship
properties of an entrepreneur are those which have been invented with a long
time effort. Intellectual properties are results of all the invention and creative
works. Using the intellectual properties, human being has discovered many
mystery of the creation. Intellectual properties have made knowing the
impossible possible. Among this properties, Patent, Trade Mark and Copy right
is mentionable. Intellectual Property Day on 26th of April is observed every year
in Bangladesh along with the world.
2. Patents:
Patent is one kind of Intellectual Property. With the help of patent, the inventor
is given a monopoly ownership over his invention. In this case, an agreement is
signed between the inventor and the government. Giving Patent to the inventor
means that anybody can not make it, use it or sell it for a particular period of
time. Sometimes, the dishonest business people or competitors may duplicate
the products in the market and the original inventors may incur financial loss.
The main objective of Patent is to protect the entrepreneurs’ invention so that
nobody can duplicate the product to gain financial benefit from making and
selling it to the market. In the business world, in the past many genuine inventors
had incurred financial loss in this way the concept of patent evolved. However,
because of entrepreneur's lack of awareness and ignorance, they have been
cheated many times. In Bangladesh, we have been following the Patent and
Design Law of 1911.
3. Trade Mark
Trade Mark is used to differentiate products in trade from other same and
identical products. In the similar way, incase of service it is called the Service
Mark. The main objective of the mark or symbol is self identity. Device, Brand,
Heading, Label, Ticket, Name, Signature, Word, Letter, Symbol, Numbers
added things, Mix of color, or any combination of these at any form will be
included in Trade Mark. Packing is not included in the Trade Mark.
Trademark: | N\/I
Registered Trademark:
CR)
= &

Legal Aspects of Business 75
Necessity of Trade Mark Registration
Registered Trade Mark gives the owner sole ownership or entitlement to use the
mark exclusively. Without the permission of the registered owner, nobody can
use the mark. If the registered mark is renowned, the owner shall enjoy his
ownership on all the products having the marks. And the mark is protected under
the law. If the rights are breached, the owner can sue against to protect his
rights.
Time-limit of Trade Mark Registration
The owner of the registered trade mark reserves the exclusive right to use the
mark. This registration is given for seven years initially. It can be renewed for
ten years, if application is made before the expiry. If any agreement is breached
or any complaint is proved, the registration can be cancelled if it is not renewed
in time. In this Sub-continent Trade Mark act has been introduced in 1940. In
Bangladesh, at present we are following Trade Mark Act 2009.
4. Copyright:
Copyright is another significant intellectual property, which if not protected can
cause huge loss to the owner or its entitled person. Exclusive entitlement is given
on the use of literature, arts and culture with the help of Copyright. Literature
including Story, Drama, Essay, Poem, etc. Paintings, Film, Music, Instrumental
Music, Sculpture Art are also preserved by Copyright. Presently, computer
software is also protected by Copyright. For example, we can say that when an
agreement is signed between the writer and the publisher for publishing and
marketing of the book is called Copyright agreement. In the agreement period
and amount of royalty etc. are mentioned. If the deed of agreement is registered
then the writer can take protection from the court for any breach of conditions
and terms. Branded products, Sports, Name of film stars can be distributed
through Copyright agreement. Actually, Copyright agreement is a popular
medium for distribution of products and services. Copyright Act was actually
introduced on 1911 in this Sub-continent. Bangladesh has Copyright Act on
2000 and which was amended on 2005. If the ways for protection of Copyright
is properly followed, business entrepreneurs can be safeguarded from their loss
in most of the cases. As per Copyright Act 2005, the right of the artist is

< preserved till 60 years after the death of the artist.

N

76 Business Entrepreneurship
5. Bangladesh Standards and Testing Institutions- BSTI
It is necessary to register the symbol of a product ot separate it from other similar
products that are bought and sold in the market. Bangladesh Standard and
Testing Institution is responsible for this job. It is an organization under the
ministry of Industry. For registration of trademark of a product, application to be
submitted on prescribed form along with specified fees. More over, to ascertain
the quality of some products, certificate to be obtained from BSTI after
production of those products as per standards. BSTI mandatorily maintains a list
of products certificated by them. In any case, if the quality is not maintained to
the predefined standard, their certificate may be cancelled. There are some
products which have mandatorily maintained standard under BSTI certification
and quality of those products can be ensured from BSTI. To maintain the quality
of products, BSTI extends necessary assistance in this regards.
6. Insurance
The probability of loss in a business for any reason is called business risk.
Without risk there is no business. Storm, flood, cyclone and excessive rain are
major natural risk. Besides, business enterprises can face heuge damage because
of burglary, snatching, fire, boat, rail and motor accidents. Insurance is a better
way to reduce this sort of risks. Insurance is also a business.
When any business organization agrees to make payment of a particular sum of
money for loss caused by any predefined incident or for occurrence of the
specified incident against payment of particular premium is called Insurance
Contract. The party who agrees to compensate or make payment of the particular
amount of money is called ‘Insurer', on the other hand; the party who is being
compensated is called the 'Insured'. As per agreement the insured gives the
insurer a certain amount of money which is called ‘Premium’. The deed of
insurance agreement is called Insurance Cover Note which includes all the
details of terms and condition betweens the parties. Insurance is called the
contract of compensation. But, life insurance is an exception in this case.
Insurance System is also exists in Bangladesh like other countries. In our
country, we had been following the Insurance Act 1938 which had been
introduced in the subcontinent. Later, in 2010 the Act has been changed,
modified and amended and a new law has been in force which is known as
Insurance Act 2010. as
Ss
N

Legal Aspects of Business 77
Necessity of Insurance in Business
Assessing the risk in business is an important task for an entrepreneur. There are
many risk associated with production and distribution process. A business firm
may face difficulties and financial loss at any time due to supernatural loss, theft,
workers sickness, accident, fire, and sinking of vessel. The insurance
organizations compensate the insured against the above mentioned losses as per
insurance agreement. For this reason, insurance is very much helpful for a
business. As a result, in absence of the insurance service many entrepreneur
would have to leave the business because of probable risk inherited in the
business. So, it is necessary to have the assistance of insurance to smoothly run
the business by removing the stipulations of risk and prevailing uncertainty in
the business.
Classification of Insurance
At present, there are many types of Insurance. Among them four types are the
most popular:

1. Life Insurance

2. Marine Insurance

3. Fire Insurance

4. Accident Insurance
Having the benefit of insurance, at present there are many types of insurance has
been evolved in the market, such as: Insurance for Burglary, Trust, Riot, Strike,
Earthquake, Liabilities, Motor Car, and Crop etc. Some of them are discussed
below:
Life Insurance
Life insurance is the most popular among all the insurance business. The
Insurance Policy which gives the insured or any nominated person a certain sum
of money (insured amount) by the insurer against insurance premium after a
certain period of time or death of the person nominated is called life insurance.
Life of human being is the subject matter of this insurance. Since, life can not be
compensated; it can not be called the contract of compensation like all other
insurance contract.

nen “
S

78 Business Entrepreneurship
Fire Insurance
The insurance policy which gives the compensation against losses caused by
fire is called Fire Insurance. Generally, Fire Insurance Policy is taken to
protect Goods, Houses, Warehouse, Factories and Machineries from fire.
= a << 7
er | |
Marine Insurance
The Insurance policy which gives protection from the risk associated with river
journey and sea voyage is called Marine Insurance. A major part of the world
business is done through water ways. To avoid the risk related to water ways,
such as Storm, Tsunami, Pirates, War etc. marine insurance can be taken.
r ~
é ~~ Wek ——s
Accident Insurance
Insurance for Life and asset of a person is included in the Accident Insurance. In
this kind of policy, as per terms of the policy the insurer pays compensation for
particular insurance premium to the insured for any loss against the probable
accident.
2
§

Legal Aspects of Business 79

SS SS Eee ee

SSN or
ae ‘

_ ~_ Snr anaitice retackatiris - 20441605 _
Besides, the above mentioned legal aspects of business, there are some
additional laws; knowledge of which gives the entrepreneur more feasibility to
tun his business smoothly. Specially, knowledge on Worker Recruitment Law,
Factory Law, Risk Mitigation Law in Business, Banking Law are helpful to run
business positively.

EXERCISE

Multiple Choice Question
1. What is the main characteristic of Franchising?

a. Manufacturing b. Marketing
c. Making Profit d. Agreement

2. Why Trade Mark of goods in business is registered?

a. To establish right of the owner _b. To expand the market of the product
c. To avoid risk d. To face the competition

Read the following paragraph and answer the question No. 3 & 4:
Mr. Habib of Shanir Akhra, in Dhaka is the owner of a factory of manufacturing
electronic goods. Besides, he imports various electronic goods from abroad. The
supplying company delivers the goods to the Chittagong Sea Port, Bangladesh.

% To avoid the risk of transporting the goods, an insurance policy is taken.
N

80 Business Entrepreneurship
3. Who will be the insured in the above mentioned paragraph?

a. Manufacturer b. Supplier

c. Importer d. Port Authority
4. Insuring the mentioned business —

i. Particular risk shall be eliminated

ii. Accident on the sea shall reduce

iii. There will certainty of being compensated.

Which one of the following is correct:

a. IT & Il b. [& Ill

c. 1& Tl d.1,0& Il
Creative Question
1. Ismam came to Dhaka from Hatia after his final exam. He along with his
college going cousin visited many places like National Zoo, Novo Theatre,
National Museum, etc. Ismam noticed that his cousin takes him to restaurant
with the same name at different places. Asking the reason he came to know that
it is a foreign restaurant. All the big cities in Bangladesh have its branch. But,
this kind of business has not gained popularity in Bangladesh yet.
a. Trade Mark Act of which year is being followed in Bangladesh?
b. What do you understand by Copyright? Explain
c. What kind of business it is as mentioned in paragraph? Explain.
d. Give your opinion to make this type of business more popuar.
2. Mr. Shabuz is an inventor. After long research, he invented a different kind of
solar power based machine for irrigation which is different from all the
contemporary machineries. It took first place at the National Science Fair. He
started commercial production and got huge response from the market. Very
shortly, another established company duplicated his product in the market. But,
he failed to take any action against the company after filing suit.
a. What is the minimum number for entrepreneur for a private limited company?
b. What do you understand by license? Explain.
c. What kind of asset is the irrigation pump of Mr. Shabuz? Expain.

ho}

d. Explain the reasons of Mr. Shabuz not having any legal support. s

CHAPTER SIX
Business Plan
The main objective of business is to make profit. If there is planning in running
business, success becomes easier and possibility of failure reduces. Sometimes,
many enthusiastic entrepreneurs can not become successful because of lack of
proper planning in regard to the business. In this chapter, we shall discuss
various aspects of business planning.
00: Oc

- gene ie is =]
At the end of this chapter the students will be-

¢ Explain the concept and importance of business planning

* Explain the process of business planning

¢ Explain the concept of project planning and its importance

* Describe the steps of project planning

¢ Able to select the right business in entrepreneurship through project selection

process.
e able to prepare the structure table for project planning.
Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-11

82 Business Entrepreneurship
Concept of Business Plan

Business plan is the chart/graph of the future activities of business. It is written
documents through which the objective of the business, nature, management
style, financing, present status and future development process is depicted.
Business planning helps the businessman to reach his objective like radar
helping an aero plane to reach its destination. Business planning is necessary in
both cases, starting a new business or expansion of existing business. A business
planning can be compared to the road map of a tourist or blue print for a building
constructor.

Importance of Business Plan

The importance of business plan is immense in starting the business,
maintaining it properly and operating it to reach the objective. The main
importance of business plan is as follows:

1, Guide line to operate the business: To achieve the objective of business
what, when, how and at what time a thing is to be done is properly
mentioned in the plan. As a result it works as a deed of guideline to the
entrepreneur.

2. Capital arrangement and Investment: When additional capital is
necessary for a business, it is not possible for the entrepreneur to arrange
the additional capital, then bank loan or from other sources capital is to be
arranged. In this case, the lender or the investor can take decision by
analyzing the business plan before extending the loan.

3. Proper utilization of government facilities: Small and medium size
enterprises receives many facilities from the government. Business Plan
helps to avail those facilities.

4. Helps to make decision: Business plan helps to take decision and give a
concept about the competitor, which way the business should be expanded
in future, which business is more profitable, what product is to be
produced in future etc.

Besides above mentioned things, by reading the business plan the stakeholders
can gain a clear concept of the business by studying the business plan.

Process of Business Plan

The success of business depend on right selection of the project. A project isa
planned and thoughtful work process to be completed within a particular time S$

Business Plan 83
and objective. It starts and ends at a specified time. A project may be a new
venture for investment or expansion of old business. The first step of the
business plan process is to identify the concepts and evaluate them for selection.
1. Identifying the Project Concept:
Selection of the project starts from the identifying of the concept the project
by the entrepreneur. He can assess the surrounding environment and get the
idea for the demand of a product and services. Selection of a project depends
on this demand. Normally, the demand of product and services give birth to
the project idea. During the selection of the project it is wise to think of
entrepreneur's hobby or interest, products having real demand, prevailing
disadvantages of the products, opportunity of using new technology. The
sources of new project concepts are entrepreneur's own thinking, various
government and non government publication, economic and industrial report
and research report.
2. Evaluation of the Concepts and Selection of the Project:
An Entrepreneur shall make a list of the probable projects after analyzing the
information from various sources. A project shall be selected from the list
after analyzing it through various methods. A project can be selected by two
methods by analyzing the selected concepts. One is Macro-screening and the
other is Micro-screening.
a) Macro-Screening
Macro-screening is such a process which helps to select a project by evaluating
the influential elements of the business concepts. All the businesses are
influenced by some elements which are beyond control of the entrepreneur.
These elements are population, economy, politics, society, cultural and legal
environment.
e Population: The existence, progress and advancement of a business
depend upon the population of the locality where the business is located.
The demand of the product is influenced by the size of the market,
population, and population growth ratio.
e Economic Environment: The demand of the product is also influenced
by the consumer's income, savings, expenditure pattern and standard of
- living. Decision should be taken considering these elements while
s selecting a project.

84 Business Entrepreneurship
e Natural Environment: Natural environment plays vital role in
selecting a project. The raw materials for the industry come from the
natural environment. But, those businesses should be avoided which

destroys the environments.

e Political Environment: Political stability, ideology of the leading
parties and attitude of the politicians also influences the business
activities.

e Cultural Environment: Education rate, expansion of technical
education, social ethics and religious values work as an important
element for selection of the business project.

e Legal environment: The prevailing law of the state, industrial policy
contributes a lot to the expansion of the business of a country.

Selection of project through Macro-screening is an initial stage. To select the
project finally and assess the appropriateness of the project, detailed scrutiny is
done with the help of Micro-screening.

B. Micro-Screening:

Micro-screening is the detailed process of selecting a project through analyzing
the market demand, technical, commercial and financial aspect and contribution
to the economy, etc. The elements of micro-screening are explained below:

e Market Demand: Through market survey and analysis of market
demand, consumer's point of view and interest, number of competitors in
the market and advantages and disadvantages of products are properly
justified.

e Technical Aspect: Technical aspects of projects are justified from the
technological and mechanical point of view. Production processes,
technology specification, selection of machineries, feasibility of
implementation of the projects are included in these types of jobs.

e Commercial Aspect: Profitability or commercial viability of a project is
most important to select a project. In this case, elements of production
cost, sales price, estimated profit etc. are to be considered very carefully.

e Financial Aspect: In this case considering the expenditure of the project,
sources of financing, return on investment etc. a project is selected.

oo
Ss
N

Business Plan 85
e Contribution to the National Economy: It is also essential to evaluate
how the project shall contribute to the national economy. The yardstick
to measure the economic contribution is employment generation, tax
payment to the national treasury etc.
From the discussed point of view, projects having realistic and profitable
attributes are selected for investment. It is mentionable here that in case of small
enterprises and retailing projects; contribution to the national economy is not
significant. But, in case of medium and large business such as manufacturing or
production oriented business macro and micro-screening both are necessary.
3. Submission of Business Project Report
The last stage of the business plan is to prepare an excellent report. This report
is prepared on the basis of justifiable information of the probability of the
selected project.
Guideline for Small Business Plan
It is necessary to be careful while preparing a business plan. The entrepreneur
can make the report by himself or with the help of any other specialist. The
following guidelines can be followed to prepare a proper business plan:
e Business plan should be precise and free from excessive wordings.
e The objective of the business is to focus only on one or two products and
place for the product and market selection.
e In the management process of the business unknown person should
not be included
e Any product should not be described with words only understood
by the professionals; rather, it should be comprehensible to all.
e Sales volume should be projected on the basis of realistic quantity
of production capacity. Sales account should be maintained very carefully.
e Business plan should not be drafted on the basis of vague information.
e There should be a detailed discussion on the present and probable
problems of the business in the business plan.
e It is necessary to involve all the members of the management team
x and if necessary, advice from an expert may be sought for.
N

86 Business Entrepreneurship
Contents of Small Business Plan
The subject matter of the business plan may vary on the basis of the size
of the business, variation in nature and types of the business. But, the following
things are common in a business plan:

1. Name of the Business organization

2. Address of the organization

3. Name of the Entrepreneur(s)

4. Brief of the entrepreneurs or directors

5. Nature of business (Sole proprietorship, Partnership, Joint Stock Company)

6. Management style of the business (Single, partnership or joint management)

7. Amount of Capital

8. Precise description of market survey (size of the market, possibility of

future progress, ways to penetrate the market, pricing of the product.)
9. Possibility of profit generation (Target profit and guideline to achieve
future target profit )

10. Attachment of projected Financial Statement

a. Total cost of the project

b. Projected Income

c. Projected expenditures

d. Projected Income Statement

e. Projected Balance sheet

f. Projected Cash-flow statement

g. Statement of Break Even Analysis
A projected financial statement for a grocery project on the basis of
sole proprietorship is depicted below:
1. Cost of Project
Fixed Capital Amount (Taka)
(This type of cost is to bear at the time of starting the
business only) 2,00,000.00
Advance Rent for the Shop 3,00,000.00
Furniture & Fixtures 50,000.00
Others

5,50,000.00 &

Total &

Business Plan 87
Working Capital
(These types of expenditures have to make all the year round to operate the
business smoothly)
Purchase of various goods 3,00,000.00
Salary of workers/staffs 48,000.00
Electricity Bill 12,000.00
Rent 36,000.00
Others 54,000.00
Total 4,50,000.00
Total Cost of the Project
Fixed Capital 5,50,000.00
Working Capital 450,000.00
Total 10,00,000.00
Financing of the Project:
Own Source 6,00,000.00
Borrowing from Relatives 2,00,000.00
Bank Loan 2,00,000.00
Total Project Cost 10,00,000.00
Projected Income Statement
Revenue (from Sales) 6,00000.00
Estimated Cost :
Purchase of Sord 3,00000.00
Salary 48,000.00
Electric Bill 12,000.00
Rent 36,000.00
Personal expenses of the owner 60,000.00
Others 54,000.00
Projected Income (yearly) 90,000.00
3
8

88 Business Entrepreneurship
Estimated Cashflow Analysis
It is necessary to estimate the Cashflow to operate the business smoothly. This
statement can be preserved daily, weekly and on a monthly basis. In this
statement, how much Cash flow is made and how much expenditures is to be
made in a particular period of time is estimated. Because of preparation of
cashflow statement, the entrepreneur can have a clear idea about the cash
position of the business.
Break Even Analysis
Break Even indicates such a state of the business where the income and
expenditure of the business becomes equal. It is neither loss nor profit scenario
of the business. More precisely stated when revenue from quantity of goods sold
becomes equal to the volume of expenditures is called Break Even. The point at
which the sales and expenditure becomes equal is called Break Even Point.
Correct pricing of the product, increase of the sales volume, profit planning,
increase of profit etc. are possible if the Break Even Point is predefined.
For example, if a businessman manufactures 5000 Cricket bats and sells them he
gets no profit of loss. However, if he manufactures more than 5000 Cricket bats
he earns profit.On the other hand, if he manufactures less than 5000 Cricket bats
he gets loss. In this case manufacturing of 5000 Cricket bats is the break-even
point.
Concept and Process of Self Analysis
It is necessary to justify the capability of the entrepreneur to run the business
before starting it. The main reason for this is because there is possibility of
success and risk of failure in a business. As a result, it is wise to assess the
capability before starting the business. It is a complex procedure to assess the
business capability.
If the following work chart is properly filled up by an entrepreneur, he would be
able to find out whether he has the quality of becoming an entrepreneur:
Yes) | No@
1 [Canyoudrafta Business Plan? SYS
> smenoee |
maintain your decision in adversity?
lead? [8

Business Plan 89
4 Do people trust and honor you with whom you
stay?
le | Can you work for long time? |
Do you feel free to mix and work with others? |
Can you communicate effectively with others
and influence them?
Can others easily understand your thinking
and concept?
10 Do you have in depth knowledge about the
business that you want to start?
11 Do you have idea about the related factors of
the business such as tax, accounts etc.
12 Do you have experience in marketing and
finance?
13 Do you have sufficient supply of fund to start
the business?
14 Do you have idea about the materials to start
the business?
15 Do you want to start the business staying
above all?
After answering the above questions you will give 1 marks for positive
answer and o for negative answers. Now, count your total achieved number. If
your number is:
12 or more then: Enough possibility of becoming entrepreneur
7-11 : Your possibility is not to the optimum level, but you
can be successful if try you more.
Below 7 : You do not have sufficient will power to be an entrepreneur
In many cases, because of lack of competency, efficiency and willingness a
person can not become an entrepreneur, but the scenario may change.Then you
can also be an entrepreneur.
By analyzing the Self Assessment Process mentioned above, try to find out
the necessity of Self Assessment:
Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-12

90 Business Entrepreneurship
Activity 1 : Necessity of Self Assessment
EXERCISE
Multiple Choice Question
1. Which one helps the business man to achieve his desired goal?
a. Capital b. Plan
c. Consumer’s Income d. Demand for products
2. How a project begins?
a. From the demand of products _b. From the interest of the entrepreneurs
c. From technical education d. From using latest technology
After reading the following paragraph, answer question No. 3 & 4:
Mr. Shamim stayed abroad for a long time. Recently, after returning home he has
opened a highly decorated Fast Food shop in his locality. The area is populous
but economically not so developed. As a result, he could not make profit as
expected.
3. What issue did Mr. Shamim disregard before starting the business?
a. Size of the Market b. Demand for the product
c. Literacy Rate d. Quality of Product
4. The reason for not having expected profit from the business of Mr. Shamim-
i. Consumers’ low income
ii. Not selecting the right product
iii. Small size of the market
Which one of the following is correct?
a.i&ii b.i & iii a
c. ii & iti d. i, ii & iii S

Business Plan 91
Creative Question
1. After completing graduation from BUET, Mr. Arif along with several friends
decided to take up a project of establishing a cement factory considering huge
demand for the construction and housing industry in the country. They drew a
detailed and long term picture of their whole work plan before selecting the
project. They arranged alternative source to accumulate capital since they did
not have sufficient fund of their own.
a. What it is called to know the market demand of a product?
b. Describe the technical side of business.
c. What type of capital is necessary to implement the project of Mr. Arif
and his friends in light of above paragraph? Explain.
d. Mr. Arif & his friends have followed appropriate way for selecting a
project. — give your own opinion in this regard.
2. Mr. Shahed is the owner of M/s. Ananda Confectionary. His business
income and expenditures are mentioned below in table:
Advance against Rent 1,00,000.00 Sales 5,16,000.00
Purchase raw materials 1,50,000.00
Wages 50,000.00
Furniture & Fixtures 1,00,000.00
Rent 60,000.00
Workers Salary 36,000.00
Electricity Bill 12,000.00
Other Expenses 8,000.00
a. From which environment do we get the raw materials for industry?
b. What do you understand by working capital. Explain
c. Find the projected profit of Mr. Shahed’s business.
d. Is the present condition of Mr. Shahed’s business satisfactory? Give
your opinion.
=
&

CHAPTER SEVEN
Industries of Bangladesh
Nafis' s elder uncle is an Engineer in a cement factory at Chatok. During the
vacation, Nafis along with his parents and cousins went to visit his uncle. His
uncle took him with his other cousins to show how the cement is prepared. Nafis
noticed the piles of stones there. His uncle informed that numerous numbers of
stones are coming from India everyday. These stones are the raw materials for
making cement. These stones are converted into cement with various processes.
The cement of Chatok is very good in quality.
Chatok cement industry is an important industry in Bangladesh. In this chapter
we shall learn about various types of industries and its importance, problems and
possibilities. — aes ei Pp 5
* eee vir
At the end of this chapter we shall be able to —
e Explain the concept, features and importance of cottage industries
e Identify the suitable areas of cottage industries
e Find out the hindrances against the development of cottage industry
e Find out the ways to spread small industries.
e Mark the necessary things to be done for the development of cottage
industries.
e Explain the concept of small and medium size business, its features
and importance.
e Explain the formation process of small and medium size enterprise
e Considering the socio-economic condition of the country, specially
your locality find out the suitable business for small and medium size enterprise.
e Identify the problems relating to small and medium size enterprise
e Explain the concept and features of large scale industries.
e Explain the importance of large scale of business in context of
socio economic condition of Bangladesh. 20
e Will be encouraged to set up small, medium and cottage industries. 8

Industries of Bangladesh 93
Classification of Industry
Generally, Industry is the process of converting raw materials or primary
products into secondary or finished goods using heavy capital investment.
Manufacturing of an industry is factory based and factories of a particular
product is known as industry as a whole. Such as, Jute Industry, Garments
Industry, etc. Though, Bangladesh is an agricultural country, contribution of
industry to the economy is not insignificant. In this particular case, government
and non government assistance and entrepreneurship is also increasing. As per
National Industry Policy 2010, Industry in Bangladesh is divided in to
Manufacturing Industry and Service Industry.
a. Manufacturing Industry
Production, processing, addition and later refinement and processing of
produced goods, all are included in the manufacturing industry. In
manufacturing industry, raw materials are processed into finished goods using
labor and technology. Garments industry, Sugar industry, Jute and Jute Products
industry, Fertilizer industry, Cement industry, Leather industry, Ship Building
industry, Rail and Engineering industry, all are examples of manufacturing
industry.
F Set ak we “eal ae YG
& « 4 he = es ae 5 Ser ieee

se Rising Ship Building Industry

S

N

94 Business Entrepreneurship
b. Service Industry
Using the machineries, fixed assets or intellectual properties, the service related
activities are provided by the industries are included in the service industries.
Fishing, Construction and Housing, Automobile Servicing, Entertainment
Industry, Horticulture, Floriculture, Flower Cultivation and Marketing, Milk and
Poultry Rearing and Marketing, Hospital & Clinic, Tourism, Transportation and
Communication are the examples of Service Industry.

aed | 4 J — |

~ : ~ = £ S

===

Bangladesh Rail way; important medium of Government Transportation System
In respect of investment required for the industry; manufacturing and service
industry are divided into four categories. These are Cottage Industry, Small
Industry, Medium Industry and Large Industry.
Cottage Industry
Cottage Industry refers to those industries which are mainly family based and
where capital is not more than 5 lac taka excluding land and factory building and
manpower does not exceed 10 including the family members. Generally, cottage
industry is operated by husband-wife, son-daughter, brothers-sisters and other
members of the family. They are engaged in the job for full time or part time
basis.

=
8

Industries of Bangladesh 95
h { | ‘
i a a, Te |
Ug ‘an "i Yio o®
i ) a
Various products of Cottage Industry
Suitable Areas for Cottage Industry in Bangladesh
Cottage industry is established on the basis of small place, less capital,
individual efficiency and creativity, technical knowledge and help of the family
members. Various types of cottage industry have enriched our country. Cottage
industries at various place has gained so much popularity that those places are
known by the industry of that place. Such as Rangamati Cottage Industry,
Manipuri Cottage Industry, Khadi of Comilla etc. A list of suitable Cottage
Industry in Bangladesh is mentioned below:
Nature of Cottage Industry Manufactured Products
Jute Based Indust: School Bag, Net, Wall Mat, Sandal, Carpet
Bamboo & Cane Industry Basket, Bulb Shed, Tray, Chair, Cradle, Dol
Flower, Vase, Mat, Dala, Kula, Chalun
Pottery Various Animals, Fruits, Flower, Utensils,
Showpiece, Doll, Flower Vase, Flower Tub,
Canter, Pitcher and other products.
Weaving and Garments | Saree, Lungi, Table Cloth, Sofa Cloth, Jamdani
Industry Sweater, Bag, Muffler, Cap, Wall Mat, Sheet,
Towel, Winter Cloth, Readymade Garment,
Hosiery etc.
Food and supporting Industry | Chanachur, Jam-jelly, Honey, Molasses, Sweets
Card, Chips, Vermicelli, Confectionary etc.
Handicrafts Industry Hand made Carpet, Mat, Nakshi katha, Office
ee Stationary, Book Binding, Fishing Net, Packet
S of Sweetmeat,

95 Business Entrepreneurship
Shell Indust Garland, Ornaments, Toys, Showpiece
Small Steel & Engineering |Da, Spade, Shovel, Knife, Scissor, Surma Pot,
Industry Radio Television & Fridge Repairing, Automobile
workshop and servicing center.

Chemical & Pharmaceutical | Oil, Perfume, Rose Water, Agorbati, Candle, Soap,
Indust Fenile

Activity-1 : Make a list of the cottage industry established in your area.
Small Industry
A small industry is a industry in the manufacturing concern having asset value
with installation cost ranging from Taka 50 lac to 10 crore excluding value of
land and factory building and worker is 25 - 99 is called a Small Industry.

Ny Be ae Ces s
“ant VD et oe A f Seen
Small Industry

In case of Service Industry, Small Industry means industry having asset value
including installation cost of Taka 5 lac to 1 crore excluding land and factory
building and worker is limited to 10 to 25.
Medium Industry
In terms of manufacturing concern, medium industry means, excluding land and
factory building, other fixed assets including installation cost having value of
Taka 10 crore to 30 crore and engaged number of labor ranging from 100 to x
250. S

Industries of Bangladesh 97
Incase of Service Industry, Medium Industry means industry having asset value
including installation cost of Taka 1 crore to 15 crore excluding land and factory
building and worker is limited to 50 to 100.
ae ee
Medium Size Garment Industry
Suitable place for Small and Medium Size Industry-
Type of Small and Medium Produced Products
Industry
Food & Food based Products | Flour, East, Suji, Vermicelli, Bread & Biscuit, Red
Sugar, Honey Refinement, Dried and Tinned Fish,
Oil Mill, Chocolate, Cigarette & Biri Factories,
Rice, Puffed Rice, Pressed Rice, Khoi etc. making
including automated rice mill
Garments Plain Cloth, Bed sheet, Cloth for Shirting -Suiting,
Saree, Towel etc.
Jute and Jute Goods Yarn, Sutli, Jute Bag ,Cloth ,Carpet Jute Sandal
and all jute based products
Forest Industry Wood, Things made of bamboo & cane, Saw Mill,
Toy made of wood and Furniture, Sports Items
Printing & Publishing Industry | Various Types of Paper, Packet, Carton etc.
Leather & Rubber Industry Bag of Leather & Rubber, Shoe Factory
Small Steel and Engineering} Tube-well, Agricultural Tools, Tools for Mills &
Industry Factories, Automobile Items,
Chemical & Pharmaceutical | Various Types of Color, Paints, Plastic Factories,
Industry Pharmaceutical Industry, Manure, Mixed
Fertilizer, Making of Guti Urea
Glass and Ceramic Industry Various Types of Glass and Ceramic Products,
Utensils of China Clay.
Cold Storage Various Types of Cold Storage
Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-13

98 Business Entrepreneurship
Problems of Small and Medium Industries in the Context of Bangladesh.
Though the contributions of small industries are increasing day by day for socio-
economic and cultural development, yet some problems still exits in developing
such industries. The Problems are: traditional concepts, want of raw meterials,
want of financial support, availability of huge foreign goods in the local markets,
poor transport system, lack of support to enter into local and international
markets,

Contribution of Cottage, Small and Medium Industries to the
Economy of Bangladesh:

In a developing country like Bangladesh, the cottage, Small and Medium size
industries play a vital role for the development of the economy. Their
contribution towards alleviation of poverty and employment generation is
mentionable. Almost ninety six percent of the industries of the country are
included in cottage, small and medium size industries. These industries are a
major source for generating employment. Millions of people of the country are
engaged in this type of industries. These types of industries are formed with
small amount of capital, locally available raw materials, individual efficiency,
creativity and help of other family members especially from the women. As a
result, thousands of people get employed. Particularly, self-employment
generation and alleviation of unemployment among the village women, cottage
and small industries have a significant role. Cottage and Small Industries have
been contributing significantly to maintain and spread out the history and
tradition of the country around the world.

Statistics on Small & Cottage Industry of the Country — June, 2011
Total Small Industries 93,660

Total Cottage Industries 6,36,577
Employment at Small and Cottage Industries 33.37 lac
Things to do for the development of Cottage, Small and Medium
Industries:

Cottage industry is mainly family based. But, small and medium size industries
require more labor in addition to the family members. The entrepreneurs of these
types of industry have been contributing a lot for the economic development of
the country by utilizing their own effort, brilliance and locally available raw
materials. Additional steps need to be taken for the development of these types 2
of industries. These are- 5

Industries of Bangladesh 99
1. To ensure certainty of availability of raw materials:
Normally, these types of industry flourish at place based on the availability of
raw materials in the locality. But, in many cases the development of the
industry is hindered due to non availability of raw materials for natural
calamities, awful transportation system or any other adverse cause.
Government assistance is necessary for this reason.
2. Market Proximity:
Market is indispensable for sales and marketing of goods and services. More
over, raw materials availability is also dependent on market. There will be
rapid development of these types of industries, if, market for raw materials
and produced goods are ensured.
3. Sufficient Supply of Labor:
Cottage, Small and medium size industries are mainly labor based industries.
For their development efficient worker and cheap labor is necessary. It
becomes obligatory to have knowledge on design and technical issues with
the emergence of demand of the products and services. There should be
sufficient arrangement for training for educating the labor force.
4. Transportation Facility:
Though this type of industry is established initially considering local raw
materials and demand of product, with the expansion of market and demand
it is necessary to have a developed transportation facility to aid the sales and
marketing and carrying of raw materials and machineries for the industry.
5. Emphasis on local and foreign, both demands:
Since, small and cottage industries are established with emphasis only on the
local demand, importance is concentrated on local demand only. It should be
kept in mind that we should give importance to the foreign market as well as
emphasizing on local demands.
6. Availability of Capital:
Though the small and cottage industries require small amount of capital, it is
not possible for the entrepreneur of this firms to arrange the required amount
of capital at all time. So, there should be arrangement for bank loan and other
- sources of financing.
S
N

100 Business Entrepreneurship
7. Government Facility:
Cottage industry is the symbol of pride and tradition for the nation. For this
reason, for its expansion and development, government help and assistance is
necessary. It is a matter of hope that the government is working for the
development of these industries through "Small and Cottage Industries
Corporation". Government has also decided to provide financial assistance to
these industries for their development and expansion. Besides, government is
also taking initiative to protect weaving industry, establishing separate area,
for Benarasi and Jamdani Palli. Special incentive is going to be given to
weavers, blacksmith, potters etc.
Activity-2: Prepare a statement visiting some small and midium
industries in your area.
Large Industry
In case of manufacturing concern, large industry means, excluding land and
factory building, other fixed assets including installation cost of Taka 30 crore
and more and engaged number of labor ranging from 250 or more.
In case of Service Industry, Medium Industry means industry having asset value
including installation cost of Taka 15 crore or more excluding land and factory
building and worker is more than 100. Among the large industries in
Bangladesh, Fertilizer, Cement, Paper, Electricity, Garments, Steel,
Engineering, Pharmaceuticals, Jute and Jute goods, Tea, Glass and Glass Tube
industries are mentionable.
Importance of large industries in the socio-economic context of
Bangladesh :
Though Bangladesh is an agricultural country, yet industries play a vital
role in economic growth, especially-
Contribution of large industries is increasing day by day.
Besides for the development of large industries the support from both the private
and the government is increasing. Cheap labourers are available in our country.
Therefore to create empolayment opportunities large industries can play a vital
role in our country.
oo
S

Industries of Bangladesh 101
Potential large industries in Bangladesh
@ Food Processing Industry « Ready Made Garments
e Manpower Exporting e Herbal Medicine Industry
Ship Building and Ship Breaking Industry| * Leather and Leather Goods
(Environment Friendly) Industry
# Renewable Energy (Solar Power, Wind Mill) | e Hospital and Clinic
*® Tourism Industry e Automobile Industry
*® ICT Products and ICT based Service
Dhaka - EPZ
: ——<—— ———
jel al
Dhaka EPZ
Contribution (“%) of Industry to Gross Domestic Production (GDP)
(Based in Fiscal year 1995-1996 of Production GDP)
Midium and 41735.0 | 44229.8 |49,069.9 |54,232.3 | 59830.6
large Industry |
% of GDP 12.71% | 12.68% |13.20% | 13.75%
Samll and other 17018.9 | 18340.9 |19411.9 | 20664.7 | 22,061.9
industry 5.18% |5.26%  |5.22% 5.26%
PT
Source: Statistical year book of Bangladesh, BBS, August-2013
Developed and underdeveloped Area
Bangladesh is underdeveloped in industry. The industrialization process is still
very slow because of some problems and obstacles. Firstly, underdeveloped
socioeconomic infrastructure such as roads and highways, lack of electricity
and gas, lack of good transport and communication system, lack of technical
knowledge and efficient labor, conflict between labor and owner, labor unrest
etc. are the reasons for obstructing the development of industrialization.
a Besides, the whole country is not developed equally at all the place. As a result
S differences are noticed among districts in respect of industrial development. As

102 Business Entrepreneurship
per 2010 Industrial Policy; a list of developed and underdeveloped district
according to industrialization are mentioned. The list is as follows:
Developed District Under Developed District
Dhaka Dhaka, Narayangonj,| Jamalpur, Sherpur, Netrokona,
Narshingdi and Gazipur, | Kishoregonj, Mymenshing, Tangail,
Rajbari, Gopalgonj, Shariatpur,
Madaripur, Faridpur, Manikgonj and
Munshigonj
Chittagong | Chittagong, Cox’s Bazar,|} Khagrachari, Rangamati and
Brahminbaria, Chandpur, | Bandarban
Comilla, Feni, Noakhali
and Lakshipur
Rajshahi Bogra Jaipurhat, Naoga, Chapainowabgonj,
Rajshai, Natore, Sirajgonj & Pabna
Rangpur Rangpur, Panchagar, Thakurgaon,
Dinajpur, Nilphamari, Lalmonirhat,
Kurigram and Gaibandha.
Khulna Chuadanga, Meherpur, Kushtia,
Jhinaidah, Magura, Norail, Jessore,
Satkhira Khylna and Bagerhat
Barishal Barisal, Jhalkathi, Pirojpur,
Potuakhali, Barguna and Bhola
Sylhet Sylhet, Sunamgonj, Moulvibazar and
Hobigonj
Activity-3: Select your own district and find out the reasons for its
being industrially developed or underdeveloped
Name of your district Industrial Position Reasons for developed
/underdeveloped in
Industrialization
ho)
Ss
A

Industries of Bangladesh 103
EXERCISE
Multiple Choice Question (MCQ)
1. When was the last national ‘Industrial Policy’ declared?
a. 2009 b. 2010
c. 2011 d. 2012
2. Which of the following is small industry?
a. Industry having 100 nos. of labor
b. Organization having investment of more than 10 crore,
c. Fixed asset installation cost taka 5 lac to taka 1 crore
d. Industry formed with family members
After reading the following paragraph, answer question No. 3 & 4:
Mr. Sadif makes various kinds of showpiece with mud with the help of his
family members and sells those in his shop and earns profit. The neighbours of
Mr. Sadif have also been encouraged to form this type of industry.
3. What type of industry of Mr. Sadif is?
a. Small Industry b. Cottage Industry
c. Medium Industry d. Large Industry
4. Mr. Sadif contributes to the national economy-
i. Employment Generation
ii. Enhancement of Standard of Living
iii. To preserve the tradition of the country
Which one of the following is correct?
a.i&ii b. i & iii
c. ii & iii d. i, it & iii
3
8

104 Business Entrepreneurship
Creative Question
1. Rashik established an industry of Jute and Jute Goods with an investment of
Tk.11.00 crore at Fulpur village in Mymenshing district in Dhaka Division
which is a famous place for jute cultivation. His friend Rafi established the same
industry with the same investment in Rajshahi where sugarcane is grown amply.
After a certain period of time Rashik's company made more profit than Rafi.
a. How many types of industry are there in broader sense?
b. What do you understand by service industry? Explain.
c. What is the type of Mr. Rashik’s industry considering investment? Describe.
d. Analyze the reasons for Rashik’s industry making more profit.
2. Considering the continuous demand for electricity, Ms. Jarin Tasnim set up a
windmill for producing electricity at Cox's Bazar taking permission from the
government. She supplied the electricity produced from using the sea wind to
different places. Her investment in this industry is more than Taka 3.00 crore.

a. How many types of industry are there on the basis of investment?

b. What do you understand by Cottage Industry? Explain

c. What is the type of Ms. Jarin’s Industry? Describe.

d. ‘The economy of the country shall be progressive with the help of Ms.

Jarin’s industry’ — evaluate the statement.
ho}
=

CHAPTER EIGHT
Management of Business Organization
There is a correlation between the development of management and the
evolution of the civilization. Initially, management was based on family and
group. The concept of management spread over all spheres of life with the
progression of civilization. The concept of management got huge popularity
from the business operating method of the businessmen. Generally, Management
is the process of making others to do necessary jobs to achieve a certain
objective. In this chapter, we will learn about the concept of management,
activities and various elements of management in an organization.

fe | oS eRe ff ij
- im aaa as j oe
ey iy = ai ms ‘ we
i i , anit mi f
,
After reading this chapter, we will be able to —
e Explain the management concept and activities.
e Describe the concept and necessity of planning.
e Explain the concept and importance of organizing.
e Describe the concept of leadership and its types
e Identify the quality of a good leader
e Describe the concept and sources of financing of a business
Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-14

106 Business Entrepreneurship
Concept of Management
Mr. Rahman has been operating a business of fabrics for five years. All kinds of
fabrics and readymade garments are available in his shop. He has been operating
the business alone. He started to think about appointing a staff with the
expansion of the business. Recently, he has recruited a staff. As a result, he was
relieved a little bit from the work load. But, after some days, the customers of the
shop brought charges against the staff for opening the shop late and complaned
about his misbehavior. Mr. Rahman listened to his customers attentively and
advised the staff to protect the goodwill of the business. The staff realized his
fault. He got motivated to work more attentively in future.
In the above mentioned story, thinking of appointing staff, recruitment of the
staff, giving attention to the customers objection against the staff and taking
measures accordingly, all these activities of Mr. Rahman is the part of his
business management.
Management is the efficiency and strategy of doing things by utilizing others
potential. According to Henry Fayol who known is as the father of the modem
management "Management is the combination of forecasting and planning,
organizing, commanding, coordinating and controlling." Some features of
management are:

e Management is a systematic process of some tasks.

e Management is operated to achieve a predefined goal.

e Management is a process based on team

e Management is a continuous process. It is necessary to take new strategy
of management with the passage of time.

Functions of Management
All the activities performed to achieve a predefined goal is known as manage-
ment. Many activities have to be performed under management to achieve the
defined target through operating the human resources and other elements of
business. The functions of management are descried below:

1. Planning: Planning is the guideline for future work process. Planning is the
process to specify that what jobs to be done, who will do them, when and
how it is to be done in future to accomplish the predefined goal of the .
business organization. Planning is the first job of management. S

Management of Business Organization 107

2. Organizing: Organizing is known as the process of accumulation of

human resources and other elements of the business and distribution of

power and responsibilities among the workers and building interpersonal
relationship among them.

3. Staffing: Major element of an organization is its work force. It is termed
as the human resources of the company. Staffing includes collection of
worker, selection, recruitment and training, promotion, transfer and lay
off.

4. Directing: Direction is called to commanding the workers to implement
the plan. The manager gives order to the worker about when, what and
how to do a job. Workers can show most efficiency if the direction is
appropriate. That is why many has compared direction with leadership

5. Motivation: Motivation is the process of making the worker attracted
and encouraged towards the job of the organization. Because of
motivation, the workers become responsible and perform with quality.

6. Coordinating: Coordination means effective communication between
the workers of the organization, various divisions and departments.
Through coordination all the workers form a team which help them to
perform with unity.

7. Controlling: Controlling refers to the activities related to looking after
whether the works are done according to the plan, finding variances if
any, and taking corrective measures if necessary. Controlling makes the
implementation of planning easier.

Due to effective and corrective measures of controlling business
organizations lead to development overcoming internal and external
barriers and obstacles. However, it can be ensured through controlling
whether the appropriate work is being done in appropriate way and time.
Concept of Planning:
The teacher of Business Entrepreneurship, Mr. Kohinur entered the class and
exchanged greetings. The students also welcomed him spontaneously. He
wanted to know about the experience of visiting a factory before starting the
discussion of classification of industry.
He found that most of the students do not have any practical experience of
o visiting a factory. All the students become overwhelmed in joy when they heard
& about his intention of visiting the BSCIC industrial area of the district. He made

108 Business Entrepreneurship
everybody to calm down and said that they need to take permission from the
Head Master. Besides, some more things are to be ensured:

e When to go.

e How to go.

e How many teachers and students shall accompany.

e How to contact the authority of the visiting company.
At last he asked the students: What can it be called to forecast or thinking to visit
the factory. The students replied in chorus: Planning. He thanked everybody. He
told them that the prior thinking or forecasting before starting a job is called
planning. To say more vividly Business planning is the advance decision making
process of what to do, when to do, where to do and within how much time to
spend about implementing a particular job. Correct planning helps to achieve
target easily. With the help of planning, proper utilization of assets and elements
of the organization is ensured. Duties and responsibilities can be distributed
among the workers appropriately. As a result, they become responsible and
efficient.

Activity-1: Why it is necessary to have a planning for a business
organization?

Concept and Importance of Organizing
Mr. Proshanto Das, the owner of the 'Ashar Bani General Store' has been doing
business in his locality with reputation for long. He has accumulated various
products like readymade garments, cosmetics, baby foods and toys from Dhaka
and Chittagong. But, the most lucrative thing in his business is the pickle made
by himself. Every year he buys Mango (aam), Hog Plum (ambra), Jujube
(borui), Olive (Jolpai), and Amla (amloki) from the local market to make the
pickle. For this reason, seasonally he appoints some women to help him to make
and bottle the pickle. His pickle gets reputed day by day. He decided to opena
separate division to make and sell the pickle. He permanently appointed the &

Management of Business Organization 109
women who were temporarily helping him to make pickle. A person was
appointed as manager. He distributed the responsibility of collecting raw
materials, making and preserving the pickle all the year round.
All the jobs done by Mr. Proshato Das is the part of management of the business.
These works are called organizing.
As per planning Mr. Proshanto has accumulated and coordinated the human
resources and other elements of the business for proper utilization and has
distributed jobs among the workers with duties and responsibilities. Organizing
helps a company to achieve the objectives in an easy way. Proper utilization of
the assets of the company is ensured. Controlling and operating the workers and
employees working in the organization becomes easier. The velocity of work
increases with the help of strong interpersonal relationship.
Concept of Leadership
Mr. Arshad started his business M/s. Akhitara Furnitures with a small capital.
But, his hard work, honesty and efficiency to direct the workers and eagerness to
be successful in business has made him a special person in the society. Now, five
branches of his business are running with reputation. He listens to the workers
demand and complains attentively and tries his best to solve their request. On the
other hand, the workers are also working in the organization with sense of
belonging, always trying to increase the goodwill of the business by fulfilling the
demand of the customers.
From the above story we find the following qualities of Mr. Arshad:
e He is hard working
e He is honest
~ e He is efficient to direct the workers
s e He has strong inclination for the development of the business.

110 Business Entrepreneurship
e He is cordial to listen to workers demand and objections and positive
to solve the problems.
All the above mentioned qualities of Mr. Arshad can be called the quality of
leadership. In case of business, leadership means the quality and strategy to
encourage workers to perform jobs to achieve some particular goal.
Clasification of Leadership
Leadership
1. Democratic e Leader consults with the subordinates
Leadership e Take advise from the subordinates
e Collects information from the workers
e Gives the workers opportunity to ask question
e Answers them
e Accepts accountability
e Accountable to the worker
e Workers feel them to be a part of the
organization.
2. Autocratic e The leader only gives order, there is no
Leadership accountability
e Relies solely on his own power and capability
e Can not rely on the ability of the workers
e Never takes the opinion or advise of the
workers
e Keeps negative mentality about the workers
e Keeps workers always under pressure
e Workers never take ownership responsibility
of the business.
3. Laissez Faire | e Leader remains tension less after assigning
Leadership responsibilities to the subordinates.
e Leader does not like to work by himself
e Do not give particular order to the workers.
e Workers do not have the accountability
e Workers can work of their own will.
e Takes more time in decision making
e The success of the organization depends upon
the good interpersonal relationship and team |
work s

Management of Business Organization M1
Bureaucratic e Leader orders the worker to get the work
Leadership done.

e Workers give priority to the ideology than
the leader and are bound to follow them

e All the time workers have to follow the rules

e Order of the leader is more important than the
leader himself and discipline than personal
relationship is more important.

Activity -3: Complete the following chart by analyzing the different

types of leadership

Types of Leadership Advantages Disadvantages
— EGE
— EGE
Laissez Faire

Leadership

— EGE

Qualities of Ideal Leaders

He who leads is the leader. The task of the leader is to encourage and motivate

the workers of the organization to achieve the defined goal of the business. A

leader must have some qualities or characteristics to perform the serious task of

a leader. Because, the good quality of a competent leader can make the success

S of the company easier, and in a similar way their incompetency can fail the
\ organization. The qualities of an ideal leader are analyzed below:

112 Business Entrepreneurship
1. Physical capacity and soundness: A leader has to take physical and
mental pressure and perform physical labor. For this reason, his physical
capability is important as well as his mental and physical soundness.
Besides, his physical structure should also be attractive.

2. Keen Personality: The leader should be calm quiet in nature. The
subordinates honor a leader having decent attitude and attractiveness.

3. Education and Experience: Formal education helps to achieve many
positive knowledge, efficiency and view. Besides, experience makes them
enriched. So it is expected that a leader should be educated and
experienced.

4, Courage and Honesty: Leader has to always lead from the front. He has
to perform a lot of challenging and risky job. He has to be courageous and
honest. Because, he earns the trust and honor of others with his honesty and
courage.

5. Hard working and flexibility: Hard work is the key to performing any job
well. A leader has to work hard to carry out his responsibility. If, the leader
is lazy, does not do work and becomes tired, then it becomes difficult to
direct the subordinates. Besides, if he does not have flexibility, it will be
difficult for him to lead.

6. Responsibility and Cooperation: Leader's sense of responsibility works
as a motivating factor for the workers. On the other hand, cooperative
mentality to all makes it easier to achieve the goal of the company easily.

7. Organizing Efficiency: A leader must have efficiency in all aspects of the
organization so that he can find the right people for the right job.

8. Realizing human resources relation: A successful leader must have the
quality to realize the expectations, qualification, personality, taste, point of
view of the subordinates. Effective and long run results can not expected if
leading is not done considering the mentality of the subordinates.

9. Power to take decision: Success of the organization depends upon taking
the right decision at right times. Leader has to take decision on the basis of
his wisdom and far sight. Decision taken by the leader increases the
reliability and mental strength.

10. Gender Awareness: A leader is always compassionate and shows honor to
the subordinates whether they are men or women. He must be neutral. He
has to lead considering the different mentality of men and women and their &
social status. »

Management of Business Organization 113
Activity -4: Through Self analysis, try to find out what qualities of a leader
do you have and which one needs to be improved.
Qualities of a Good Leader
e Physical capability and soundness a ae
e Education and experience PT
e Hard working and flexible PT
e Responsibility and Cooperation FT
e Realizing human resources relations a ee
ee
Ps canteramnaan Cd
Concept of Finance in Business
Samir Chakma of Rangamati wasted a year in searching for a job. Many of his
friends are still studying, some of them has been engaged in job or business. At
last, he decided to start a business. He has his own shop near the government
school at Upazila. He is interested to start a stationary business in the shop. His
parents became very happy on his decisions. But, they were thinking about
arrangement of capital. At last, to start the business, he arranged taka 1.00 lac
from his father and taka fifty thousand from his aunty. His uncle from abroad
agreed to pay taka one lac. His father advised him to be careful in using the
money. He was also informed that it is possible to take loan from a commercial
bank. In the above story, to operate the business of Samir Chakma, planning,
sourcing, collection and utilization of fund, al these activities are known as
Finance.
Generally, Finance means collecting funds for business. But, in broader sense,
Business finance is all the activities related to meet up the required fund for
business through collection, preservation and proper utilization of fund.
Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-15

114 Business Entrepreneurship
Sources of Finance

Fund or capital is necessary for any type of business. This fund is necessary to
start the business, maintaining the business, running and expanding the business.
There are opportunities to collect fund from different sources. These are
discussed below-

1. Own Source: Small business like sole proprietorship or partnership
business the owner arranges the required fund to start the business from
their own source.

2. Relatives: If the fund from the own source of the owner is not
sufficient, he may borrow from relatives, friends and other well
wishers.

3. Commercial Bank: All the government and non government
commercial banks including Sonali Bank, Janata Bank, Rupali Bank,
Agrani Bank extends short term, mid term and long term loan to the
business people. Normally, the commercial banks are the main source
for financing the business.

4, Co-operative Bank: Co-operative Banks extends short term loan to its
members. It also extends loan to non members as well.

5. Grameen Bank: Grameen Bank extends loan to set up small size
business.

6. Krishi Bank: Bangladesh Krishi Bank and Rajshahi Krishi Unnayan
Bank extends short term and long term loan for the development of
small and medium size enterprise.

7. Bangladesh Development Bank Ltd.: This bank provides short term,
mid term, and long term loan for industrial development of the country.

8. Bank of Small Industries & Commerce: This bank is the long term
source for fund for the small business and industries. It is known as the
Basic Bank Limited.

9. Non-government Development Organization: There are a number of
non government organizations who provide loan to the small business
against interest.

Lo)
ES

Management of Business Organization 115
Activity -5: Put tick mark on the organization having possibility to get
loan from and otherwise put cross mark
Sources of Fund Po
Sonali Bank Po

|AgraniBank |

[JanataBank
Rupali Bank Po

|CooperativeBank |

|GrameenBank |
Krishi Bank Po
Bangladesh Development Bank Po
Bank of Small Industries& Cottage [| = =—C—CsdC
Non government Organization(NGO) [|
EXERCISE
Multiple Choice Question (MCQ)
1. How many types of leadership are there?
a. 2 b.3
c. 4 d.5
2. Management is -
a. Strategy to influence the customer to buy product
b. Transferring the products from the manufacturer to the consumer
c. A strategy to make others to do things.
d. Taking steps to justify the demand for a product in the market

After reading the following paragraph, answer question No. 3 & 4:

Mr. Tasnim took some advance decision before starting "Dhanshiri

Departmental Store". Such as; where to set it, who will operate it and how to

source the capital. As a result, it saved him time in different tasks. At present, he

is running the business with reputation.

3. Which of the following is similar to the task of Mr. Tasnim before starting

his “Dhanshiri Departmental Store”?

a. Planning b. Market Demand
S c. Selecting the Project d. Organizing

116 Business Entrepreneurship
4. The step of Mr. Tasnim to set up the business-
i. will be helpful to achieve goal
ii. will assist to increase the efficiency at work
iii. will reflect the personal willingness
Which one of the following is correct?
a.i & ii b.i & iii
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
Creative Question
1. Hashi-Khushi Nakshi Ghar" is a reputed organization in Jamalpur. Its owner
Mr.Mahin is very careful to collect materials for the business. Give advice to
the workers if necessary. To maintain success in the long run, he recruits
worker and arranges training for them considering the importance of
efficient worker for making Nakshi katha and other items.
a. Who is the father of the modern management?
b. What do you understand by motivation? Explain.
c. Describe the task of Mr. Mahin in the paragraph.
d. Analyze the reasons for “Hash-Khushi Nakshi Ghar’ becoming
reputed organization.

2. Yafi and Shafi are two friends. Their business is situated near to each other. To
operate the business, Y afi takes decision after consulting with the workers
and taking their opinion. But, Shafi imposes his decision on the workers and
not aware of its influences. Shafi’ s business failed because of worker
dissatisfaction.

a. What do you call the person who leads?
b. What do you understand by gender awareness? Explain
c. What type of leader is Mr. Yafi? Describe.
d. ‘The reason for Shafi’s failure is his incompetency in influencing the
worker’ — evaluate the statement.
=
&

CHAPTER NINE
Marketing
Rafina is the student of class ten at Rasulpur village. Her father is a renowned
vegetable farmer in their village. He grows various types of vegetables including
Okra, tomato, hyacinth bean, bottle gourd, sweet gourd etc. It is very wonderful
to see the growing vegetables in the field. A lot of people from the village buy
vegetables from him when he plucks them at the field. The rest of the vegetables
are washed and cleaned and taken to market for selling arranged beautifully on
a large basket. He is also careful so that the vegetables are not damaged. Rafina
during her off days helps her father in the vegetable field for caring and plucking
them. People from neighboring village also like his vegetable and buy them. She
feels proud of her father's reputation.
In the above mentioned story, growing vegetables, conserving and selling it to
the ultimate buyer, all tasks are referred to Marketing. In this chapter, we shall
learn about the concept of marketing, activities, advertisement and other aspects
of marketing.
Se a Se 5 > Ee

After reading this chapter, we shall be able to —

e Describe the concept of marketing.

e Explain the activities of marketing.

e Describe the concept and types of distribution channel.

e Explain the concept of advertisement and its importance

e Mention the name of the media for advertisement and explain

20 their activities
8 e Describe the concept of salesmanship and quality of a good salesman.

118 Business Entrepreneurship
e Concept of Marketing

Generally, buying and selling of goods and services can be termed as
marketing. But, in real sense the concept of marketing is wider. Marketing
refers to all the activities related to supplying the goods and services from its
manufacturer to the consumers. It means that marketing is the combination of
all the activities from buying, selling, transportation, storing, standardizing,
grading etc.

Marketing has special importance in todays business world. Because,

success of a business not only depends upon the production of the products,

it is also necessary to arrange to supply them to the consumers. Through
marketing, the consumers can get quality goods and services. Effective
marketing helps to increase production. With the improvement of marketing,
industry, commerce and services also develop. It helps to create huge
employment opportunity.

e Functions of Marketing

Marketing works as a bridge between the manufacturer and consumers.
Marketing helps to create utility of possession, place and time. The functions
of marketing are analyzed below:

1, Buying: Buying is one of the main jobs of marketing. Goods and services
are bought to use or reselling. Through buying of products and services
ownership is established.

2. Selling: Another important task of marketing is to bring the buyer and
seller together. Through selling the ownership of goods is transferred.
Estimating the demand for products, buyer searching, pricing all are
related to selling.

3. Transportation: Transportation creates the utility of place for a product
and generates demand. Goods and services are transported from one place
to another. In this way the products reach to the consumer. With the help of
transportation we have been able to use the electronic products
manufactured in China. Similarly, shrimp/prawn or tea of our country is
consumed by the people of other country.

4. Warehousing: Warehousing creates the utility of time. At every stage of
marketing, storing of goods is necessary. Many goods are grown at a
particular season of the year and used over the whole year. To meet the
demand all round the year, goods are stored in warehouse. For example, S

Marketing 119
potato and tomato grown in the winter are available during the whole
year with the help of warehousing.

5. Standardizing: Pricing of products is possible by standardizing them
on the basis of quality, size, color and taste. As a result, the marketing of
product becomes easier and velocity of sales increases.

6. Grading: Classification of products on the basis of quality is called
grading.Generally, grading is done considering the weight, size and
quality of product. As a result, sales become easier.

7. Packaging: Covering the products to look good and attractive and
protect them from breakage is called packaging. Acceptability of
Industrial product such as freeze, television, soap and agricultural
product such as pastured milk, fish and meat to the consumers depends
upon packaging.

8. Collection of Information: Collection of information related to goods
and services is also a task of marketing. To know the demand and supply
of a product, buyers or consumer's choice and taste; gathering of
information is necessary.

9. Consumer Analysis: Another important function of marketing is to
analyze the consumers’ taste, demand, characteristics and interest.
Because, if this task is not done properly, the risk of the business
increases and expansion of business is hindered.

Activity — 1 : On the basis of discussion above try to find out the importance
of Marketing through team work.

e Concept of Distribution Channel

Sometimes, the manufacturer sales their produced goods to the consumers

2 directly. But, in most of the cases, direct selling to the consumer is not
& possible. As a_ result, presence of intermediaries becomes necessary.

120 Business Entrepreneurship
Business intermediaries work as bridge between the manufacturer and the
consumer. Helps from the wholesaler and retailer is to be taken through
buying and selling as part of marketing. Distribution channel is known as the
process to reach the goods and service from its manufacturer to the
consumer. For example, consumers do not buy tea from its manufacturer
which is produced at tea garden, rather the wholesaler buys it from the
manufacturer. Then, he sells it to the retailer. Consumers buy tea from the
retailer. In this way, the products reach the destination of consumer through
a particular channel.

e Distribution Channel and Marketing of Different Goods:
Distribution channel depends upon the nature and types of goods and
services. Distribution channel of different products are shown below:

1. Direct Sales: When the goods manufactured are directly sold to the
consumers without the help of any intermediaries are called direct
distribution. Some agricultural products such as paddy, fruits, vegetables
and industrial products such as molasses, sugar etc. is directly sold to the
consumers.

2. Selling through Retailer: In some cases, to sell the goods and services,
assistance is taken from the retailer. The manufacturer sells their goods to
the retailer and the retailer supplies them to the consumers as per demand.
Normally, paddy, rice, potato, soap, biscuit, vermicelli etc. are sold and
distributed through this channel. The manufacturers sell the product to the
retailer at local hat and bazaar.

Diagram of various distribution channels:

ee |] ———___ oe

Consumer
+(e]. + [ee

Representative or Agent >| Consumer |

Representative or Agent —+[ Retailer | [Consumer S

Marketing 121

3. Selling through Retailer & Wholesaler: Through this process, the

manufacturer sells the products to the wholesaler and wholesaler sells

them to the retailer and the retailer sells the products to the consumer.

Places where agricultural products are grown in vast, the wholesaler buys

goods from those places. Normally, paddy, jute, mustard, mango, banana

and different types of vegetables are bought by the wholesalers. On the

other hand, industrialized products such as paper, pens etc. are also

bought by the wholesalers. At last those products reach the consumers via
retailer.

4, Selling through Representative or Agent: In many cases, the
manufacturers appoint representatives or agents at different places of the
country and sell their products through them to the consumer. Various
types of electronic goods such as TV, Freeze, Fan, agricultural products
like fertilizer, seeds etc. are distributed through this channel.

5. Selling through Representatives/ Agents and Retailer: In this process,
the manufacturer supplies the goods to the representatives or agents as
per demand and then the agents supply their products to the retailer with
the help of their own transportation. The consumers then can buy the
products from the retailer. Various types of soft drinks and cosmetics are
sold through this distribution channel in our country.

Activity -2 : Try to make a list of the daily products bought by your

family and identify which distribution channel is used for them.
a O
ee
ES
Se
A
Ee
e Concept of Advertising
After closing of the school, Irfan saw a person distributing a paper at the school
gate.He was also given one. It was written that a new stationary shop was going
Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-16

122 Business Entrepreneurship
to be opened at their bazaar. Where, they will be able to find books, papers, pen,
pencil, bag and other related things at a cheaper rate. On the inaugural occasion,
every buyer will be presented with a colorful calendar. After returning home, he
showed the paper to his elder brother and he told that it was a leaflet. These are
distributed for the campaign of any business,
From the above event, the leaflet distributed for the general buyers of their shop
is a media of advertisement. Advertisement is strategy or way to attract the
attention of the mass to a particular product or service. Every day, we see or hear
a lot of different attractive advertisement on television, radio and paper. Other
media for advertisement are leaflet, magazine, transport, billboard, signboard,
internet etc.
: Talk
ee i
Billboard of an advertisement (Teletalk)
Different Types of Media of Advertising
There are various medias for advertisement. A single media is not used for all
kinds of business or products. The media for advertisement is selected on the
basis of demand, quality, price and buyer of the product. Different media for
advertisement and their nature is mentioned below:
[Media for Advertisement] ——~—=~=S~C~SrYpe=*s=~=~‘~*~*~S~*d
Different pages orparticular pages of various
dailies or weeklies
Periodicals Weeklies, fortnightlies, monthlies and annual
periodicals,consumer’s periodicals, agricultural
periodicals, women periodicals, finance
periodicals etc .
Circular Letters Circular letters mentioning the product’s quality, | .
characteristics, price and available place. s

Marketing 123
poster at places of mass movement.
Commercial Advertisement, Jingle, National
advertisement, Regional advertisement
during the jnterval and at the end of the movie
Boishakhi mela, Industry Fair, Trade Fair,
Cottage Industry Fair, Meenabazaar etc.
Pharmaceutical companies, book _ seller,
cosmetics seller distributes samples of their
products
at important places in the city .
Cinema, Soap, Cigarette, Soft drinks all these
products use transport advertisement.
Balloon, Sky advertisement.
Importance of Advertisement
Advertisement is a very effective media for distribution of products and services
at this competitive business world for the small, medium and large business
enterprises. The importance of advertisement is described below:

1. Through advertisement, the quality of product, its price and uses are revealed
to the mass. As a result, demand for the product increases which increases the
production, sales and profit.

2. Advertisement helps to enhance the goodwill of the business which is a
important asset of an organization. Increased goodwill helps expansion of the
business. Advertisement also helps to maintain the goodwill.

3. Advertisement brings velocity to the campaign of the product. Demand of

20 the product, sales and total production increases which results in increase
S gross domestic production.

124 Business Entrepreneurship

4. Advertisement creates demand for a product and businessmen ensure to

supply the product accordingly. Equilibrium is maintained between
demand and supply and stability of price is established.

5. Because of advertisement, market of the product expands and business
increases. As a result, employment opportunity generates and
unemployment problem is solved.

6. The general people become acquainted with new products and service
with the help of advertisement. As a result, propensity to consumption
among them increases. Their standard of living also increases with
consuming quality products.

7. Advertisement helps to create social and ethical awareness which helps to
ensure social welfare and social development. For example, awareness
about quality and inferiority of products, awareness of negative impact of
smoking, awareness about aids, advertisement can play a vital role.

8. Advertisement awakens the patriotism among people and motivates them
to buy their own products. "Be proud buy the product of own country"
-this type of advertisement encourages to uphold patriotism and
nationalism.

Activity -3 : Make a list of the products for which you see advertisement

at various media.

Write down the reason(s) how an advertisement has attracted you.

Name of the Advertisement Reasons for attraction
oo
S

Marketing 125
e Concepts of Salesmanship

Salesmanship is the technique or efficiency of a person by which he/she can sell
a product to a person by attracting him with his quality. A salesman earns the
trust of the buyer about the business and products and makes them a permanent
buyer on the basis of long term relationship.

e Qualities of a Good Salesman

The role of a salesman at this competitive business world for increase of sales
and success of the business is very significant. In many cases, the success or
failure depends upon the quality of a salesman. A salesman must inherit a
number of good qualities to impress and attract the buyer and consumer to make
them permanent customer. The qualities of salesman are analyzed below:

1. Good looking face: Good looking face can easily attract the attention
of the buyers

2. Good Health: A salesman must be of good health. Because it helps to
attract people

3. Nice smile: Smiling face of the salesman gives the buyers extra motivation

4. Willingness and cordiality: A salesman must have interest in his
work. Cordiality to the buyer and respect towards self job increases the
goodwill of the business.

5. Confidence: To make to goods acceptable to the buyer; the salesman
must be confident.

6. Keen intelligence: It is necessary to realize the interest, mentality,
attitude of the buyers’ and ability to face unwanting situation with
charm. A salesman must have keen intelligence.

7. Patience: A salesman must have patience.

Ethical Quality

8. Honesty and Trustworthiness: A salesman must show his honesty
and trustworthiness to the buyers through his transaction and dealing

with them. Honesty and trustworthiness make the buyer permanent customer.

9. Decent behavior: A salesman is to be gentle, modest, kind and smart
in his behavior.

10. Ability to mix with people: A salesman must have the quality to mix
with the customer freely so that he can be friendly with them and convert
them to permanent customer.

11. Gender Awareness: How to behave with different people such as

26 men - women, boys-girls, aged people, the salesman must have
8 awareness in this regards.

126 Business Entrepreneurship
12. Positive Attitude: An ideal salesman always keeps positive mentality
about his customers. If any body uses any bitter words about a product
or price, he must be influenced positively with smiling face.
13. Education and experience: A salesman must have sufficient education
and experience so that he can use them when necessary at the business
14. Knowledge of Distribution: A salesman must have efficiency on the
tasks like selection, collection, pricing, standardizing, packaging of products.
15. Efficiency in Accounts: A salesman must have efficiency and knowledge
of pricing and accounting of products.
Activity-4 : Through self analysis, identify the qualities of an ideal Salesman
present in you and which qualities need improvement.
Qualities of Salesman | The qualities you have | The qualities need
(put tick mark) more improvement
(Put tick mark)
Good Health OO
[NiceSmile |
ee
Keen Intelligence ee
[Patience |
Honesty and
trustworthiness
Ability to mix with
people
a
Distribution
ho)
S
A

Marketing 127
EXERCISE
Multiple Choice Question (MCQ)
1. What is the main task of marketing?
a. Buying b. Selling
c. Transportation d. Warehousing
2. Why advertisement for a product is done -
a. To increase the price of the product
b. To give the idea about the product
c. To know the market of the product.
d. To create entrepreneur
After reading the following paragraph, answer question No. 3 & 4:
Mr. Rubel is a cultivator of watermelon. He himself carries and sells the grown
watermelon to the local market. He is trying to find other strategy of selling
goods since the production has increased.
3. Which of the following is Rubel’s distribution channel?
a. Manufacturer > Consumer b. Manufacturer >Retailer
c. Manufacturer >Retailer >Consumer d. Wholesaler >Retailer
4. Using the right distribution channel by Rubel-
i. Reduces the gap between buyer and seller
ii. Buyer gets the product at less price
iii. Distribution functions become easier
Which one of the following is correct?
a.i& ii b.i & iii
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
Creative Question
1. Shovo's selling decreases because of a similar type of new shop is set up
beside him. As a strategy to increase his sales, Shuvo appointed a salesman
who is good looking and well-spoken. After several days his sales returns to
the previous level.
a. With what products can be attractive?
b. What is standardizing? Explain.
% c. What qualities Shuvo has considered to recruit the salesman?
S d. Evaluate the steps of Shuvo to increase his sales.

128 Business Entrepreneurship
2. There is a new shop name ‘Ador Store' on the highway. But, for some reasons
the sale of that shop is not good. Recently, the owner of the shop distributed a
leaflet among the houses of the locality with the help of a newspaper hawker
introducing his shop, nature of service, quality of products and name of
different products available. After some days, it was found that number of
customers and sales of the shop is increasing.
a. Who is the last party in the distribution channel?
b. What is grading? Explain
c. What media for advertisement did the owner of Ador Store select?
Explain.
d. ‘Steps taken by the owner is one of the strategies to increase sales’ —
Express your opinion.
Assignment : collect information about the marketing conditions of the products
of a manufacturer in your area and present them in the classroom.
Steps : Collect data through interview, presentation of data, Analysis of
data, Personal opinions.
ho}
=

CHAPTER TEN
Assistance for Entrepreneurship Development
Different types of assistance are necessary to take initiative to establish a
business firm. These assistance motivate the entrepreneur to set up the business
or industry and operate them successfully. In this chapter, we shall learn about
various assistances provided by Bangladesh Industrial policy, different
Government & private commercial banks and non government development
organization.
th ahhh
ga Te
1 Wissel
BN
basaat SH
Patni Wa
i 4)
1,
After reading this chapter, we shall be able to —
e Explain the concept of Assistance.
e Mention the types and sources of assistance for business in Bangladesh.
e Describe the types of assistance mentioned in the Industrial Policy.
e Describe the types of assistance provided by Bangladesh Small and Cottage
Industries Corporation.
e Describe the types of assistance provided by the commercial banks.
e Describe the types of assistance provided by the Non Government
Development Organizations.
Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-17

130 Business Entrepreneurship
e Concept of Assistance for Entrepreneurship
To start a new business or industry is a creative and structural job. But, risk is
also involved with this. As a result, nobody wants to come forward to take
this job. For this reason various assistances is necessary. Assistance favoring
an entrepreneur motivates a potential entrepreneur to set up business or
industry and run it smoothly. On the basis of nature of assistance, it is
classified in three types: Motivating, Supporting and Preserving. Motivating
assistances include different types of training, awareness of opportunities for
investment, huge campaign of government support relating to establishing
industries, technical and economic information sharing and providing
consultancy. With the help of supportive assistance, the entrepreneur gets
facilities related to establishing industries, operation, utilizing assets and
other benefits. Registration, supply of capital, infrastructural support, tax
holiday, subsidy etc. are mentionable supportive assistances. On the other
hand, preserving assistances includes the supports to remove the hindrances
to maintain the operational activities and expansion of business.
Sources of Assistances
1. Bangladesh Small and Cottage Industries Corporation
2. Bangladesh Development Bank Limited
3. Commercial Banks
4. Bangladesh Industrial Technical Assistance Centre
5. Bangladesh Council for Scientific and Industrial Research.
6. Directorate of Youth Development
7. Directorate of Women Affairs
8. Non Government Development Organization
Bangladesh Small & Cottage Industries Corporation
While working as a Minister of Labor, Commerce and Industry under the
Juktafront Government in 1957, Father of the nation Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman placed the bill to the parliament to establish a "Small and
Cottage Industries Corporation". As a result of this, East Pakistan Small and
Cottage Industries Corporation (EPSCIC) was formed in 30th May 1957 which
is named as Bangladesh Small and Cottage Industries Corporation (BSCIC) x
after independence. Its 55th anniversary has been celebrated on 2012 with &

Assistance for Entrepreneurship Development 131
immense pride. At present BSCIC has been working as a main assisting body for
the development of the small and cottage industries Bangladesh. The
corporation is supervised under the Ministry of Industry. The main objective of
this corporation is to provide investment advice for the development of
industries. Other assistances provided by BSCIC are as follows:
e Providing information related to industries
e Selecting entrepreneur
e Development of industrial entrepreneurship
e Selecting of project
e Evaluation of project
e Infrastructural development
e Management and Efficiency Development
e Designing of Product
e Assistance in Supplying Raw Materials
e Assistance in distribution of finished goods
e Registration of Small and Cottage Industries
For the above mentioned assistances and any other advice for setting up an
industry, an entrepreneur has to communicate with the district BSCIC Industry
Assistance Center. Till April, 2012 we had 74 BSCIC industrial area, training
institute and 4277 factories in our country. 33 lac 81 thousand people are
working in these factories.
Bangladesh Development Bank Limited
Bangladesh Development Bank Limited (BDBL) is a complete state owned
commercial bank. BDBL started operation since Yd January 2010 combining
Bangladesh Shilpa Bank and Bangladesh Shilpa Rin Shangstha. Besides
commercial banking this bank provides financial and technical support to the
government and private industries. The main task of BDBL is to extend loan and
provide advise to the entrepreneur for rapid industrialization in the country for
setting up new industries, modernizing existing industries, changing of
machineries and expansion of business and patronizing agro based industries.
o The mentionable assistances provided by BDBL are as follows:
S
N

132 Business Entrepreneurship
a. Priority of the Small Entrepreneur

It is undeniable to acknowledge the role played by the small and medium
enterprises (SME) for the total economic development of a developing country
like Bangladesh. The sector being labor intensive can immediately contribute to
increase national income and employment generation. SMEs are called
‘Employment Generating Machine’. Between the small and medium enterprises
in our country; entrepreneur and entrepreneurship for small enterprises has more
potentiality for employment generation, reduce unemployment and ensuring
economic growth. In this connection, as per direction from Bangladesh Bank,
the branches of BDBL extends 40% loan favoring small entrepreneurs of their
total loan budgeted for SME sector. The rest amount is distributed among the
medium entrepreneurs.

b. Prioritizing the Manufacturing and Service Sector: Bangladesh
government has given priority to manufacturing and service industry over trade
to ensure employment generation and enhancement of production. As a result,
the branches of BDBL has to make loan favoring manufacturing industries and
agro based service industry.

c. Priority of the Women Entrepreneur: Any women who are proprietor of
sole proprietorship firm, partner in a partnership firm and owner of 51 % share
in Joint Stock Company, can be called a women entrepreneur. 50 percent of the
total population in Bangladesh is women. Involvement of the women in to the
mainstream of economy is necessary for quick economic development of the
country. Our women have honesty, interest, creativity and work efficiency.
Specially, their activities in micro credit and continuous participation in
garments industry has a vital role for industrialization. For this reason, BDBL
has been extending more loan facility with simple terms for the small and
medium industry women entrepreneurs.

Commercial Banks

The four nationalized commercial Banks (Sonali, Janata, Agrani and Ruapli) and
Bangladesh Krishi Bank with help of their branches all around the country has
been providing financial services to industry and business entrepreneurs.
Specially, they have taken initiatives to quicken the expansion of small and
medium enterprises and business with a view to the development of labor
intensive and employment generating economic development. The Sonali Bank 2
Limited as a development partner of the government has been providing various &

Assistance for Entrepreneurship Development 133
services to sole proprietorship, partnership, private limited companies and
public limited companies for the development of SME sector. The loan limit
varies from Taka 50 thousand to Taka 10 crore depending upon the nature of
industry or business. The term of the loan is fixed on the basis of the project. The
tenure is one year for working capital and three to seven years for term loan. The
prerequisites to avail the loan are as follows:
e The entrepreneur must have two years of experience
e The entrepreneur must be sound, educated and age should be between
18 to 60 years
e Defaulters, Bankrupt, Insane and dim-witted can not apply for the loan
e The entrepreneur should be Bangladeshi
e Women entrepreneur will given priority
Bangladesh Small Industries & Commerce Bank Limited -BASIC
BASIC Bank Limited was incorporated in 1988 under the Company Act 1913 of
Bangladesh and commenced its business from 31st January 1989. At present, it
has been operating under the Bank Companies Act 1991. Though, the bank was
established for financing the small enterprises, at present it provides both
commercial and developmental services. As per Articles of Association of the
Bank, it is committed to invest 50% of its allowable fund to the Small and
Cottage Industries. The Bank is mainly financing the entrepreneurs of Small and
medium enterprises. The sectors are mainly Ready Made Garments and Agro
Based Industries, such as Poultry, Engineering, Food and Food Based Industries,
Chemical Industries, Pharmaceutical Industries, Paper and Board Mills, Printing
and Packaging Industries, Leather and Jute Industries. A chart of industrial loan
provided by BASIC Bank limited for the last several years is given below:
so Source: BASIC Bank Limited
Ss
N

134 Business Entrepreneurship
Bangladesh Industrial Technical Assistance Centre -BITAC
This institution has been established for industrial development and economic
changes specially to increase the industrial production. Assistances provided by
this organization are training for developing technical and managerial
efficiency, introducing new machineries and design and advising to solve
problems in installation of new machineries. Besides, it has publications,
seminar, group discussion, fair and movie show for spreading the technological
knowledge. BITAC has been operated through its four regional office. The
centers are located at Dhaka, Chittagong, Chandpur and Khulna. At present,
work is going on to set up another center at Bogra.
Bangladesh Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
Bangladesh council for Scientific and Industrial Research has been established
in 1973 to become self sufficient in industrialization. The main objective of the
council is to research on the problems related to science, industry and
technology for setting up new industry, to encourage new research and provide
consultancy in operating research. The council invents and innovates new things
in industrial sector, provides guideline for scientific and industrial research,
innovates new product and process. An entrepreneur can commercially produce
the invention or product invented by the council and contributes to the
production.
Directorate of Youth Development
Directorate of Youth Development under the Ministry of Youth and Sports
operates many activities for the self-employment of youth and women. The
directorate has many training institutes all over the country. Various training on
such as small business, agricultural farm, Horticulture, Apiculture, Cattle
raismg, Aquaculture, computer learning, office management, sewing and
embroidery are given to the educated and less educated youths. Besides, it also
arranges to supply capital at a low interest.
Directorate of Women Affairs
The directorate of women affairs provides various training and credit facilities to
the women entrepreneurs of towns and villages for their prospect of creativity,
self-employment and empowerment. Their training includes poultry farming,
cattle raising, handicrafts, boutique works, sewing etc. 20
S
A

Assistance for Entrepreneurship Development 135
Non Government Organizations -NGOs

Non Government Organizations are playing a significant role for development
of entrepreneurship. These organizations help the poor and lower class people
from villages to be entrepreneur. Among the numerous NGOs in Bangladesh, the
role of BRAC is most important.

Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee - BRAC

BRAC is the largest NGO in Bangladesh as well as all over the world as per
statement made on 2010. After our independence, this organization was
established in 1972 under the leadership of Mr. Fazle Hassan Abed. At first it
was working on grants and rehabilitation only. But, now it is working with
various programs on poverty alleviation and women empowerment. At present,
it is working in all 64 districts in Bangladesh. The activities performed by BRAC
for the development of entrepreneur are as follows:

1. Activities to develop small industries: Activities includes weaving,
poultry farming, furniture making, oil producing, molasses
manufacturing, rope making, making things from bamboo and cane, rice
making

2. Development of Associate Organization: Under this program the land
less people are organized through project planning, implementation,
management and distribution activities.

3. Developing the Manufacturing Unit: The quality and production of
village based industrial product are developed through art design and
technology. Besides, BRAC is also working to develop the traditional
crafts such as Silk, Jamdani, Nakshi katha etc. BRAC has its own dairy
farm and chain shop (Aarong).

a >
ae
ES Various Items of BRAC operated Aarong

136 Business Entrepreneurship
Micro Industries Development Assistance Service - MIDAS
As a private development organization MIDAS provides financial, technical
and management related assistance to the entrepreneur of the small and
medium enterprises. Overall activities of MIDAS are —
1. Extending loan facility to small and medium industries
2. Providing training, information and advice to the national,
multinational, government and non government organizations.
3. Continuing investigation and research in business
4. To increase the network of cooperation among entrepreneurs.
5. Assisting in marketing of goods produced by small and medium
enterprises to national and international market
Proshika
Proshika has been contributing a lot to the development of small industries in
Bangladesh. Proshika has been introducing many new profession related to
Agro Industries, Weaving, Silk producing, Handicrafts, Cattle raising, Bee
hiving, plant growing etc. The entrepreneurs who have come forward in these
jobs, Proshika has provided them with training and loan.
Thengamara Mohila Sabuj Sangha-TMSS
Thengamara Mohila Sabuj Sangha-TMSS started work in 1980 in northern
district Bogra. At present its work has spread all over the country. It mainly
provides loan assistance, training and self employment to poor and landless
women. It also provides loan assistance to small entrepreneurs for grocery,
poultry farming, fish cultivation, horticulture and cottage industry.
Various Assistances as per Industrial Policy 2010
Motivating] e Adoption of various activities for the development of
entrepreneurship culture so that both the men and women
can identify themselves as an agent for changing the
economic condition of the society.

e Acknowledgement of the successful entrepreneurs, To
observe National Entrepreneurship Day, inclusion of
entrepreneurship development in the curriculum of school,
college and university

e Subject related to nation building and development should
be included in the curriculum of primary and secondary S

Assistance for Entrepreneurship Development 137
level and motivating them to make the youth of the
country aware of the different aspects of life struggle,
development of the country and success, limited
infrastructural asset with a view to develop human
resources at the primary and secondary level of education.

Supporting} ¢ To award the inventor of new technology to ensure
addition of new technology in the industry for additional
development of industrial products. Technical training,
technology invention, technology development, transfers
of technology and selecting appropriate technology and
implementing them with a view to assist the factories with
strengthening the BITAC and other organizations.

e To create opportunity to work simultaneously of the local
machineries manufacturer and technology based
institutions to ensure easy availability of local and
appropriate technology at a cheaper rate for the local
investors especially investors of micro, cottage and small
industries.

e To provide tax holiday as the following ways to the
companies which have started commercial production
within 30.06.2012:

i) Industries established in Dhaka and Chittagong (excluding

districts in the hill tracts) division shall enjoy tax holiday of

100% for first two years, 50% for the next two years and 25%

on the last year.

ii) Industries established in Rajshahi, Khulna, Sylhet, Barisal

and Rangpur Division and Districts of Hill tracts Tax Holiday

is seven years. 100% Tax Holiday is for the first three years
and 50% for the next three years and 25% for the last year.

Preserving e To give priority to the women entrepreneur in the service

sector such as ICT, Laundry, Tourism, Beauty Parlor,
Advertising Firm, etc. and other sectors like Aquaculture,
Agro and Handicrafts, Live Stock raising, and Food
Processing etc.

e To provide special incentives to assist in small, medium and
cottage industries, protecting weaving industry, establishing
Silk Palli like Benarasi and Jamdani Palli. More over,
assistance to be provided to the weavers, Black smith,
potter, pottery, bamboo, cane, tama, kasa and pati industry.

Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-18

138 Business Entrepreneurship
EXERCISE
Multiple Choice Question (MCQ)
1. Which one is Supporting Assistance?
a. Advising b. Providing Information
c. Supply of Capital d. Modernization of Business
2. Why people do not want to come forward to establish industries?
a. It requires creativity b. The task is formal
c. Risk is to be taken in this job d. It requires own capital
After reading the following paragraph, answer question No. 3 & 4:
Mrs. Nishat Afrin started a project in 2011 to make household utensils with
bamboo and cane. While being in the production process she faced financial
difficulties and took loan from a financial institution. Because of having Tax
Holiday facility, her business started improving day by day.
3. What is the amount of Tax Holiday for Ms. Nishat Afrin on her income
in the year 2015?
a. 100% b. 75%
c. 50% d. 25%
4. With the assistance from the financial institution-
i. Women entrepreneur in the country shall increase
ii. Development of large scale industries will be ensured
iii. Economic development of the country will be achieved
Which one of the following is correct?
a.i&ii b. i & iii
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
Creative Question
1. Mr. Mehraj did not want to establish and operate a business considering the
risk and complexity associated with it. But, after hearing about the
government and non government assistances, he established garments
factory at Savar near Dhaka. He became successful within short time with the
help of his hard work and sincerity. Recently, it has become difficult for him
to sustain because of his competitors using high quality technology.
a. What is the percentage of women in the total population of Bangladesh? ~
b. What is the main job of BSCIC? Explain s

Assistance for Entrepreneurship Development 139
c. Why Mr. Mehraj become interested to set up the garment industry? Explain
d. Does Mr. Mehraj need any assistance? Give logic to your answer.

2. Ms. Saima Hoque used to perform challenging jobs from her childhood. She
established a 100% export oriented modem factory name 'Saima Food
Products in the Narayangonj BSCIC Area after completion of her studies from
University. She has taken financial and technical support from an institution.
At present, 300 people are working in her factory.

a. What is the elaboration of BSCIC?
b. Explain the main task of the Directorate of the Women A ffairs.
c. What government organization is engaged to support the entrepreneurs
like Ms. Saima? Explain.
d. Evaluate the role played by Ms. Saima for the over all economic
development of the country.

=

R

CHAPTER ELEVEN
Ethics in Business and Social Responsibilities
The main objective of business is generating profit. However, it has to maintain
some ethics and social responsibilities as well. As a part of the society, the
entrepreneur and business organization has to bear in mind and uphold the idea
of social values, morality and positive attitude towards society. In this chapter,
we shall learn about the different aspects of ethics and social responsibility of a
business.
i a ae, oF cn ae
iy ie i ee 5 at he a
After reading this chapter, we shall be able to —
e Explain the concept and importance of business values, and ethics
e Explain the concept of business and social responsibilities.
e Explain the mode of responsibility towards state, society, buyer
and worker.
e Explain the features and effect of air pollution, water pollution,
sound pollution and land contamination.
e Identify the social responsibilities of business.
e Describe the various types of developmental works of |
social responsibilities of different business. S

Ethics in Business and Social Responsibilities 141
Concept of Business Values and Ethics
The concept of values and ethics are indispensable to each other. Value is the
wisdom and attitude of the society which is treated as valuable and eligible to be
followed by others. It indicates the positive, wellbeing and goodness of human
life. Ethical principle means the ability to differentiate between good and bad,
justice and injustice, do's and don'ts etc. It is really necessary to follow the
ethical standard of the behavior of people to form a happy society and country as
a whole.
Ethics
The word ethics has evolved from the Greek 'Ethos' which means the standard
of human behavior. Ethics is related to our daily activities. We know that the
responsibility of teacher is to teach the students properly. This is not the end. He
has to ensure whether the students understand the lessons. He should also look
after the attentive-inattentive students, to examine the home works of the
students and make correction if there is any mistake; all these tasks are included
in his ethical responsibilities. Like a teacher a student needs to be followed some
ethics; such as going to school in time, doing home work and follow the
ideology of the teacher. Ethics means the capacity of analyzing the good and bad
and accepting the right things. It is the part of ethics to carry out responsibilities
by the teacher and student properly.
Business Ethics
In a business there are lots of task related from the very beginning to the
operational level. To proceed with the tasks with proper, decent and correct
measures, ethics works as a guideline for this. Besides, the business ethics or
ethical value helps us to be well behaved in the business world.
Business is a societal institution. A business organization is formed and
continues to meet up the demand for various goods and services for our daily
use. An entrepreneur or businessman sell the products to the consumers with
addition of profit with the production cost or purchase price. Profit is the
difference between the selling price and buying price or selling price and
production cost. If any body creates an artificial demand for a product to gain
extra profit, then it will go against ethics. There are some ethical values in
operating a business. The pricing of the product should be fixed in such way so
so that the seller can make profit along with keeping the price within the purchasing
& power of the buyer. On the other hand, the business person should not supply

142 Business Entrepreneurship
such products which are harmful for the society. It means that business should
be operated through maintaining the interest of the stakeholders. Other ethics of
business are as follows:
e To maintain honesty
e Not to produce and market harmful products
e Not to cheat with the customer
e Not to sale expired product and goods
e Not to make any artificial scarcity of products
e To follow the commercial and industrial law of the state
e Not to pollute environment
e To contribute to the welfare of the society.
Necessity of Business Values and Ethics
In our country, making excessive profit and illegality in business is increasing
day by day. Ethical practice in business in Bangladesh is not satisfactory. Every
day we can see a lot of negative news in the dailies. For example we can say
selling of dead chicken, contaminating food, producing and selling of low
quality products, cheating in weight, fish and fruits with formalin, mixing of
harmful colour in food is dangerous for health giving false and exaggerate
information of products, using low quality of products in construction,
contaminated medicine, plying of vehicles ineligible to run on the road. The
impact of these unethical activities is severe. A number of children has been
becoming sick and dying from tainted fake medicine. People are getting diseased
from eating various poisonous foods. If this is not stopped immediately; very
soon we shall find ourselves in an ailing society. The result of which will be
devastating. For the following reasons necessity of business values and ethics
are immense:
1. Man is the best creation of God. Unethical activities and attitude is
not expected from them.
2. A businessman lives on selling manufactured or supplied goods. It is
their ethical obligation to supply right goods and services
3. At present, people are falling sick of complex and severe diseases
from eating contaminated foods. It has a dire impact. Only, business
ethics can save us from this dire situation.
4. Medicine contamination causes death in many cases. The ethical
mentality of the manufacturer of medicine can save from this S
devastating consequence. N

Ethics in Business and Social Responsibilities 143

5. Business is a social institution. It is responsible to look after the good —
bad, welfare of the society.

6. Though, generation of profit is the main objective of business, it has
some social responsibility as well. To avoid the social responsibility is
not good for the business.

7. To carry out social responsibility is obligatory for the business.

8. The role of ethics is immense to maintain and operate the business
with sound and proper way. The decision of the business are correct
if the general rule for ethics are followed

9. Though, temporary financial gain is possible from unethical activities of
the business. But, there are many businesses that has gone astray by
getting involved in unethical works.

10. Everybody hates the businessman involved in unethical activities. There
is no alternative of respect and honor for the businessman other than
availing ethics and right path-ways of business.

Concept of Social Responsibility and Its Importance
The social responsibility of business means to contribute to the well being and
welfare activities of the society along with earning profit. From ancient times,
the objective of the business has concentrated on profit only. But, the concept
has been changed now. Business is a social organization. Its activities also
revolve around the society. To estimate the demand for goods and services and
manufacture and supply them accordingly to meet up the demand are the main
activities of business. To live a sound life there are some more demands such as
education, health service, entertainment etc. It is the duty of the government to
arrange to supply the expensive necessities for the people, since individual can
not arrange to supply them because of the incapacity. Recently, some business
organization are coming forward to perform various public welfare task like
establishing schools, college, hospital, providing scholarships to the meritorious
poor pupils, etc. Since business is a social institution, its existence and
profitability largely depends upon the support of the mass. Carrying out social
responsibility is the ethical responsibility of every business.
In real sense, a business person is a creative and well aware member of the
society. He is creative, mindful and effective. He has the right to receive
something form the society and similarly he has some responsibility to give
« something back to the society. If he spends a part of his earned profit for society
S it will increase his honor and status in the society.

144 Business Entrepreneurship
Activity-1 (group work): what are the reasons for businessmen to carry
out social responsibilities?
FE
a
LE
4
Ea
Case Study
Abul Kashem is an intelligent, brave, trustworthy and honest young man. He
plays arole to organize every program in his society. He used to visit a pharmacy
on his way to school while studying. Sometimes, he used to help the owner of
the pharmacy in various tasks. In this way, he acquired some knowledge on
pharmacy business. He failed to continue his studies after SSC, so he sold some
ornaments of his mother and started a pharmacy with a small amount of capital.
He remembered some advises from his father such as "Never deceive a person,
‘Give honest advice, if sought by anyone’ ‘Never tell lies’ "Respect your elders'
‘Help the destitute’. Abul Kashem always followed ethics in operating his
business. He always gave good advice to patients about good doctors. Many
patients with complex diseases have been benefitted from his advice. Besides,
he used to sell genuine medicine. He never tried to make more profit by taking
higher price or selling duplicate medicine. For all these reasons, his profit grew
rapidly and he became reputed as an honest business person. Besides, his
business also prospered.
After a period of time, his son, Abdur Rahman took responsibility of the
pharmacy. But, out of his greed, he started to sell duplicate medicine. Many
people suffered from buying medicine from his shop. He gained disreputation
within short span of time as a dishonest businessman. Gradually, the business
lost its fame and had to be shut down.
Activity -2 (Team work) : Try to differentiate between Mr. Abul Kashem|
& Abdur Rahman on the basis of their business activities

e

e

e

e =

° §

Ethics in Business and Social Responsibilities 145
Social Responsibility of Business to Various Stakeholders
In this competitive business world, the business person has to carry out
responsibility to various stakeholders along with maintaining sustenance as per
profit growth. The stakeholders of business are state, society, buyer, worker etc.
These parties are involve with the business by some means.
Responsibility to State
The objective of the state is to ensure that business is done protecting the interest
of the people. Government is happy if demand for goods and services of mass is
met through establishing business and developing employment as well as
providing tax regularly. The following responsibilities are to be carried by the
business to the state:
a) To pay Tax to the government regularly
b) To follow the rules and regulations properly
c) To contribute for employment generation and economic development
Responsibility to the Society
The business is developed from enjoying various facilities from the society. So,
business has to carry out the following responsibilities favoring the society.
a) Producing quality products and supply them as per demand of the
society.
b) Creating opportunity for employment generation
c) Assisting in various public welfare works
d) Stand by the people at natural calamities
e) Safeguard the environment from pollution
f) Not creating artificial storage of goods for making artificial scarcity
to make extra profit.
Responsibility to Customer and Consumer
The success of business depends upon the trust and cooperation of buyer
and consumer. So, the businessman has to carry out the following responsibilities:
a) To keep product market stabilized
b) To Supply quality products
c) To make products easily available
d) To provide various information on products and market
Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma-19

146 Business Entrepreneurship
Responsibility to Employees
The profit of the business is earned through the untiring effort of employees and
staffs. Thus, business can not be operated ignoring their interest. With the
progress of business their salaries and wages should be increased, bonus and
increment to be awarded and as a whole their condition should be improved. A
business person has to perform the following responsibilities towards the
employees: 3) To provide proper wages and financial benefit.

b) To provide job security

c) To ensure suitable working environment

d) To arrange training and promotion

e) To arrange for residence and treatment
Social Activities by Different Business Organization
Though for many decades, the social responsibility of business has been
disregarded, but now a days, many organization of home and abroad are coming
forward for social activities. Various banks and Mobile operators are stepping
forward to carry out social responsibilities. Dutch-Bangla Bank, Prime Bank,
Islami Bank, Teletalk, Grameen Phone, Robi, Banglalink, Citycell, Airtel; such
organizations are contributing for the social development through working on
poverty alleviation, providing educational expenses for poor meritorious
students, awarding scholarships and providing financial assistance for the
development of games and sports. Some organizations are coming ahead to
explore the genius among the youth. In Bangladesh, the tendency of corporate
social responsibility has started recently. Bangladesh is hopeful that the profit
oriented entrepreneurs of our country will come forward to carry out the social
responsibility more and more in the future.
Environment Pollution and Business

£0 Re ee eee | 5,

River Pollution from the industrial wastage “

Ethics in Business and Social Responsibilities 147
The main disadvantages of business especially of industry is environmental
pollution. Industrial wastage and liquids are polluting the river and canal water.
Because of contamination, water becomes toxic for the things living under water
including fish. On the other hand, throwing wastage here and there, and fumes
from the vehicles pollute air. Factory machine and generator with their awful
noise cause serious sound pollution. Besides, in the name of industrialization
trees are cut down and hills are planed without any limits and environments are
polluted. In the name of land development for residence, operating up the canals
and water reservoir for residential purpose, river erosion, operating the ineligible
vehicles in the roads and extensive use of air conditioning machineries are
responsible for environmental pollution. For this reason health hazard is
increasing and on the other hand living creatures are being seriously
endangered.
Government has introduced new law to reduce pollution. But, lack of proper
implementation of the law is increasing the level of pollution day by day. Lack
of awareness about the effects of pollution, disposing wastage here and there and
flawed sewerage system are also responsible for environmental pollution.
Besides these it is necessary to increase awareness through mass media, proper
application oflaw, developing wastage management and inclusion of course on
environmental pollution in the curriculum, if we want to make us safe from the
environmental pollution.
Responsibilities of business Organizations in preventing environment
polution:
Wastages are being emitted from every industry. For example, lather industry,
use of harmful colour in dying industry. These harmful wastages should not be
thrown in flowing water of the rivers, canals and ditches. In this case the owners
and the businessmen should ensure about wastage management at and during the
time of establishment of industries. For this, establishing waste reserviors should
be ensured for every industry.
Water Pollution, Sound Pollution and Land Pollution by business and
its impact on environment.
Reasons for Air Pollution Impact on the environment
e e
20 e @
S bd e

148 Business Entrepreneurship
Reasons for Water Pollution Impact on the environment
e e
e e
e e
Reasons for Sound Pollution Impact on the environment
e e
e e
e e
Reasons for Land Pollution Impact on the environment
e e
e e
e e
EXERCISE
Multiple Choice Question (MCQ)
1. What kind of organization the business is?
a. Economical b. Social
c. Political d. Family
2. To sustain in the business in the long run, the businessman needs -
i. To earn extra profit
ii. Pricing the products perfectly
iii. Supply quality products.
Which one of the following is correct?
a.i & ii b.i & iii
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
After reading the following paragraph, answer question No. 3 & 4:
Mr. Fahim set up a leather based industry name "Tasnim Hide & Skin" in the
populous area at Agorpur in Kishoregonj. Since, the factory did not have
appropriate wastage disposing system, all ran towards the water reservoir. But,
he arranged residential facility for the workers nearby the factory and pays eS
government tax regularly. 8

Ethics in Business and Social Responsibilities 149
3. By paying taxes regularly, Mr. Fahim is carrying out responsibility to
which party?
a, Society b. State
c. Buyer d. Worker
4. The result of establishing the factory “‘Tasnim Hide & Skin’-
i. The standard of living of the people will increase
li. There will be an adverse impact on the agricultural land of locality
iii. The living creatures in the water shall extinct
Which one of the following is correct?
a.i&il b.1 & iii
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
Creative Question
1.Shahid earns limited profit from his business doing with transparency. On the
other hand, his friend Nadim earns huge profit by selling contaminated and
low quality products to the customer. The buyers always gather in front of
Nadims shop because of his glittering products. Though, Sahid earns less than
Nadim; he is mentally very happy.
a. What is the meaning of ‘ethos’?
b. ‘Not to storing of products’ what kind of responsibility it is? Explain
c. Explain the reason for Sahid’s self satisfaction.
d. Is it possible for Nadim to sustain in the long run though he is earning
huge profit at present? Give your opinion in this regards.

2. Mr. Ali decided to set up a pharmaceutical company named "Nayeem
Pharma" in the forest area of Gazipur by cutting the trees on 500 acres of land.
Later, with the advice of an environmentalist friend, he established the factory
on a nearby vacant place. Medicines produced in his factory are exported
abroad after meeting the demand of our country. Around 2000 people are
working in is factory.

a. Black smoke exposed from mills and factories pollutes what elements
of the environment?
b. What do you understand by ethics in business?- explain.
c. How “Nayeem Phrma” is helping to develop the standard of living?
x Explain.
s d. Evaluate the first decision of Mr. Ali for setting up the factory.

CHAPTER TWELVE
e
Lessons Learned from the Lives of
Successful Entrepreneurs
Though from the time beyond remembrance, the industry and commerce in our
country has been bearing rich tradition and pride, its contribution to the
economic development is not so bright. A few Bengalis name become successful
in business before independence. Mainly, the Bengalis got the fullest
opportunity for doing business after the Liberation War in 1971. During the last
40 years, several entrepreneurs have proven their superiority in business
entrepreneurship with starting business in smaller scale and now their
businesses have been contributing significantly to the socio-economic
development of the country. In this chapter, we shall discuss about the lives of
some successful entrepreneurs including two most reputed figures in the
business arena of Bangladesh; Mr. Jahurul Islam and Mr. Samson H.
Chowdhury. We, all shall be motivated from their lives and activities.
After reading this chapter, we shall be able to —
e Describe the important aspect of the lives of Mr. Jahurul Islam and Samson
H. Chowdhury
e Describe the business organization formed by Mr. Jahurul Islam and
Samson H. Chowdhury
e Mention the names of the Companies and social and public welfare
related activities of Mr. Jahurul Islam and Samson H. Chowdhury
e Describe the story of Mr. Jahurul Islam and Samson H. Chowdhury;
of becoming entrepreneur.
e Identify the learning aspects from the lives of the entrepreneurs
e Make report on the local successful entrepreneurs
2
S

Lessons Learned from the Lives of Successful Entrepreneurs 151

SSESEEESSSSEF

i ;

F

4 »)

J

4

a Sas
Jahurul Islam (1928 -1995)

One of the most successful entrepreneurs in Bangladesh is Mr. Jahurul Islam. He
is one of the most reputed figures in the arena of business, industries and
commerce of Bangladesh after the independence. He had the qualities like
business talent, hard work, visionary and creativeness. He was born at the
vallage of Bhagalpur, in Bajitpur upazila in Kishoregonj district in 1928. His
father Late Aftab Uddin was normal contractor in Mymensing District Board.
His mother's name is Mrs. Rahima Akhter Khatun. He was second among his
five brothers and three sisters. His uncle was the Oversheer of Kolkata Power
Development Board. He completed primary education from the local primary
school and went to the Sorarchor Shibnath High School for his secondary level
education. Then he took admission at Bajitpur High School. After some times,
he went to Kolkata with his uncle Mr. Murshed Uddin. He completed
Matriculation from the Ripon High School of Kolkata. He attended the I.A.
exam from the Horogonga College of Musnshigonj in 1948, but could not pass
it. His formal education came to an end because of adverse surroundings and
responsibilities and liabilities of his family. He joined the C & B Department as
an Work Sarker with salary of only taka seventy seven to remove the financial
insolvency of the family. Later, he was promoted to the post of Lower Division
Clark of the same department. He was influenced by his uncle's job and father's
business as a contractor. After two and half years, he left the job and enlisted
himself as a third class contractor. He established a company named Bengal
Development Corporation Limited and fully started his business with a capital
of only 3/4 thousand taka. His hard work and sole attention to the business and
cordial attitude gradually made him a successful entrepreneur and one of the
richest persons in the country. At the very beginning of his life as a contractor,
o he completed the construction of Kishorgonj Post Office. Afterwards, he did the
S$ road construction from Gulistan to Tikatuli in Dhaka. Because of honesty in the

152 Business Entrepreneurship
business and quality of his works, he became second class and subsequently first
class contractor by 1953. He was interested in all types of construction. He had
investment in Housing, Roads, Bridge, Irrigation System, Sanitation etc. He
used to acquire knowledge form his works and applied them in his subsequent
works. With his visionary power, he realized that the surrounding area of Dhaka
city shall get populated and the demand for the land shall increase. For this
reason, he bought vast area of land in Dhaka, Mirpur, Savar, Joydevpur and
Kaliakoir, He used those land for setting up industries and housing. Day by day,
the value of his investment was increasing with the increase of land value.
During 1960, he established a timber factory at Chittagong and a glass factory at
Gingira in Dhaka. He established a housing company named Eastern Housing
Limited in 1964 to meet up the increasing demand for the residential purpose,
the company is now one of the renowned name in the housing industry of the
country. All the companies are known as Islam Group of Companies which was
established in 1965. The group includes Eastern Housing Ltd., Navana Ltd.,
Millners Limited, Essential Products Limited, Dhaka Fibres Limited, Crescent
International Limited, Navana Sports Limited, Dhaka Re-Rolling Mills Ltd.
Aftab Automobiles Limited, Aftab Dairy Limited etc. People more than one lac
is working in various organization established by him.

Hard work, honesty, sincerity and confidence all these qualities made him a
successful man. The identity of this extraordinary son of Bengal is not limited to
as an industrialist. He was a social reformer, successful organizer and model of
efficient manager. All his achievement was possible because of his hard work
and sincerity. Not only investment and employment generation, but also his
activities of social responsibility covered various contribution to the society
including education, health, food, banking, agriculture and sports. He
established many shelters for the destitute, institutions for kids, madrasa and
school. 350 bed Jahurul Islam Medical College & Hospital established by him at
Bajitpur is the largest private medical college in Bangladesh. Besides,
establishing Nursing Training Institute and Jahurul Islam Education Complex is
his worthy deeds. He had also contributed in many ways to the great Liberation
War in 1971. The life of this work hero ended on October 19th 1995.

=
8

Lessons Learned from the Lives of Successful Entrepreneurs 153
1 ce eet
os" TS sae ea
a8 Ga Te PEF > re ee)
] eo vt Sees we
= Re the, tg.
Beet ce =e
Jahurul Islam Medical College & Hospital, Bajitpur, Kishoregonj
Activity-1 : Identify the characteristics of the successful entrepreneur Mr. Jahurul
Islam which have attracted you and how you will practice those in your life?
Special qualities of — successful | Ways to practice those in own life
entrepreneur Mr. Jahurul Islam
wal
Samson H. Chowdhury (1930-2012)
Public well wisher and the Chairman of the Square Group, Samson H.
Chowdury is the unforgettable name in the history of industry and commerce of
Bangladesh. He was born in 25th September, 1926 in the Faridpur District. He is
the son of E.H. Chowdhury and Latika Chowdhury. His father was a medical
officer of outdoor dispensary. He studied from 1930 to 1940 in the Bishnupur
High School in Kolkata. He attained Senior Cambridge Degree from there.
Then, he obtained Diploma in Management from the Harvard University
Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma- 20

154 Business Entrepreneurship
School. After finishing his studies, he got back to his village Ataikula in Pabna.
From the very boyhood, he was involved with various medicines because of his
fathers profession. After thinking a lot, he decided to take the business of
pharmacy or medicine shop as a profession. He started a small shop in the village
market. The time was 1952. In 1958, he got the license to set up medicine
factory. He, along with his three other friends providing Tk.20,000 each; with
capital of total taka 80,000.00 and 12 workers, they established ‘Square
Pharmaceuticals Limited'. The first medicine produced in their factory was
blood refining ‘Aston Syrup’. They had to purchase raw meterials from the local
importer at a very high price. They never compromised with quality. Only
because of the quality of the medicine, the doctors used to prescribe it. At that
time, their medicine became more demanding than that of the reputed firms. He
dreamed of square to be a large company. With this dream in mind, he advanced
forward against all the odds gradually, capitalizing his immense zeal and
courage. His small initiative has now turned into vast Square Group of Industries
due to his hard work, honesty and discipline. At present, approximately 30000
workers are employed there. Not only medicine, these group has expanded its
business to cosmetics, textile, agro based products, technology, healthcare,
media, etc. Products of Square have been spread all over the world. The quality
of the product is acknowledged both in home and abroad. The medicine of
Square is being exported to 50 countries. He was the Chairman of MasRanga
Television, one of the reputed private television channel in the country. Besides,
he was the Chairman of the Metropolitan Chamber and Society of Medicine
Industry. He was also involved with the International Chamber and Commerce,
Bangladesh. Shova Odhikary has written about him "He was the
owner-manager, accountant, typist, clerk, worker and medical representative in
a row". There is no work that he has not performed. He untiringly moved around
the market, towns, cities, ports of the country for marketing his medicine. Now,
Square is a proud name after passing many ups and downs over the period.
Square Group had been selected as the Best Tax Payer for the year 2009- 2010
by the National Board of Revenue .

Various products manufactured by square are used in every home. The product
of square has been adored in both home and abroad due to its standard,
competitive price, quality and discipline in work. The addiction of creativity has
made Samson H. Chowdhury a successful industrialist and triumphant
entrepreneur. With his untiring effort and passion, he established industries one ,,
after another. At present, among different institutions of Square Group: the S$

Lessons Learned from the Lives of Successful Entrepreneurs 155
mentionable names are Square Pharmaceuticals, Square Toiletries, Square
Textiles, Square Holdings, Square Spinning, Square Consumer Products, Square
Knit Fabrics, Square Fashions, Square Herbal and Naturals, Square Hospitals,
etc. This entrepreneur has mentioned patience, perseverance and honesty as the
basis for his success in interviews with different media. He believed that highest
level of values and practice of ethics has put Square to the trust of people. He
thought that the key to success was the smooth relation and combined effort of
the worker and entrepreneur. There was never any labor umest in the organiza-
tion of this labor friendly entrepreneur. The life of this great active person ended
on 5th January 2012 at the age of 86 years. His spouse name is Anika
Chowdhury. His three sons Tapan Chowdhury, Anjon Chowdhury,Swapan
Chowdhury are established in their own business.
“an ie at
eo a ry } ea ec
ee t_| pak
The famous Annoda Govinda liabrary at Pabna patronized by Samson
H. Chowdhury
Awards and Acknowledgement
In 2010, government declared 42 persons as Commercially Important Person
-CIP for their contribution in establishing industry, production, employment
generation and contribution to the increase of national income through private
sector. Samson H. Chowdhury was one of the eighteen large groups of
industries. He was awarded 'Business Man of the Year’ by the Daily Star and
DHL in 2000 and ‘Business Executive of the Year' in 1998 by the American
FS Chamber of Commerce.
g

156 Business Entrepreneurship
Activity-2 : Identify the characteristics of the successful entrepreneur Mr.
Samson H. Chowdhury which have attracted you and how you will practice
those in your life?

Special qualities of successful | Ways to practice those in own life
entrepreneur Mr. Samson UH.
Chowdh

e e

e e

e e

Shahida Begum- Entrepreneur from Housewife (Intrepreneu)

Shahida Begum is the proprietress of Liberty Gents Tailors in Barisal. She

started her business out of necessity, not from hobby or planning. She never

thought of doing something like this. She did not have the experience too. When
she started the business she faced a lot of difficulties. But strong determination
and hard work has brought her success and honor. She started to make cloths for
men and is still doing it. Shahida Begum has been residing in Barisal. Her days
were passing peacefully with her four daughter and husbands' tailoring business.
But, suddenly her husband became sick. He passed away in 1997 leaving them
to survive alone. E > Sa
A ; 4
Shahida Begum was blinded with shock as to, how she will manage the coming
days? What will be the future of her daughters? She knew nothing except the
household jobs. She does not understand business either The condition of her
husband's Gents Tailors near Barisal Town was not good. All their savings was
depleted because of her husband's sickness for many days. A little amount of
ornaments was her last resort. She started the business with 50000 taka by
selling her ornaments. Then, there were only two worker in the shop. She x
learned tailoring from them. 8

Lessons Learned from the Lives of Successful Entrepreneurs 157
At first, the gents customer, family members and relatives; no body took this
positively. But, she did not lose hope. She formed a modem gents tailor by
controlling all odds with her strong determination and confidence. In this way,
she became a business entrepreneur from a housewife. She received an award as
a successful women entrepreneur in 2008 from the SME Foundation.
Abul Kalam Azad: Owner of Azad Products
The fist business he started was with a capital of four hundred and fifty taka.
Gradually the business became a large organization. At present, he is the owner
of 'Azad Products' the famous organization of the country. His name is Abul
Kalam Azad. It is the time of 1970. After the SSC exam, he went to market with
his father to buy Hilsha Fish and Jack Fruit in exchange of Jute. He found there
a way of making profit by selling coconut and with the help of his cousin and
capital of taka 450; he started the business. This was the turning point of his life.
He used a small boat to carry coconut from one market to another. After a period,
he migrated to the city to do something more. The struggling life began. All
round the day, he used to walk by the road and dream. He found a way too. He
saw a person selling poster in front of Baitul Mokarram and got an idea. After
collecting necessary materials, he started 'Azad Poster House' a very smaller size
business. He used to sell poster by hanging them on post in front of the L.
Rahman Jewelers. Some people mocked at this and some body encouraged.
After huge effort, he managed to make poster and view card of the hero and
heroine of TV and cinema. The general people of the country accepted the
glittering poster of the famous stars. After this, he never had to look back. The
floating shop has been turned in to a large organization Azad Products. Abul
Kalam Azad says that his hard work and blessing from his mother has made him
successful. For this reason, to show honor to all the mother of the world, he has
started 'Rotnogorva Ma Award' since 2003. This award is given to those mother
having at least three established daughter or sons. One of the objectives of this
award is to create awareness among mothers. The award giving ceremony is
arranged every year on 'World Mother's Day'.
Lutfa Sunjida: Successful Entrepreneur in a Careworn Life
(Intrepreneu)
The owner of the Aunindya Boutique and Parlour at the Halishahar in the port
co city Chittagong is Lutfa Sunjida; Who started her business with taka fifteen
§ thousand only and now has enlisted her name in the list of millionaires. She has

158 Business Entrepreneurship
established the boutique and the parlor steadily with strong determination and
patience. To struggle is the main principle of her life. Without continuous effort,
it would not be possible for her to reach the present situation by any means.
When there were any problems, she overcame those with patience and hard
labor. She had to join part time job when she was a candidate for SSC exam in
1988. She used to make baby cloths and Punjabi and sell them to the local
market. She opened a showroom at Chawkview Super Market in 1989 by
borrowing thirty thousand taka from her cousin. That was the turning point of
her life. Sales of the shop was satisfactory from the very beginning. She opened
another showroom at Chittagong Shopping Complex by availing loan of fifty
thousand taka from Chittagong Midas. Her business was booming. Her family
started to become solvent. In 2004, she started a Beauty Parlor. Support from her
organization 'Anindya', hard work of the workers and spontaneous presence of
the buyers has encouraged him to step forward.

Ars
As a part of carrying out social responsibility of business, she always tried to
stand by the poor and destitute. She tries to generate employment through
providing free training. She will advance to long ways with her 'Anindya' along
with her other dreams to fulfill.
Nayeb Ali of Bogra
The young man from Bogra, Nayeb Ali has proved that it is possible to improve
ones own fate with the help of hard labor, talent and small amount of capital
despite of having severe frustration and sufferings. Nayeb Ali was cheated by a
manpower businessman on his attempt to change his fate from going abroad by
selling his lands and borrowing from others which left him helpless. Nayeb Ali
a 27 year old young man from Horihara village of Nandigram Upazila of Bogra
district went abroad by borrowing more than lac taka from the village Samity. z
When he was hapless from loosing everything, then he dreamt of livinganew §

Lessons Learned from the Lives of Successful Entrepreneurs 159
life. He decided to do something on his own in his village with the help of his
patience and merit. His friend Mizanur Rahman and other members of his
family extended their support favoring him. Most of the part of their village has
canal, ponds and water reservoir. Considering this natural element, Nayeb Ali
decided to rear duck. He bought 30 ducklings from a nearby village. With only
one thousand taka capital he established a duck farm in his village. Though,
people used to mock at him for losing money for his abroad mission, within six
month he proved himself as an ideal duck farmer in the locality. Working every
moment in his farm, he won over poverty. He also proved that it is possible to be
self depended by just farming of duck. In this way, he became not only a
remarkable figure of the locality but also their light of hope. At present, he is the
owner of a farm of 1000 ducks. His ducks give more eggs because of supportive
environment and food. He refunded all the borrowed money for going abroad
and also bought some pieces of land. With the expansion of his farm, he
appointed two more workers. Because of this farm, ten more people have got the
opportunity for earning through selling feed, snails and eggs. To see his success,
many people of this locality have been engaged in duck farming. Nayeb Ali has
a dream that his village shall be a remarkable one in self employment. This is to
be attained through proper training about poultry farming.
the mentioned four persons
3
&

160 Business Entrepreneurship
Preparing Report on Successful Entrepreneur at Local Level
The contribution of the entrepreneur for the economic development of the
country is very significant. There are many entrepreneurs who started their
business in smaller scale and later turned to large businessman through their hard
work, perseverance and creativity. We can learn about them in many ways. But
many remain unknown. Use the following format to prepare report on the local
successful entrepreneur and submit it to the class. You may invite them to the
class with help of your teacher at a feasible time to learn about their success story
so that you can be motivated from them.
Chart to prepare the report

Name and Address of the Entrepreneur:

Back Ground of Starting the Business: (How he started the business, What

was his motivation, what obstacles he had to overcome)

Initial Capital:

List of established Companies/Firms: (Sequenced by formation year)

Reason for becoming successful:

Description of participation in Social Activities:

Advice for the students of Business Entrepreneurship as the next generation)

entrepreneurs:

hol
S

Lessons Learned from the Lives of Successful Entrepreneurs 161
EXERCISE
Multiple Choice Question (MCQ)
1. Who is the founder of ‘Bengal Development Corporation Ltd.?
a. Jahurul Islam b. Samson H. Chowdhury
c. Abul Kalam Azad d. Lutfa Sunjida
2. What is entrepreneurship?
i. Initial effort to start a job
ii. Initiative to set up a business
iii. Activities related to marketing products.
iv. Financing for the business
After reading the following paragraph, answer question No.3
& 4:
Mr. Shadman is an established businessman. He spent ten lac taka to set up a
school in his own village to increase the literacy rate. Fifty teacher and staffs got
appointed in that school. For this reason, his goodwill will increase.
3. Out of what kind of responsibility Mr. Shadman established the school?
a. Social b. State
c. Personal d. familial
Business Entrepreneurship, Class 9-10, Forma- 21

162 Business Entrepreneurship
4. Entrepreneurs like Mr. Shadman contributes for the development of the

country-

i. by creating employment

ii. by enhancing the standard of living

iii. by developing the infrastructure of the village

Which one of the following is correct?

a.iWii b. i & iii

c. ii & ili d. i, ii & iti

Creative Question

1. Mr. Ishrak joined a pharmaceutical company as a medical representative. He
did not like the rules of the job and working under somebody else and left the
job to start his own medicine business. Later on with his labor, honesty and
sincerity, he established a pharmaceutical company named 'Raj Pharma’.

a. Who is the founder of Square Pharmaceuticals?

b. What do you understand by risk? Explain

c. Which characteristics of entrepreneurship helped Ishrak to be an
entrepreneur?

d. Evaluate multi dimensional characteristics of Ishrak by establishing

Raj Pharma.

2. Shyamol of Kalikochcho village simply started his business with a floating
shop.He gradually established the business by working hard through day and
night. Always smiling Shyamol never retreated to weariness. His dutifulness
of daily life impressed every body of his locality. Now, he is a reputed
businessman of the area. He is also helpful towards religious and social
activities.

a. Which year was Eastern Housing established?
b. What do you understand by Commercially Important Person -CIP? explain. S

Lessons Learned from the Lives of Successful Entrepreneurs 163
c. What qualities of entrepreneurship has made Shyamol a successful
businessman? Analyze.
d. “To participate in the religious and social activities is a great virtue of
an entrepreneur” — evaluate the statement on the basis of the paragraph
mentioned above
The End

2}

S

N

— FATT AeA CY APTAT
AS AMAA COCA CHICAT GARI
WIS FTA AH
at 6 Pre Petecra <b Kor afSaia @ efecaicea Ory VAT CREST OTSA
sos FA-g (Corr fF, 28 VOT AA) cory Sey
AON
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh

