4 e
Career Education
7 <a. LE Ey
OQ
a. @ B) Nationa

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a textbook for classes nine and ten from the academic year 2015
e
Career Education
Classes Nine-Ten
Written by
Mohammad Mojibur Rahman
Md. Abdul Haque
Mad. Shahrier Haidar
Sumera Ahsan
Editor
Dr. Mehtab Khanam
Translated by
S.M. Nazrul Islam
Mohammad Mojibur Rahman
NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka
[All rights reserved by the publisher]
First Edition : December, 2014
Reprint: August, 2016
Reprint: August, 2017
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh
For free distribution by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Printed by :

Preface
The aim of secondary education is to make the learners fit for entry into higher
education by flourishing their latent talents and prospects with a view to building the
nation with the spirit of the Language Movement and the Liberation War. To make the
learners skilled and competent citizens of the country based on the economic, social,
cultural and environmental settings is also an important issue of secondary education.
The textbooks of secondary level have been written and compiled according to the
revised curriculum 2012 in accordance with the aims and objectives of National
Education Policy-2010.Contents and presentations of the textbooks have been
selected according to the moral and humanistic values of Bengali tradition and culture
and the spirit of Liberation War 1971 ensuring equal dignity for all irrespective of
caste and creed of different religions and sex.
The present government is committed to ensure the successful implementation of
Vision 2021. Honorable Prime Minister, Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina expressed her firm determination to make the country free
from illiteracy and instructed the concerned authority to give free textbooks to every
student of the country. National Curriculum and Textbook Board started to distribute
textbooks free of cost since 2010 according to her instruction.
For the unprecedented development of Science and Technology, the learners of this
century facing the ever changing world. In this new circumstance, Carrier Education
subject is included in the curriculum as per guidelines of the national education policy,
2010. The text book has been designed with a view of creating eagerness among
learners towards jobs and professions and making them respectful towards people of
different sections and professions. It is expected that this subject will make an
important contribution to build up a self-confident new generation in order to face the
future educational and professional challenges.
] thank sincerely all for their intellectual labor who were involved in the process of
revision, writing, editing, art and design of the textbook.
Prof. Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh.

CONTENTS
Chapter One Me and My Career 01-24
Career Building: Quality and Skills 25-55
Chapter Three Developing Connectivity and Behaviour in Career 56-74
Building
Chapter Four Me and My Workplace 75-100

Chapter One
Me and My Career
Career education is a vast subject. To understand this, we did many kinds of
activities in the previous classes (from class six to class eight). We also tried to
understand how those activities are related with our life. Here we shall study
some specific and necessary topics on career building. The education about
career and the concerned activities will help us to identify the strategies of
searching and building up the right career.
Y_\ — Zz a |
r_\ |_| \— [| {]
(1 = | [FF [>
\ \_\ -— 7, {|
= | ry Fy
| an ey 2 [>
\_\ |_| f | {|
ch OY AO
| ao
By the end of the chapter we will be able to —
1. Explain the concept and development of career education;
2. Describe the rationale of studying career education;
3. Ascertain personal likings and disliking of career;
4. Determine the relation of career with personal interest, competency and values;
5. Explain the outline of future career
6. Design a poster on the planning of own future career;
7. Realize the importance of personal interest and skills in career building; and
8. Interested in gaining the attitudes and personal values necessary for
building such career.

2 Career Education
Concept of Career
To understand the concept of career well, it is necessary to be clear about the
other topics related to it. Let us get familiar with the following words. Do
these words bear the same meanings or different ones? What is the meaning of
employment? Is there any difference between job and profession? If there is
any, what is the difference? Which concept is elaborate or vast, career or job?
Let us think about these.
Work Profession
Career Vocation/Occupation
Group work
Let us get into small groups in the class; each group will choose a concept
(work/ profession/ job/career/ vocation); each group discuss that topic;
after discussing that each group will write down the brief description of the
concept on a paper, each group will put up the writings with a tape on a
certain area of the wall and after that each group will read out their
writings by turns before the class. If necessary, the after conceptions can
be revised through discussion. Now let us try to differentiate among the
concepts through discussion.
It is very difficult to determine the clear difference among these concepts of
career. These concepts are related to one another. Besides, we use these
concepts for referring to the same meaning in everyday life. For example, we
frequently say—my father is a farmer. Cultivation is his work. Again, we can
say, it is his profession. But there are some differences among these words.
Therefore, we are trying to understand these differences. Now, read the
situation below and answer the questions by discussion.
The conceptions will be clearer to us after doing the next works.
Case study: Nirupama is the Executive Director of a prominent NGO of
Natore district. She has been promoted this month. Therefor, her colleagues
have arranged a function to congratulate her. Waking up early in the morning,
Nirupama is working in the garden and thinking about what she will say in the
function. She is thinking that she will start talking about her strong will dream
of engaging the rural women in self employment. She has cherished this dream
since her student life. Then she will say how she has ended her study in x
Political Science in a college to fulfill her dream. Nirupama’s father wanted her &

Me and My Career 3
to be a doctor but she wished to work in NGO. She wanted to study in Social
Welfare which is closely related to her works. But she did not get chance. After
appearing at the admission test, she got the opportunity to study in Political
Science. By various short courses and training programmes she has acquired
the competency needed for joining in the NGO. Then she joined in an NGO as
a field officer. Though there Nirupama worked with child education, she
actually wanted to work for employment of rural women. She continued trying
to get better opportunities. Therefore she faced various interviews and
examinations in different NGOs. At last she got the opportunites to join as a
programme officer of an NGO. After three years she got the opportunity to join
this NGO. This organization is well-reputed for creating opportunity of self
employment for the rural women. She has been promoted quickly through her
gradual attainment of experience and skills. Today Nirupama can remember the
whole way to fulfill her dream. The way was of hard labour and worship, but
of course successful. She picks up a rose from the garden and places it in the
vase. This is also the result of laborious effort.

Let’s get into small group and try to answer the questions from the above

situation;

1. What will we say the work that Nirupama doing in the garden? Is it work,
profession, vocation, job or career? How is your answer different from
others?

2. Nirupama’s father wished that Nirupama would be a doctor but Nirupama
wanted to work in NGO. Which one of the professions, occupations, works,
jobs or career includes the profession of physician or working in NGO? Why?

3. Nirupama occupied in various posts at different times while working in the
NGOs, such as,

a. as a field officer in NGO
b. as an executive director in NGO

What can we say these? Is it work, profession, vocation, job or career? Justify

your opinion.

The meaning of work is vast. Indeed any mental or physical activity for serving

any purpose is work. It may be for earning or without for earning money.

Profession is indeed the work which requires person’s special education and

training. Without special education and long term training if man earns money,

eo We term it vocation. It is neither related to career. But profession is closely
S related to career. These two concepts are closer to each other.

4 Career Education
As for example we can say that the people, who design a house, are
professionals. And the people, who build it, are the men of vocation.
Now let us match the following description with the concepts got by
discussion:
Work: Generally doing anything is called work. It is an elaborate concept
which includes any kind of activity. What man is to do in job, profession or
career, it is some work or the other. Outside these, what man does in everyday
life such as studying, eating, exercising, marketing etc. we say all these work
in general.
Job: The definite post which man occupies in workplace is called job, such as,
physician in government hospital, gardener in district administration office,
guard of the school, assistant in hospital laboratory etc.
Vocation and Profession: Sometimes the words vocation and profession are
used for the same meaning. However there is a little difference between these
two words, vocation and profession. In the field of profession institutional
education and training are required which common vocation do not need, such
as, the architect who designs a building needs to receive education and training
in architecture. So it is his profession. On the other hand those who are mason
are labourers. So their work is called vocation.
Career: Career is the combined shape of all kinds of works, professions, jobs
or the experience of life which a man gains in whole of his life.
Now let us do one more activity. (Individual Work)
Nirupama's
ening cl
Education eriployment of
B. Asa C. As the
A. Asa field programme executive
officer in fficer i P
NGO officer in director
NGO inNGO
oo
Ss
N

Me and My Career 5

15 years as NGO worker

Cd

25 years of Nirupama

Every day of Nirupama

Choose the right word from the box below and place where there is a question mark.

Work, career, vocation, profession, job etc.

Now let us try to present the topics through a project:

Project: There are people of different professions and vocations around us. We

can know about their professions and vocations from them. We shall try to find

out people of different professions and vocations and know about the
information related to their professions by this project. It will help us know the
different kinds of professions and choose our own profession in future.

Let us :

1. All in the class write down the name of different professions on the board.
If any profession is repeatedly written, erasing that, write the name of
different professions as much as possible.

2. Now let us all in the class get into small groups and each group will choose
one profession for the project.

3. Let us move to collect the following data from different newspapers,
websites (such as, Bdjobs.com, jobsA1.com etc).

> What kinds of posts/jobs are found in the advertisement?

> What are the responsibilities and works to perform indeed?

> What maximum qualifications are usually asked?

> What kinds of or how many days experience are asked?

> How is the salary structure?

> What definite skills are needed?

> Other topics (If you think necessary.)

4. This time on a certain day each group will present all necessary information
in a creative way (chart, picture, graph, cartoon, posters etc.) occupying a

3 certain position in the class room. Collected magazines, newspapers,
s advertisement, picture etc. may be in possession.

6 Career Education

5. Now, different groups will move and watch others’ presentations. If
possible, you can invite the learners of class six/seven/eight.

[If you choose any profession or vocation whose advertisement you do not find
out for the project, you can collect information directly communicating with
the men of that profession.]
You will have seen that the duties and responsibilities of people of different
professions and job holders are different. So, the requisite skills and
educational qualification etc. for their works are also different. The people of
each profession can be beneficial to the society. So we should be respectful to
the people of all professions. It is our responsibility to behave well with them
and help them in their works.

Career Development

A few definitions of career are given below.

e Indeed a man’s all activities related to his profession during his life and the
ways in performing these activities are his career. It is the combination of
various jobs, posts, works, honour and experience.

e Career is one or more than one kinds of jobs which a man does due to
professional reason for a long period of his life.

e Career is the gradual course of lifelong development or a definite part of
life.

Pair work
Let us work in pair; analyze various definitions of career and write down
the main characteristics of career and present in the class.

Analyzing the characteristics of career we can understand that the matter is not
something stable, rather changeable. It is better to say development instead of
change. Because, change of career is expected to be orderly, aim based, stage
by stage and well-balanced. For this reason, we will have to develop our career
stage by stage. Various stages of career development or the stages of planning
are given below:

Knowing Oneself: It is very important to know oneself for moving forward on

the way to career. I will move forward in every stage considering my own ,,

interest, liking, disliking, skills or competency, values, etc. If most of the time S$

Me and My Career 7
of life we have to do the work which we don’t like, it makes us tired. Again,
the work for which we have no skills, if we do it, there is less prospect of doing
better.
Knowing about Varieties of Professions, Vocations and Jobs: Only to know
oneself is not enough. We will have to find out the profession or the vocation
suitable for our own choice and skills and make ourselves fit. We will have to
know what skills, competency, training, experience etc. are important for
career building. We will have to know what kind of jobs we get in certain
profession or vocation and what duties we are to perform etc. Proper
information about various professions and jobs will help us choose the right
profession or job.
Determining Aim and Objective to Plan Accordingly: It is essential to
determine aim and objectives in career development. If we have definite aim,
we can choose vocation or profession and plan clearly for its preparation. As a
result, planning is done successfully on the way to career. So, we can proceed
to career successfully. Sometimes in spite of having enough competency and
interest, career is affected owing to lack of definite goal and planning.
Suppops, you have determined a goal of your career. Then say what you will
do to achieve the goal. Of course it needs definite competency and skills for a
definite profession or vocation. You will have to achieve these. These are
achieved through various kinds of educational qualifications, experience of
co-curricular activities, training, institutional and non-institutional experiences.
It is only necessary for entering into a definite vocation or profession, not that.
Continuing in any profession or vocation, for becoming successful in that
profession or vocation or upholding the success we need to achieve new
competency and skills.
Looking for Job: We often hear that someone is looking for a job. Again we
find various job advertisements in newspapers and internets. When a man
wants to do a job, he submits application watching and evaluating the
advertisement published through these mediums. For this, a person needs
enough attention and patience. Considering own competency, skills, interest,
values, etc. he is to apply for the concerned job from various job
advertisements. It is necessary to prepare a Curriculum Vitae — CV mentioning
own educational qualification and professional experience. In this case it is
important to mention own skills, experience and competency neatly.
FS Sometimes the concerned job provider organization calls him for written
“exams, viva voce or interviews. In that case enough preparation is necessary.

8 Career Education
Changing Job if Necessary: Man changes job for different reasons. Among
these, an important and main cause is to get any opportunity of better job. We
know that career does not mean any definite job or profession rather it means
the combination of different jobs and experience on the way to life. So
considering the change in own interest, liking, skills, etc. trying for new job is
a part of career.
Career development is seen in various ways. Such as —
Line Development: The promotion from lower to upper post is meant line
development of career. For example after joining as an assistant secretary, one
is gradually promoted to the post of a secretary.
Skill Based Development: In this case man’s gradual development in a definite
work or subject is considered greatly. For instance, a teacher’s teaching of
science is a continuous practice of skills and its increase, is a kind of
development on the basis of skills.
Spiral Development: Man’s knowledge, skills and experiences develop
gradually in course of time. It is called spiral development of career. In this
case, man starts his work with a definite subject in a specific workplace and
day by day does various kinds of work with various skills along with different
experience in newer workplaces. Suppose, a science teacher, besides science,
received training in Information and Communication Technology. Next he
trained the other teachers of another school in Information and Communication
Technology. Thus spiral development of his career started.
Dynamic or Continuous Development: In this case a continuous or huge
change is seen in a man’s career. He works with different subjects or in
different kinds of workplace at different times. These changes take place
disorderly. Suppose that science teacher receiving higher education in
Management takes another job. After a few years changing that, he receives
education in Library Science and is appointed as a Chief Librarian of a Library.
These multiple changes of his career are called continuous development.
It is important to remember that all kinds of development in career are possible
in a person’s life. But sometimes a definite pattern can be noticed.
=
8

Me and My Career 9
Career Outline or Model Life Rainbow
Psychologist Donald
Super establishes a fstablishment 4 Maintenance f
model in the context aad a564
a A : 40 45 50
of gaining experience 35 55 ;
. Parent Decline
and on the basis of Exploration ‘a 30 aoe 60 és q
changing of man’s 15-24 a Giizen 65
concept about 2 Letnutie oF
himself in course of = Sh A i — eC
time. It is called Life 84 7 ¥1° S
Rainbow _ because PR 5 erates
these steps are Ages Lifestyle eeiades
arranged step by step Environmental determinants i factors Dc conal determinants
like the rainbow. Labour market a Psychological
Employment practics situation determinants Biological
Historical
Socioeconomic
world of attitude, need and work develops.
skills.
experience for entering into service.
for developing one’s own position.
Though Donald Super has divided the stages according to ages, these stages
may vary from person to person.
Project
1. Each will choose a man who has retired from service or is going to retire
very soon. Now we shall interview him to know the life history of the man
from his boyhood till now. We shall interview him several times if
necessary.
2. Then we shall prepare a profile. Many people do not want to provide their
personal information in the larger extent. So we shall use pseudonym. We

10 Career Education
can arrange the profile according to his age or his special characteristics.
We will notice the following information to be mentioned in it.

Name of the person (pseudonym)

e Gender

e Date of Birth and Birth Place

e Education Life

e Service Life

e Personal Life

e Retired Life (If he has)

e What matters has he passed successfully in his career?

e In what matters has he faced challenge? How has he overcome them?

e Does he think of any decision, which might be otherwise, would be better?

e Which of other matters of life have influenced the decision of his career?

e Other important events

Now compare the life of the person with the model. If necessary, determining

the stages newly, you can describe the trends of his life.

Everyone will present the project in the class.

Necessity of Career Education

We have been learning career education gradually from class six. Have you

ever thought why we are studying this subject? Is there any change happening

or may happen in our life due to this study? Let us think a little.

Activity:

Fix 4 large papers/posters on the 4 walls of the classroom.

is being of use in our can be of use in our been learnt from the aro agzded to lara
life future life subject

According to the number of the students there may be one or more paper or

poster according to the necessity, on each wall. Everyone in cyclic order will] 2%

go to the posters and by thinking, write down | or 2 points or topics each. 8

Me and My Career 11
After the writing of each one having completed, we discuss together in large
group with the help of the teacher and bring out how career education is being
of use in our life and may be of use in future. What we can know and learn new
from this subject.
You have seen what the uses of career education in our life are. Therefore,
now-a-days acquiring knowledge, skills and attitude about career is given
importance in different countries of the world.
Importance of Studying Career Education
Everybody wants a beautiful and successful career. So it is very important to
know about it and to take steps accordingly. By studying Career Education we
can be aware of the following matters and proceed towards success.
Taking Decision
We know that it is necessary to take various decisions in different times to
build career. Such as, in which subject I will read and which profession or
vocation I will choose, etc. Every decision is important. Our living style,
standard, earnings, movement of life etc. can be determined by it. Besides, our
personal decision can influence not only our personal life but also family,
social, national and even global levels. Such as, if most learners of us read in
science group and engage ourselves in the profession related to it, the society
will be of same type, whereas if most learners read in humanities group and do
the jobs related to it, the society will be of different type. Again, if there are
more jobs in the world market for the learners who have studied science and
their own country cannot provide them with such opportunity, many can be
migrated to the other countries in search of better jobs. Again, the matter can
be seen reversely. As for example, considering the job market in the globe, job
situation in the country, needs of the society, sometimes man plans to choose
the steam of education, group, aim of education, job, etc. So we take decision
depending on the world, society, situation, etc. As the decisions related to
career are important, it is necessary to take decision considering various topics
related to it.
Here is another issue too. All times all decisions cannot be wholly within our
grips. as for example, in many times definite section or group of certain class
= can be distributed on the basis of previously determined exam’s result of
“determined class. So, thinking all these issues, determining the action plan

12 Career Education
beforehand with care is a kind of decision. If I know that I have to obtain at
least 70% marks in science subjects for getting me admitted into science group
and if my goal is to study in science group, I will have learnt the subject
thoroughly. It needs to remember that goal may not be achieved. In that case
goal can be changed on the basis of reality.

Inspiration for Learning

When the learners select one from various routes through career education,
determine the goal, they naturally develop interest in learning the related
subject. Through career education we can understand what we are learning,
how these are being used and will be of use in future. It revives the internal
inspiration of learning the understanding. The learners learn the necessary
skills on the basis of their future goal, profession, and liking, style of living
from school, family and society and get inspired of learning.

Need of Work and Profession in Social Life

It is necessary for everyone to work for the society. Man works in the society
through various vocations, jobs and professions and earns his livings. Man
does many kinds of works in the society for the needs such as food, clothes,
housing, medical treatment, security etc. of the society, and thus the society
advances. All people do not work with the same aim they get.

Many indeed work for satisfying the fundamental needs of their own or their
family. Again, many work for self satisfaction. However, works satisfy the
necessity in human life and bring satisfaction. And the society is benefitted
through it. Career education helps us choose the comparatively favourite work
and become successful. It also helps us develop a positive outlook towards
work.

Concept of the Nature of Changeable Work

There are differences of the needs and the opportunities of work at home and
abroad, even in various places of the same country. This need of work changes
in the prospect of time. Career education helps us know this changeable need
and enrich us accordingly with different knowledge, skills and experience.
Development of Higher Knowledge and Skills

As day passes, it needs more knowledge and skills in various works in
comparison to the previous ones. For any kind of work minimum level of 3
literacy, language skills, especially oral communication skills, mathematical ‘

Me and My Career 13
skills, inspiration for earning, attitude to establish relation through cooperation
in work, etc. are very important. Various subjects in school and concepts of
career education help the learners gain this competency and skills.
Preparation for Entering into Service
Some definite skills are necessary for each job or profession. We acquire these
skills by education in definite subject or degree, definite training, experience,
etc. Besides, in workplace some common skills such as common qualities like
working together with various people, assisting the others, attention, patience,
devotion to work, etc. are needed. Career education provides us with the
conception what qualities, characteristics, skills are very important to acquire.
Motivation for Planning
Career education teaches us to plan for future career. By studying it we not
only plan for education, vocation and service but also in wider sense plan for
life. Because our education life, goal of life, earnings, etc. all are parts of life.
Planning is never stable or certain. It is changeable. But planning makes a man
self confident as it determines in which way and how we will reach to our goal.
And proper planning solves many possible problems.
Creating Sensitivity
We know variety of works, professions and professionals through this process
of education. We learn to respect them. So, it teaches to be tolerant,
compassionate and sensitive to the people engaged in different professions,
jobs and works.
Group Work : Short play or Role play in small group
Let each group choose a point of importance mentioned above, now
prepare a case, incident or story which reflects clearly the definite
importance of career education, then play the role in the class.
[Such as, a girl reads in class nine. She learns about career. So it has been
seen that she is tolerant and compassionate to the people of every
profession. She goes to school following the traffic signal. Besides school
teachers, she respects all including the keeper, gardener, gateman and helps
them in their works etc. Whole day activities of the girl are shown through
x playing the role.]
:

14 Career Education
Me, My Education and Career
The career, we want to choose, needs special education. Again, my career is
determined on the basis of the subjects which I learn tenderly or which I am
efficient in. We can find out a suitable workplace depending on own choice,
interest, need, authority, limitation, values etc.
For this reason stage by stage each of us will have to —
“+ Know oneself
“* Know about various kinds of works, professions or jobs
“* Determine the next planning
“* Determine the doings.
Let’s cross the stages through doing the works below.
A. Thinking of my hobby, other works and experience. I will fill up the chart
below.
done efficient in to do less interested to do
presentation, group presentation .........
cooking, writing gardening
a
eC
Now write in the same way by thinking how the subjects will be in reading in
school.
read till now efficient in like to read less interested to
read
=
Rs
es
Which of the activities and experience you have mentioned are the most
important and interesting to you?
Is there any similarity in this experience or works? Such as, most of the works %
are done with machine. If there is such similarity, mention it. BS

Me and My Career 15
While thinking and filling up the chart, have you got in your mind any values,
ideal or subject which is important for your work? Such as, to maintain the
standard of work, to be careful of environment, etc. Think and try to write.
Write down in brief what you have learnt about yourself. (Your liking,
disliking, interest, values etc.)
B. Look at the list of professions or works prepared earlier.
Now analyze skills, conditions of work, environment of work, duties,
competency and skills, opportunity, etc. needed for those. Now think a
profession/work/job/vocation for your future and draw a picture imagining that
you are working with that profession or vocation.
Name of the picture: When I am a ..............0.ceeeeeeeee tees
Find out any more same kind for works or professions. These can be worked as
alternative planning.
Think and find out some advantages or reasons for attraction and
disadvantages or challenges of the 3 vocations or professions that you like
most.
Vocation or profession It is attractive, because - The challenges may be faced
in the vocation or profession
a
oS
i
SB

16 Career Education

Try to know and write down the requisite educational qualifications, skills,

experience necessary for each work (3 according to choice):

Now think, how is it possible for me to acquire the competency, skills,

education, degree, etc. which have been mentioned above?

Think, do I have enough interest in and attraction for this work for which I

shall plan to acquire the requisite skills?

Now I shall identify a person engaged in the profession of my first choice. Then

with his permission, discuss with him one day.I shall record everything in a

diary. Then I shell try to know-

o What competency and skills are necessary for this work?

o What facilities are there in the work?

o What are the disadvantages or challenges in doing the work?
o Howare the challenges faced?

[Without asking him directly, watching and analyzing his behaviour and

activities. We shall try to find out in most of the cases. ]

C. Let’s see what to plan next. The 3 professions or works I have determined,
now know clearly the requisite educational qualifications, experience,
training, etc. for it by reading newspapers, and consulting with the teachers
and the others. In this case, I have to determine how much I have these
skills.

ho}
Ss
N

Me and My Career 17
Profession | Competency and Skills Required How much _ | What to
Competency and | achieved do more
Skills
Profession 1 | Educational Qualification | | |
[Experience |
[Training |
Profession 2 | Educational Qualification ee
[Experience | |
[Training |
Profession 3 | Educational Qualification | Tt
[Experience | |
Training
D. Now I should think how to acquire competency and skills in the subjects
which I have marked. In this case we can take help from the teachers and
the others.
Think more topics.
o In which way I have to read, which subject I have to give importance, what
I am supposed to learn by this time, have I learnt these?
o Is there any necessity of changing the planning?
o What kind of co-curricular activities can I participate in and how will they
help me acquire the definite skill?
© Is there any necessity of changing my reading habit? What kind of change?
World of Work and Me
We often dream of entering into various professions, vocations or definite job.
Some days that will perhaps come true. But it is not enough to enter into work.
It is also necessary to think how to move in service with success. We have
learnt earlier that different kinds of skills and competency are needed for
various kinds of professions or works.
Individual Work
Try to determine the requisite skills in service for the work or profession of
your choice. After determining, convey that through a
story/poem/song/picture (or any other means).

18 Career Education
Change of My Choice
What we have planned, needs to be flexible enough. The change of our will,
interest, etc. is very natural. If it happens to change will, interest, career
planning can be changed accordingly. In the following chart, think and write
down what kinds of changes of likings, dislikings, needs, interests, values have
taken place in you.
—
You have seen that the thinking of man happens to change, along with his
interests, likings, needs etc. Do you know anyone whose choice of education,
job etc. have been changed into different ones? If there is anyone, inform all in
the discussion of the group. It is necessary to remember that change is a
common affair in career. Adapting the change, planning will be done
accordingly. For this reason it is easy to change if there is flexibility in planning.
My Interest, Competency, Values
It is important to know about my own interest, competency, values for which
kind of work I will do or want to do in future. It can be known through various
tests and surveys. In determining career ‘interest’ is very important. The
subject in what I find interest, I am inspired to read and work accordingly. If
there is no interest, many subjects seem lifeless and monotonous. Due to lack
of enough interest, man cannot be successful in work in spite of having
competency.
Let us examine. It is for pleasure. It will provide us with a little idea about our
personality. First read the remarks in the table. Put a tick in any box against
each remark depending on how far it is true to your case. Remember there is no
wrong or right answer.
Lo)
=

Me and My Career 19
en ciel
ppinions opinion fhe opinion
0 1 2 3 4
| lime erie ie |
home
|2__|Isolveproblemslogically | | |
[3 |Tamfondofreading TT
[4 _|Peoplecall mecreative | |
|5___|1am fond of doing work practically | | | TT
[6 | Tliketowork away fromhome | | | |
7 I get pleasure in analyzing and solving
"tte TT TT
amen TTT
puzzle
[9 _|Newideaoccursinmymind | |
|10_|Igetpleasure in practicalworks | | | TT
|11_|Talways love tosavedifferentthings | S| | |
[12 |Tloveman’sassociation | |
13 | I like to make understand my position in any
meee
14 | I love to arrange and classify with data and
“lien || TT
|15_|Tliketocounseltheothers | | TT
[16 | Tlike to express my opinion writen | |] |
|17_|1like to make various designs | | | |
18 | The others come tome for assisting them in
PY limpeting || TTT
[19 |Tliketotaketheinitiative | |
Pees ere TT TT
away from home
eeetsetaeremeemmer TTT TT
things
|22_|1liketouse and arrange data | | |
[23 |Tamfondofusingmachinery | | | |
|24 | like to know the background ofanyevent | | | | |
[25 |Ipreferwinningtocompetition | | |
|26_|Tlove music, artsorplayverymuch | | | TT
27 | like to consult about my opinion and engage
 |nddacwinteoten ee || LT ||
28 | I love to find out the trends or patterns or
P [reion fom diferent da snd nfommaion "| | | | |
[29 |Ispend much time inactive playing | | | |
emer TT TT
responsibilities
a |3l_|Igetpleasure inhelpingthe others | | |
ick iain
os data

20 Career Education
Now, it is time for awarding marks. Eight kinds of personalities have been
shown differently in the chart below. The marks given at the top line of each
box is the marks of the remark. For example, totally disagreed- 0, disagreed- 1,
neutral- 2, agreed- 3, totally agreed- 4. Sum up all the scores you obtained
putting them on the table.
As for example, how far you are extrovert, you will consider the remarks
number 1,6, 20 and 29. Suppose you have put tick marks in the boxes
respectively agreed to the opinion, totally agreed to the opinion, totally agreed
to the opinion and neutral. Then your score will be (3+4+4+2) = 13 for the
place of extrovert. In this way after giving marks in the boxes of eight kinds of
personality, it will be seen in which place you have scored more. In which side
you have scored more, your inclination towards that side seems more.
foie
4 [fet ts Pas a
Personality[ | [ist [8 ff oe TP of Pe 7
pi7f fit fo TP ot a
a ed
[tol [oT
My Competency and Skills
Let us see some of such competency and skills important for entering into service.
writing
Competency in group work
Self consciousness
Knowledge in number or mathematical skills
Solving problems or searching and analyzing
Leadership
Some of the description of compentency and skills are given below :
Communication %
By communication we understand speaking, listening, understanding and 8

Me and My Career 21
writing clearly. It includes something presenting by writing properly according
to various categories of readers, influencing the others, negotiating and
expressing sympathy. Besides, it means building up relationship with other
people by social communication, competency to share information and present
concepts, skills in speaking, ability to present the summary of information
logically etc.
Work in Groups
Work in groups means working together with the people irrespective of age,
gender, cast, creed and political opinion. To have idea about the good qualities
of the members of the group, to remain conscious of own qualities and short
comings, to expose the goal of the group and to work in agreement are some of
its characteristics. To lead , if necessary to counsel the others, to inspire, to
reach a decision respecting various opinions, to participate in group for gaining
success etc. are the other characteristics of working in groups.
Solving Problems
Always we are to solve some problems in our life. The person, who is able to
solve the problems as much as possible scientifically and plan-wise, is crowned
with success. We are sure to succeed if we solve the problems following the
steeps below:

> Analyze data and information

> Examine or verify the supposition

» Identify the problem and find out the reasons behind it

> Find out creative, innovative and effective solution

> Use different means in solving the problem

> Keep alternative planning, determine alternative means and evaluate it

> Solve the problem by using different mathematical knowledge and skills

> Notice the anxiety of the stakeholders in solving the complicated problem
Values at Work
Sabiha works in a medicine company. A report including the side effect and the
other findings of a new medicine is in hand. Now, to present it including all
data in a seminar is her responsibility. Suddenly her Superintendent sends a

cx note to her. In it, it is written that she should present it without mentioning a
& definite side effect. She falls into thinking. Should she do it?

22 Career Education
Think in group

1. What are the ways open before Sabiha?

2. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each decision, i.e. the result.
Many such situations as menitioned above occur in workplace. When it is
necessary to take decision, we think what we should do and what we should
not do as well. These are values. When you have said of taking decision by
discussion, you have noticed that values differ from person to person. Again in
many services there are conditions or standards of values which are expected
that all will follow these. Self control is achieved with desired values. As for
example —

1. To refrain from doing such a work that I want to do.

2. To refrain from doing such work that I have right to do.

[For instance, I want to work in a prominent organization, but if I am
persuaded to do something immoral, I will not work in that organization. ]
Find out several such examples.
There are more things related to values. Such as, credibility, honesty, devotion,
reliance, loyalty etc.
Group Work
Getting divided into four groups, discuss the topic. Create a definite
situation or story like that of Sabiha which reflects dilemma of a definite
value.
My Dream Career
Getting into small groups, identify each group a person (known, relative,
friend) whom you think, has built up his dream career. Interview him and make
a little magazine about them (handmade).
Paste a picture of the person and give an excellent title on the cover page.
Present various data including picture inside. Decorate the magazine with the
information what his dream was, education life, interests, values, special
competency, service life, experience etc.
In this case, try to use creativity and artistry. Join the pages with stapler, scotch
tape or gum. Paint as necessary.
ho)
s

Me and My Career 23
Assignment:
Developing Poster
Have you now understood what your dream career is? Now you have certainly understood
a little by considering your interest, competency and values. Develop a poster including
the topics below.
means/stages
You can add your own picture, various paper cutting, model, chart etc.
The relation between interest, ability and values
> What do I like to do?
> What can I do?
> What should I think to do?
These indicate interest, competency and skills, and values respectively. What I
like, I may not have that skill to that. But what we often like, skills may
develop because of practising that more. Liking-disliking is very important in
career, because career is lifelong. Without interest we cannot go far with any
subject, even success does not come.
Let us try to answer the questions below.
Interest- values: What I like to do, should I always do or is it ethical to do?
Skills-interest: When there are my skills in any subject, will I have interest?
Skills-values: When I have skills in any work, will it be ethical?
Values- interest: When it is ought to do, will interest always continue in it?
Values- skills: What I ought to do, do I have skills in that subject?
Sample Questions
Multiple Choice Questions
a. What is generally called the doing of anything?
a. Vocation _ b. Profession c. Work d. Career
2. What kind of post is the main gardener of government organization?
a. Career  b. Vocation c. Profession dd. Job
3. Career development is —
i. the change of simple linear
% ii. mainly the change of job
& iii. particular change in the certain age of life

24 Career Education
Which one is correct in the followings?

a. i b. ii

c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
Read the passage and answer the question no 4 & 5
Laboni was born at a village in Faridpur. When she was in her village, she was
busy with naughtiness. When her parents or the elders asked her anything or
gave any work, she avoided that. With an aim of doing well to their daughter,
her parents sent her to her maternal uncle for study. When she went on a trip to
the village after three years, everyone became surprised at the change of her
behaviour.
4. Which side of behaviour has been changed in the case of Laboni?

a. Human behaviour b. Attitude

c. Cordiality d. Sense of respect
5. In the case of the changed side in Laboni’s behaviour it is to be considered-

i. It can be varied depending on person, family and society

ii. It can be either positive or sometimes negative

iii. It never changes
Which one is correct in the followings?

a. i b. ii

c.. iii d. i&ii
Creative Questions
Mr. Fahim Khan had been serious in building up his career since his childhood.
With this goal in mind he chose Business Education. After receiving higher
degree in Management, he joined a multinational company as an Executive
Officer. In due course after receiving proper training, skills and merit, now he
is a Senior Officer.

a. What is career?

b. Explain one of the importances of stadying career education.

c. To which category does the work of Fahim Khan belong? Describe.

d. Analyze which subject plays the major role in Fahim Khan’s career S

development. s

Chapter Two
Career Building: Quality and Skills
It is very important time to read in class nine and ten in every learner’s life. We
have already taken an important but primary decision about which kind of
career we will build up in life. On its basis we have started to think how we can
organize our future career well. It is important not only to take right decision at
right time but also to put down together some qualities and skills in oneself.
We can acquire these from our family, society and educational institution. In
this chapter we will learn about the necessary qualities and skills for career
building including positive attitude, self consciousness, self confidence and
firm determination, mutual dependency and inter personal relation, honesty,
professional ethics and respect to laws, leadership, consciousness of physical
and mental health, compassion, gender sensitivity, emotion control and stress
management, time management, aesthetic attitude etc.
By the end of the chapter we will be able to:
1. Identify necessary qualities and skills in career building;
2. Explain the strategies of acquiring necessary qualities and skills in
career building
3. Analyze the importance of qualities and skills in succeeding the career;
4. Become interested in acquiring requisite qualities and skills in career
building.

26 Career Education
Career Building: Quality and Skills
At first we will be careful in respective career building if we want to establish
ourselves and to contribute to the development of family, society and country.
It is important to acquire some special qualities and skills to build up career
well. Some important and requisite qualities and skills in career building are
discussed below:
Positive Attitude
Positive attitude is a special but invisible one among the few elements of
success in human life. After birth to the time of growth, ideal and attitude are
made unconsciously in human beings. This attitude develops gradually through
the surroundings, family education and socialization. Every human existence
depends more on his own attitude to any work or subject. How a man’s attitude
will be, it depends on how he is being educated, how the surroundings and
society are where he is being grown up, which culture he has been nurturing.
For this reason there is difference of attitude depending on person, family,
society and country about the same topic.
Attitude means the mode of outlook, mentality or thinking, i.e. how a subject is
being watched or taken by someone, is called his attitude. Attitude is the ideal
of man’s mental world on what basis he judges anything. Taking any subject
positively or keeping good outlook to that subject or receiving the subject by
positive mentality is positive attitude.
Importance of Positive Attitude
It is possible to establish oneself as a member of the society by mutual
cordiality. A cordial relation with all in the society develops by positive
attitude. Man’s originality lies in his personality. The man having strong
personality is able to draw the attention of more people. Man develops his
personality by positive attitude.
He, who is more popular in society, gets more respect and honour from people.
It is possible to stay closer to man by positive attitude and all like this kind of
man. So, special honour and respect come in possession of him. Self confidence
increases due to positive attitude. So, the way of success becomes easier.

S

Career Building: Quality and Skills 27
Building Positive Attitude
Positive attitude may build up in different ways. Education plays an important
role in building positive attitude. It awakens and fully opens man’s internal
talent and strength. Man can sharpen his intellect and thinking skills by coming
into contact with education. The nature of his thinking and outlook changes
and improves by it. So, his personal attitude builds up.
History and tradition play a great role in building man’s attitude. The people of
our country uphold the spirit of The Liberation War as well as they foster
history and tradition of ancient Bangla. Thus, the influence of freedom fighting
along with tradition of ancient Bangla is witnessed in our attitude.
Man’s imagination is built up from his family and society. By watching how
the senior members of family consider any subject, the other members of
family gain their attitude. On the other hand, by living in the society, man gains
attitude from the surroundings around him. Man’s attitude and outlook are
refined by various social customs-functions, mutual relation, practice of
religion, various mass media etc.
Man frequently passes life through various actions and its reactions. The
influence of many kinds of events and accidents plays special role in changing
his outlook. His attitude builds up on the basis of which lesson he has learnt
from any real life situation or what experience he has gathered. This attitude
can be developed through giving attention to the positive side of any event
instead of its negative side.
Values, culture and civilization direct man to way of life. Man’s individuality
and personality are rebuilt by it. Every civilization and society has some of its
own rules and regulations, manners and customs, and instincts. All these
culture, instincts and manners and customs especially shake man’s mentality.
So, a positive attitude develops in him.
Role of Positive Attitude in Career Building
Man has to build up relations with many kinds of people in personal life or
owing to profession. It becomes easy to build up good relation with man if we
keep positive attitude. Sometimes we are saved from unexpected danger if we
have good relation with the others. It is helpful for career building.

2}

S

N

28 Career Education
In many times someone is seen thoughtful about personal career which puts
stress on his mentality. If he keeps positive attitude, his stress lessens. So any
work is finished with attention and skills.
Due to positive attitude, encouragement to work and attention increases. Those
having this mentality do not think any work mean and do not have any
negligence to do the work. So they can work with great interest and
encouragement.
It is easy to solve any problem if we work with positive attitude. There are many
who do not go to the way to solve the problem due to negative attitude, rather
they make it more complicated. Those who, go with positive attitude to solve the
problem, have the key aim to solve the problem and they can do it easily.
Self-Consciousness
Self confidence means self determination about oneself. i.e. to know well about
own good or bad, to have complete knowledge how it is good and how it is
bad. What work am I doing, why am I doing, how am I doing, what is the
result of the work, does the work have any negative side, does the work have
possibility of causing me or the others any harm? Personal realization about all
these is called self consciousness.
Importance of Becoming Self-Consciousness
The self conscious persons never fall into great trouble, because they are aware
of their own good and bad. These kinds of men can lead a better life in
comparison to the others in the society. To remain self conscious is of great
importance. The self-conscious persons can know or guess prior to any
misfortune, disaster, loss or any undesirable situation. So, they find time to get
previously prepared. If they ever fall into danger, they can get through the
situation quickly.
Means of Becoming Self conscious
The key means of becoming self conscious is to have complete knowledge
about all surrounding subjects. Man can acquire knowledge about all subjects
around them by education. Education opens insight, so he can differentiate
between right or wrong and by becoming conscious accordingly, he can do any
work successfully. S
N

Career Building: Quality and Skills 29
It is possible to become conscious of any subject by experience. From own
experience and the experience of other members of the society we can acquire
knowledge of the incidents happened earlier and can be conscious of
concerned subject.
To become self conscious the contemporary matters can play a vital role. By
noticing the course of the running events in family, school and at social,
national and international level and analyzing them, a sense of self
consciousness is made. To remain conscious about surrounding environment is
another side of becoming self conscious. The man, who knows minutely his
surrounding environment, also remains conscious about himself.
Role of Self Consciousness in Career Building
It is easy to take any kind of serious decision at any level of life if we remain
conscious. As self-conscious men can realize their own good or bad, they can
understand well when it will be good to take any decision in his career.
At times it occurs that the decision may not be properly right due to the
happenings of surrounding various problems despite the decision has been
taken by considering everything thoroughly. In this case a self conscious man
reviews the decision and moves quickly to another direction which saves his
career from a great damage.
It is understood by the attainments how far a man is successful. The self
conscious evaluate their respective attainments. So it becomes easy for him to
take decision about his future doings.
None can be successful in his career if he depends on the others. Besides,
dependency on the others pushes a man away from his own thinking and he
loses his originality. Self consciousness teaches not to be dependent on the
others. The self conscious never depend solely on the others.
Self confidence
Self confidence means self determination. Strong faith in own strength, ability
and competency is self confidence. I will be able to do any work properly and I
will be successful in achieving the desired goal with all my abilities. Fostering

x and upholding this belief is called self confidence.

Ss

N

30 Career Education
Importance of Bocoming Self-confident
Self confidence always helps any person to make a quick decision. As the self
-confident have strong faith in their strength and ability, they can reach to
quick decisions. The self-confident are able to gain the confidence of the
others. When the others see that someone is doing any work confidently, they
begin to rely on him. If the work is done confidently, the work becomes
faultless, errorless and effective. The confident get less criticism. They are firm
in the decisions which they take and they execute it. So, the others cease
criticizing them. The confident succeed easily in any work as they are firmly
determined.
Means of Gaining Self-confidence
Education awakens a man’s internal strength and refines them. Man gets the
opportunity of self realization by education. Education helps a man to acquire
knowledge about all surrounding subjects. So, he gets materials to be self-
confident.
It is to know about own strength and ability to become self confident. Man can
understand from his various activities and experience in which subject he is
efficient or in which subject he is not. What he understands well and can do
well, are his strength and ability i .e. it will be identified what I can do or in
which subject I am efficient. He, who is interested more in any subject, will
gain skills in that subject. By training or practicing more and more, self interest
will be increased. It will increase self confidence.
If it is mistaken in doing any work, by learning from that, self confidence
increase. If the reasons of the mistake are identified by learning the lesson
from it, there will have no possibility of further mistake. Thus, self-confidence
increases.
To increase self confidence, no negative attitude to any subject will be kept in
mind. If we keep the mentality that this work is hard or the work will not be
possible for me to do, the lack of strength occurs and so self confidence is
reduced. If any work is considered with positive attitude, the work will not
appear hard and self confidence will be increased. %
S
A

Career Building: Quality and Skills 31
Role of Self-confidence in Career Building
Those having strong self confidence are always advance in determining the
goal. Ignoring fear and doubt they determine their goal with strong mentality
and are serious in achieving the goal. No inferiority complex and no sense of
shame can deviate themselves from determining and achieving the goal. Many
dream of achieving the goal in short time. When it is delayed to achieve the
goal due to any reason, they halt abruptly and get frustrated. But those, who are
self confident, are not dispirited. They know that one day or other success must
come. So, they always continue their effort to the goal. The self confident
people always take steps courageously. They do various works with courage to
achieve their desired goal. These kinds of people never deviate themselves
from their goal. In any work inferiority complex becomes the key barrier on
the way to success. Whether I shall do the work or not, it will not be done by
me or what people will say if I do it — this kind of thinking is called inferiority
complex which is the barrier to achieving the goal. Those, who are confident,
can triumph over all these inferiority complex easily. To take proper decision is
one of the elements in career building. There are many who get afraid in taking
decision and various sensitizations play a negative role in taking their decision.
The self-confident can take right decisions easily, because what they decide,
they execute .

Find some, from your surroundings whom you think very confident. Observe

his/her behaviour, activities. Collect information about her/him. You ma‘

take interview of him if necessary with questionnaire. Now write-

- What was his goal?

- How did he reach to the goal?

- What are the obstacles he faced?

- How did he overcome the obstacles or challenges?

- Now make a list of the qualities of self-confidenee that you found in him.

Present your findings in the class with the help of your teacher.
io)
5

32 Career Education
Firm Determination

It needs iron like firm determination to achieve any goal in life. It is not
possible to achieve the goal or to fulfill the dream without it. The other name
of this strong promise is firm determination. The relations between achieving
the goal and fulfilling the dream with firm determination are very close.
Interest in doing any work with much interest and strong mentality is firm
determination. By taking decision of doing any work, the confident remain
firm in their decision till the execution of that work.

Importance of Firm Determination

The importance of firm determination is great in every human life. It is hard to
establish own career without firm determination. There is certainty to achieve
the goal if we start the work with firm determination. Because the confident
never back out from their desired goal and at last they reach to the goal by any
means. If we start any work with firm determination, the work ends in time.
The works are done one by one as there is effort to reach to the goal.

Means of Becoming Firmly Determined

It is the foremost necessity to have dream or a definite goal for becoming
firmly determined, because, there is no activity towards the goal without
having any goal or dream. And there is no scope of becoming firmly
determined without this kind of attempt. But dream and desired goal, of course,
need to be realistic. If we become firmly determined with such subject that has
no match in reality, that is not essential for life or that is far impossible to
achieve, all efforts towards the goal will be futile. It is not possible to achieve
the desired goal if we are firmly determined in any impractical subject. One
must have the requisite skills for fulfilling the desired dream.

If we do not have the requisite skills related to the goal, we will stumble at the
starting of the work. If anyone spares no effort after determining a goal, it is
not possible to achieve the goal. To become firmly determined one must keep
in oneself a great desire to achieve the goal. It is not possible to become firmly
determined without having strong desire towards the goal for achieving it. If
we determine a goal, it is important to think about first and last of it. We should
know about the good and the bad of the desired goal and be conscious of them.
Clear idea about the goal and consciousness of it make a man firmly x
determined. Ss

Career Building: Quality and Skills 33
Role of Firm Determination in Career Building

Those, who are firmly determined in personal life, stay close to fulfill the
dream. They are able to fulfill their dream for their activities towards the
career. So, success is gained in career. Those, who are firmly determined, never
stop at a point in their career. Success comes one after another in their life and
at a certain time they reach to the peak of success. For example, due to be
firmly determined, our M.A. Muhit, Nishat Mojumdar and Wasfia Najrin won
the Everest.

Respect, Mutual Dependency and Inter Personal Relations
Respect is a social value. An excellent quality of character is sense of respect
which is acceptable and desired to all in the society. To pay someone his due
honour or to honour some one’s knowledge, position, dignity and ability is
called respect. i.e. to evaluate properly the position of everyman and to
acknowledge their attainments are respect. And the mentality, outlook and
sense to evaluate and to honour the others in this way are called sense of
respect. This sense of respect plays a unique role in the case of man becoming
man or on his way to becoming a part of the civilized society. Those who, do
not respect the others of the society, cannot acknowledge their works and
consider their social position with mean attitude, do not get their own respect
too. A sense of respect to oneself is also important. The man, who does not
respect himself, is not respected by the others. Sense of mutual respect makes
the society stable, peaceful and cordial.

Man cannot live alone in the society. Society is created as all live in the society
collectively. For this reason each member of the society depends on one
another in different ways. In this way farmers depend on fishermen, while
fishermen depend on farmers. In the same way people of every profession of
the society are dependent mutually on one another. This dependency is
cooperative and participatory. By mutual dependency society becomes
beautiful and cordial.

Man’s relation with man is inter- personal relation. When a relation develops
on the basis of keeping the mentality of assisting each other without hoping to
get anything special, we call it inter personal relations.

34 Career Education
Role of Respect, Mutual Dependency and Inter Personal
Relations in Career Building
Thre are many merits to be acceptable to all in career building. The excellent
means of becoming acceptable to all is to be respectful to the others. If it is
possible to sustain self respect in the work place also, then not only one but
also others are benefitted.
There are many such works which cannot be done alone. Especially in this
labour specialization age, it is more difficult. Naturally it needs the assistance of
the others in completing such work and it means mutual dependency. If anyone
does not have mutual dependency, it is nearly impossible to complete work
properly. In different social functions the matter of mutual dependency is
witnessed clearly. This quality plays a unique role in career building. It is
possible to know about many new things or unknown topics from the classmates
which can be the turning point of life.
Inter personal relations bear special meaning in human life. Those , who have
these relations, fall less into dangers, and if they fall into dangers, they get
across them quickly. The others come and assist them in all their dangers and
difficulties, weal and woe. Inter personal relations play a unique role in all
spheres including man’s family, society, educational institution etc. There is a
great importance of maintaining a good inter personal relations for well
establishment in career. If we maintain good relations with classmates, friends,
teachers and the others, we can get assistance and different directions.
Group Work
Divide all into 3 groups. Teacher will write ‘respect’, ‘mutual dependency’,
‘inter personal relation’ these 3 words on 3 separate piece of paper. Then fold
the papers and distribute them to the groups by lottery. Ask the 3 groups to
do the following activities with the topic they have got.
e Explain the concept
e Now describe some event by which particular concept is expressed
e Make a list of behaviours by what the concept is expressed
e Now discuss with all in the class ~
S
N

Career Building: Quality and Skills 35
Honesty, Professional Ethics and Respect to Laws
Honesty is a fundamental human virtue. To speak the truth, to keep the truth, to
foster the truth and to establish everywhere the truth are honesty. i.e. To be
honest in thought, spirit and work and to complete any work with honest
mentality are called honesty. To present something thoroughly without hiding
anything what I have seen, what I have done and what I have got is honesty.
Man is to attach to some profession or other for livelihood. Everyone is to
perform some definite duties in his profession. Professional ethics is the
reflection of such code of rules and behaviours which are expected from a
professional in his profession. i.e. To observe properly professional honesty,
dutifulness, discipline, transparency, liability, rules and regulations is
professional ethics.
A social, national and administrative system lasts depending on its rules and
regulations. In the society where laws are properly observed, no kind of
indiscipline is seen. And the precondition of executing these laws is to respect
to the laws. If we abide by all rules-regulations, according to laws, observe
decisions imposed by laws and assist in implementing and executing laws, we
can show respect to laws.
Importance and Role of Honesty, Professional Ethics and
Showing Respect to Laws
The importance of honesty is great in human life. Honesty crowns a man with
great ideal and ethics. Honesty is given unique importance in all religions. Man
gets purified, spotless and trustworthy by honesty. It is possible to be established
well by being honest in workplace. Honesty is also very important in career
building. If we cannot gain honesty from education life, it is not possible for us
to go far in career. Honesty will be given topmost priority if we want to ascertain
peace, security and discipline in society.
In the present society, professional ethics is a very important matter. If anyone
who, is engaged in any profession, is honest to work, service and time, he remains
ethically transparent. If each professional does the imposed duties properly in his
respective profession, he is never to face the question of professional ethics. If any
learner can gain honesty, dutifulness, discipline, transparency, liability well, his
< career will be well established and it will be possible for him to remain ethical in
‘his professional life.

36 Career Education
None is above laws. Everyone is to abide by and remain under the laws. To be
respectful to laws is compulsory to everyone. Also various rules and regulation
of the related organization are also observed in service life. If we are respectful
to laws from our education life, it will play a positive role in career building.
Positive Competition and Cooperative Mentality

The competition, without aiming at defeating others, considering time and
situations, to make oneself as a greater competitor, is called positive
competition. Positive competition ensures the best use of own competency and
skills, side by side, family, neighbours, classmates, friends including beliefs,
ethics and values of the society are considered. As for example — someone
wants to get better result in the examination. For this reason, he will read self
confidently, determinedly, attentively and systematically. He will not only get
better result but also assist his classmates without non cooperation and
misleading so that they can get better result. But it is to be remembered that we
have to keep honesty and morality in such cooperation. If one advances
towards success with the consideration that it will cause no harm to the others,
it reflects positive competition.

The mentality of helping the others in their problems or dangers is cooperative
mentality. By keeping one’s duties and responsibilities alright, one is to help
the others in various fields if it is needed. As for example — to help the parents
in chores, to help the classmates understand the subject matters, to nurse the
neighbours if they get ill and to take them to nearby hospital if necessary or to
help the colleagues in various works in the workplace. It is to work with
cooperative mentality in the family, school, workplace or in all spheres of the
society.

Role of Positive Competition and Cooperative Mentality in
Career Building

Those habituated in positive competition and the keepers of cooperative
mentality to the others can easily build up their good career. If one believes and
habituates in positive competition and keeps cooperative mentality, one can
easily gain confidence, respect and love of the others. The others also evaluate
him in various cases with positive attitude. The others come to assist him if he
ever falls into problems and dangers. So, it becomes easy to work in family,
field of education, society and workplace with confidence and skills and x
establish oneself with reputation. S

Career Building: Quality and Skills 37
Group Work
All in the class will get into two groups. One group will identify the means of
habituating in positive competition and the other group will identify the
means of cooperative mentality by discussion and make each group know the
others about these.
Leadership, Initiative and Interest to Work
In many cases more than one or many are to work together to achieve a
definite goal. Coordination with all and control over the speed of the work
become necessary in any group work or working of many people together. In
this case anyone has to take the charge of coordinating and controlling that
group. The process of imposing on anyone the charge of coordinating and
controlling is called leadership. In easy language, leadership is the process of
conducting the work, controlling over it and inspiring the workers.
Kinds of Leadership:
Democratic Leadership: This kind of leader always takes opinion of his
workforce. The workforce can give their opinion freely and without stress. On
the basis of the opinions of his workers, he takes all decisions and executes
them.
Charismatic Leadership: This kind of leader has a power to attract all.
Usually people agree to the instruction and decision of these leaders of strong
attraction power easily, because, the followers feel solidarity with the leader.
Autocratic Leadership: This kind of leader never pays importance to the
opinion of his workforce. On the basis of his own thinking and choices, he
takes all decisions and executes them.
Situation-based leadership: This kind of leader leads considering the
contemporary events and real situations. Sometimes, he follows democratic
leadership and sometimes autocratic.
Spiritless leadership: These kinds of leaders are not active and conscious.
They accept all opinions of their workforce and decide on its basis. They are
merely the leaders by name: the workers do not pay them any importance and
im they have no control over the workers.
Ss
N

38 Career Education
The factors of leadership:

Three factors are necessary for building leadership. gen

These are- leaders, followers and_ situation.

Leadership arises from the association of these three

factors.

Leadership Qualities ses

Some leadership qualities are mentioned below. By

discussing in group, determine which more qualities are necessary to have
according to you.

+ Proper knowledge - Competency

+ Mentality to take risks + Emotion control

+ Personality and individuality + Sympathy and empathy

« Perseverance * Punctuality

« Mentality to work under the leadership of the others
Initiatives and Interest in Work
Any work does not begin by itself. The thinking of work comes first from
someone, next he arranges to do the work, and then the work begins. In a word,
this process is called taking the initiative. Initiative is the primary step of any
work. The competency of starting the work without the directives of the others
after taking its decision is called initiative. On the other hand, the mentality to
work is identified as interest in the work. i.e. under no stress the willingness or
the mentality from oneself to do the work is called interest to work.
Role of Leadership, Initiative and Interest in Work in Career
Building
The importance of leadership, initiative and interest in work in family, school,
society or the country, even in all the spheres of life is very great. The man,
who has these qualities, is considered an active person of the society and
everyone wants him to do the work. Those, who have leadership, initiative and
interest to work, are considered especially and they are able to gain respect
from the others easily. This matter is also very important in career building. In
the case of employment in various organizations the employment authority
wants to judge whether the worker is self guided or not. If the apprentices
show these skills, they get permanently appointed in the organization. So it is 2
desired that everyone should try to acquire all these skills from education life. §&

Career Building: Quality and Skills 39

Consciousness of Physical and Mental Health
The top of man’s health consciousness is physical and mental health. It is never
possible to lead a normal life with sickly body and mind. To take necessary
steps for normal growth and development of man’s body and mind, to know
about its rules and regulations and to work accordingly are consciousness
about physical and mental health.

Man's bodily growth continues after birth. Bodily growth becomes good if
proper food habit and rules for healthy living are maintained. By knowing the
tules for healthy living, every conscious person tries to build up own health.
On the other hand the relation between body and mind is very close. Man's
mental development happens with physical development. If anyone is unhappy
for any reason, his working capability and ability reduce to a great extent.
Physical and Mental Health Development Activities
Many kinds of works are to be done for physical and mental health
development. A list of these some of works is mentioned below.

To know the rules of healthy living To build up friendship and good relations
Role of Consciousness about Physical and Mental Health in
Career Building
Where there is sound body, there is sound mind. If body or mind is not sound,
man cannot do any work properly. So, it is necessary to keep one’s own body
sound to do any work well. In all spheres of works including family work,
education or service work there is a unique importance to remain conscious about
physical and mental health. If we keep ourselves sound in body and mind before
examination, we can get prepared for the examination and do better in the

s examination. The role of this matter is greater in career building. It needs much

40 Career Education
labour for the establishment in career. If body and mind are not kept well in time,
any planning can be futile. So, it is necessary to take effective and timely steps
for the development of physical health along with mental health
Activity 1. Getting divided into some groups, identify some harmful habits
which are injurious to physical and mental health and prepare a
list of them. Two examples are given for your understanding. (To
take drugs, suffering from loneliness and remaining dejected.)
Activity 2. Arrange a debate competition on ‘Health is the root of all
happiness’.
Empathy
Man is to face many kinds of situations in his everyday life, social life,
and education life or in workplace. Sometimes danger comes; sometimes
additional stress is made, feeling of upset and dejection occurs and one
suffers from many troubles. To feel mentally ‘the oneness of spirit’ with
this type of man in this situation is called compassion.
The meaning of compassion is the feeling thrown from the deeper self of
heart. By realizing of the heartache and pains of the poverty stricken,
distressed, diseased, endangered and dejected people, to feel oneness of
spirit and to be sympathetic with them is called compassion. It can be said
in other words that by placing man’s all sorrows, distresses, sufferings and
dejections in own sense and behaving accordingly are compassion.
Importance of Hmpathy
To be sympathetic in man’s troubles bears special importance. Empathy plays
special role in developing relation. If we become sympathetic with the others
of the family or the society in their distresses and show compassion, the door
of mutual cooperation opens. Man extends a helping hand to each other and
comes mutually in any kind of problem. Every man wants that all should
behave the same way with him as he does. Man can fulfill this expectation
showing compassion or becoming sympathetic. If a man comes in other’s
distress, the others will come in his troubles in the same way.
2
R

Career Building: Quality and Skills 41

If all members of the society come to help each other in any problem, inter
personal relations among them will develop. If all members of the society extend
their compassionate and cooperative hands to each other, their mutual relations
will be tightened. They can solve any problem through mutual interaction.
Difference between empathy and cooperation

Empathy and cooperation apparently seem the same but there are some specific
differences between these two. One is sense related and the other is about the
reality. The topic can be discussed through a table below.

1. | By expressing sensuous feelings which | Not expressing by feelings, rather there

expresses mental thoughts is the existence of something material
2. | Express sympathy, to become To play role in removing sorrows and
sympathetic pains

To tighten behavioural relation To develop practical relation
Influence of Empathy in Career Development

By showing compassion the opportunity of coming closer to each other is
created. As a result we can know the condition about the allied man. Knowing
about the real condition of a man, it becomes easy to behave accordingly with
him in workplace. By showing compassion, we are familiar with the inner man
of the man. All respect him, honour him and he gets a status to the others. His
personality and originality are developed by all these. If once the compassion
is shown to anyone, a kind of relation develops with him and he tries to
remember it. Afterwards if that person falls into any problem in service life or
real life, on the ground of former connection with the related man, there is
scope of getting his assistance.

Activity : Write an essay on ‘How each one will be compassionate to the others’.

Gender Sensitivity

Human race is the combination of male and female. From the birth of
civilization man and woman from their respective position have been playing an
effective role in the development of social system. But with the evolution of
civilization the role and position of man and woman continued to change. The

42 Career Education
attitude of male and female to each other are to change. Various social and
behavioural differences are seen in them. The relation between man and woman
on the basis of social attitude is called gender.

Gender does not direct identity of the people; rather it directs the attitude and
the social relation between man and woman. i.e. gender is the expected
behaviours of man and woman developed from family, society and culture.
Man and woman will work together in any organization or social system in the
same condition with their equal skills and get equal social status and equal
monetary benefits. The process of doing any work with this attitude is called
gender sensitivity.

Importance of Becoming Gender Sensitive

By becoming gender sensitive various customary and established disparities towards
man, woman or any special gender will be reduced. This kind of disparities
will be abolished if equality between man and woman in social condition is
established. If gender sensitivity is established in all spheres of society, social
and personal security of man and woman will be ensured. Mutual sense of duty
and respect will create in them an idea that every person of the society has
respective freedom and the right to express the opinion.

If everyone of the society is gender sensitive, the status of man and woman
will increase in the society. Then none of the society will try to humiliate
anyone and there will be no indifference of people to any special gender of
people. Gender sensitivity changes people’s mentality and makes everyone
conscious of one’s position and status. For this there occurs a change in
people’s behaviour. By gender sensitivity equal opportunity of employment for
both man and woman is created.

How to Become Gender Sensitive

At first each man and woman should know about respective position, status,
strength and skills if anyone considers the position, status, strength and skills of
the others, no disrespectful mentality will be built up towards equal or opposite
gender. If there is any negative attitude towards one another, each one of man
and woman will have to change it. Because it is not possible to be gender
sensitive with keeping negative attitude to each other. Family is the first
educational institution. And gender disparity starts first from the family. So,
family will have to be gender sensitive beforehand. If the family becomes gender S
sensitive, the members of the family will grow up with gender sensitivity. s

Career Building: Quality and Skills 43
Role of Gender Sensitivity in Career Building
Gender sensititivity plays the prior role in all spheres of life. Its influence is
more in work place in our country. The condition is that man and woman will
work equally in workplace and get equal opportunities. It is the condition but
the reality is different. If gender sensitivity is maintained in workplace ignoring
the priority of a special gender in appointment of workers, distribution of
works, training, suitable environment, dividing duties and power, participation
in the process of taking decision, benefits and honour, and evaluation of
workers, priority will be given to merits, labour, skills and loyalty. If gender
sensitivity is maintained in family, school, society or workplace, mutual
respect, amity, reliance increase. Work environment becomes congenial. All
can work according to their respective skills and competency.
Analyzing and Creative Thinking Skills
If any incident occurs, the curious man tries to find out the reasons of that
incident. Explaining that incident from several angles, he tries to come to a
decision. Man’s effort to find out the reason is his analyzing power. When
various detective branches or law enforcing agencies investigate any incident,
they come to a decision by using this analyzing skills. Analyzing skills play an
important role in taking decision at various levels in man’s life.
Creative thinking skills are the combination of talents, attitude and self
-confidence. It is never possible to do anything as directed previously and
systematically. Skills of thinking newly or differently about anything are called
creative thinking skills. The statement “Think out of the box” is meaningful
about creative thinking. i.e. Skills
ee Steps to Analyze
of thinking out of customary : a :
; Lae 1. Collection of information
framework are creative thinking fi
skills. 2. Knowing the account of the incident
Steps to Analyze v
For analyzing any matter, first 3. Panter nto the depth of the incident
necessary information about that . . .
matter will be collected. Then the 4. Analyzing the data, from various sides
_ and angles
account of the matter or incident y
S will be known. After knowing the | 5 Taking decision
“account of the incident, we will

44 Career Education
enter into the depth of the incident or matter. i.e. Really what the matter is or
what the incident is, we will know that well. At the next step the matter or
incident will be analyzed from various sides and angles on the basis of the
data. The most appropriate solution has to be selected from all the possible
solutions. Finally ensure the implementation of the approved decision.
Ways of Increasing Creative Thinking Skills
There are no definite rules of increasing creative thinking skills. By forming
the habit of thinking independently and freely out of customary framework,
creative thinking skills increase. Besides, trying to answer the same question in
different ways, drawing any theory on paper, changing of work in daily
routine, suddenly thinking of the solution of any work, thinking in delight and
thinking something new, creative thinking skills increase.
Role of Analyzing and Creative Thinking Skills in Career Building
The analyzing and creative thinking skill has a special importance in career
building. When any decision has to be taken in education life, many things
have to be considered. At that time everyone with his analyzing power
considers various topics and takes decision. If anyone has proper analyzing
skills, he can take the decision easily. On the other hand, none likes to hold
anything old. The teacher in educational institution or the superior boss in
service wants the learners or the subordinate to do the work newly in a creative
way with his innovative power. The matter is very easy to them who can think
creative. For this reason those, who have more analyzing and creative thinking
ability, are advance in career building.

Activity: Identify each one an incident from real experience and analyze the

incident according to the stages as mentioned in the text.
Problem Solving and Decision Making Ability
Man has to face many kinds of problems on the way of life. Sometimes, it is
personal problem and sometimes it is family problem. There are also social
problems and sometimes it is the problem of the workplace. And so, man does
not work leaving the problems aside or suppressing the problems. Each
problem has one or other solution. To get rid of problem in an acceptable way ,
is called problem solving. s

Career Building: Quality and Skills 45
It is an important matter to take decision in doing any work. In fact, every work
starts with decision making process. If someone suffers from hesitation whether
he will do the work or not, whether it will be good or not, it is called indecision.
Getting over the situation and keeping good and bad in consideration, proper and
right decision is to be taken. Considering goal and aim of any work, the power to
do right work in due time is called decision making ability.
Problem Solving Process
: : Problem Solving Process
At the starting the problem we are facing, “| Analyzing the problem
the problem will be analyzed. Explaining 1
the problem from various sides, a primary 2. Inquiring about cause and
idea of it will be taken. Then it will be — source
inquired about why the problem has t
occurred and from where this problem has 3- Collecting and analyzing
originated. Detailed information about the mornatn
problem will be collected. Information : : ‘
needs to be collected by observation, and * Pevmoping Possible solution
from faithful and reliable sources. After 5 Determining suitable solution
collecting information, these will be J
analyzed and the problem will be brought to 6. Executing the solution
a solvable process. After analyzing all data,
depending on them, some possible Decisi :
ee
solution will be developed. Among the [7 Tentify what decision will be
accepted possible solutions, effective and | paren
the most suitable decision will be taken. y
Finally it is to be confirmed whether the | 2. Collecting and analyzing
accepted solution is fit to be executed | information
properly. v
Decision Making Process 3. Taking alternative decision
It is to identify first on which matter | 4. Hetendhcting possible result
decision will be taken or what decision y
will be taken. The process of taking | 5. Taking acceptable decision
decision is an important stage. Then v
detailed information will be collected | 6. Executing decision
= about the matter which has already been : + _
“ 7. Revising decision

46 Career Education
identified. Information will be collected from self deep observation, faithful and
reliable sources. After collecting information, these will be analysis. Along with
the decisions taken earlier depending on the analysis of data, several acceptable
alternative decisions will be made. Of course, alternative decisions will be taken
considering the decision accepted earlier. Enough documents will be collected in
favour of the accepted decisions including alternative decisions and it will be
presumed what the results of these can be. It will decision making process be
done on the basis of analyzing and self judging ability. At this stage acceptable
to all and having positive result, such a decision will be taken. Then accepted
decision will be executed properly and necessary steps will be taken. The result
of lastly accepted decision will be evaluated. If it appears that the decision
taken otherwise would be good, revising the decision, another new decision
will be taken.
Role of Problem Solving and Decision Making Ability in Career
Building
Problem solving and decision making ability plays an important role in career
building. In many cases it becomes a problem for the learners to select subject
and institution in education life. Career building depends on taking right
decision in this case. Again, after completing education life, decision is taken
before entering into in which kind of organization and in what kind of work
one will be engaged. In this case his career develops on the basis of his
decision. So, following problem solving process and decision making process
rightly and systematically, right and proper career is built up.

Activity: Identify each one a problem from real experience and solve thd

problem according to problem solving process as mentioned in the text.
Stress Management
In man’s life many such incidents take place that result in creating mental
stress. This mental stress is created from frustration for not getting, dejection
for failure in work or instability in misfortune and it disturbs man’s normal life
leading. Man gets upset and at a certain stage breaks down and becomes
derailed. So we will go forward by managing stress rather than indulging into
it. Overcoming stress inquiring about the reasons for mental stress and taking
effective measures accordingly, tis called stress management. S

Career Building: Quality and Skills 47
How to Manage Srtess
To do any work properly, Stress management is necessary. It is very important
to manage stress at any sphere of life. Some ways of stress management are
shown below. I f we can acquire these skills, we will be able to manage stress
to great extent.
1. To identify the stress-making elements/situations/persons;
2. To identify how body and mind respond to these stress-making elements;
3. To reduce the elements, responsible for stress;
4. To tell oneself to be clam. To say it repeatedly; To tell oneself. ‘no satiation
is permanent’,
5. To maintain mental strength;
6. To discuss, consult or share with friends or reliable ones. To discuss mental
agony with compassionate ones reduces stress;
7. To remember that, if shared happiness increases but sorrows, suffering of
stress decreases;
8. To work according to acceptable suggestions;
9. To exercise time management.
Group Work
By discussing, write down in group what other than these means of stress
management are and present them rationally.
Importance of Stress Management to Build Career
A man is able to establish control over him by stress management. So he ceases
to do inconsistent work here and there. By it his mental development is
attained. Emotional man has no knowledge of what is right and what is wrong
and surrenders to stress. Then he is not guided with logic. So, these kinds of
people cause a great loss to themselves. Conquering stress by emotion control
one can save oneself from this kind of loss. One of the means of achieving
© success is controlling emotion and not surrendering to stress. Those of you who
8 play or watch playing — certainly notice how the players play controlling their

48 Career Education
emotion. In different times there are different actions and its reactions in
service. It is not possible to execute many plans or many demands are left
unfulfilled. Due to these reasons strong mental stress is felt in many times. At
this time those, who keep emotion control with stress management, come out
successful.
Time Management
All kinds of works in the world are executed through some or other definite
tules or under definite management. Any work is done involving one or more
persons with a motive or planned activities. These planned activities are called
management. And planned use of time is time management. i.e. By use time
properly, the prepared planning for its highest attainment is time management.
By dividing the planned works according to time and executing them is called
time management.
Importance of Time Management
By time management it is possible to complete timely work in time, because
time is divided according to work. If the works are divided into little portion of
time and executed accordingly, the works are done in time. Time is not wasted
because of doing the planned work in due time. As a result, enough time is
saved. It is possible to do many different works in this additional time. Besides,
proper use of time is ensured by doing the work in this process. By dividing
time and work ends accordingly, it is found that the works are being completed
quickly. As the works ends quickly, opportunity to do different works in
additional time is got. As a result it is found that many works are being
completed in short time. As time is allotted to each work by planning in time
management, no part of work appears difficult. The other advantage of time
management is that no work remains pending in this process.
Model of Time Management
Famous writer Peter Drucker in his book “The Effective Executive” has
mentioned three stages of time management model —
Time analyzing > identifying useless need > work completion
ho}
=

Career Building: Quality and Skills 49
Time Analyzing

Everyone should keep his own record of time at least of a week and by
analyzing time, he should separate how much time is really used for work from
how much time is wasted. In this job honesty should be maintained. If
necessary, someone close can be kept with.

Identifying Useless Need

After time analyzing it will be found that everyday many works are done
which are not necessary and which can be excluded if we want. We have to
keep the record of these works and afterwards we will see these not to be
included in works.

Work Completion

Work planning will be done according to time and the works will be completed
with enough time in hand. No such work will be done in this time bound work
that will cause stoppage or disturbance.

Stephen Covey Zuvi, a famous researcher of the United States, prescribed a
model of four stages for time management, which is renowned as ‘Covey’s
Time Management Quadrant’. The model is given below:

Time of doing work

8 Maximum Important and to do right now. Important but not to do right now.

§ (Do it.) (Decide when to do it.)

a. Not important but to do right now. | Not important and not to do right now.
= Minimum (Hand over someone.) (Leave it.)
Role of Time Management in Career Building
Time management is very important in a learner’s life. It changes the directions
of the learner’s life. Proper use of time gives him instructions for future life.
Those, who are devoted to time, go far ahead in life. Time management makes
a learner loyal to time. To remain firm to the goal is an important matter for
career. By time management and because of the habit of doing time-bound
work in time, a learner is not deviated from his goal. By time management a
learner can identify in his career which will be given preference prior to any
work. So the rate of success increases. Time management keeps us ahead of
others. By doing right work at right time we never fall behind in work. For

50 Career Education
proper use of time if we commit any mistake, there is opportunity to rectify.
Successful career can be built up easily through ensuring right and proper use
of time by time management. It is to be remembered, ‘time and tide waits for
none’.

Activity: Make each one a list of your own works of the coming one week

following time management model of Stephen Covey.
Skills of Using Technology
From the beginning of creation man did all works with his own hands. Starting
from every day works even man also delivered letters. Gradually man started
thinking how any work would be done easily and quickly. Making the proverb
a success that necessity is the mother of invention, man gradually started
inventing all such things and methods of works that lessened man’s mental and
physical labour at a large scale. Various tools and methods of works invented
for many man’s work easy and for completing the works quickly are called
technology. It is tough to say definitely on what day, where and when the
technologies originated. When man started inventing any method or tools for
making his work easy, technology came into existence. Making spear for
hunting animals by men or inventing fire with dry wood is acknowledged as
the primary stage of inventing technology. But the technologists think that
technology, in fact, has been invented since the birth of modern science. In a
word, technology is some technical devices which man uses for the
development of his surroundings. Knowledge about any tool and natural
element and the ability to use it skillfully are also called technology.
Importance of Using Technology
There are many works which need much time to do. Any work is done very
easily with the help of technology. For example, in the past it needed much
time to husk paddy and now much paddy is husked in short time. As a result
man’s labour is lessened, much time is saved. Again, previously it was a very
hard work to ascertain the results of the examination, now in a moment results
are prepared with computer. Now it is possible to work correctly with the help
of technology. By researching from thousands of data, reports are prepared
correctly with the help of computer. It is possible to know the result of any
work instantly with the help of technology. As for example — now the result of %

Career Building: Quality and Skills 51
the admission test of the university is published just after the day of the test.
This is a great example of the success of technology.
Skills of Using Technology
We will have detailed idea about what technology is, how to use technology,
where technology is possible to use, which tool what function, how the tools
work. At present there is fear among many with the use of technology. This
fear with the use of technology will be got over and technology will be used
with interest. The use of technology will be started with self-confidence,
otherwise it is not possible to acquire skills in using technology. So, if
necessary, proper and requisite training will be received for acquiring its skills.
Using Technology in Career Development
At present using technology is one of several key skills in career development.
As day by day knowledge and science is expanding, all things become
dependent on technology. Now, from the household chores to the state level
almost all works are done with technology. The works of collecting and
submitting admission form of different educational institutions, depositing
money, knowing the results of examinations, etc. are being done by internet. If
the learners have the skills of using technology, they will be able to do the
tasks without the help of the others. Besides, day by day the use of technology
is being increased in all places and levels of service. Applying for job, sitting
for examination, buying tickets for travelling by bus, train, air etc. are being
done with the help of technology. So, there is no alternative to gaining skills of
using technology in career building.
Mathematical skills
A daily account is one of the important parts of several close subjects related to
human life. Man is to do various calculations in every stage, level, and daily
activities of life. This trend of accounts has been running from the beginning of
civilization. This trend of accounts of man is in literary term called
mathematical skills. Mathematical skills or mathematical knowledge is to use
general idea of mathematics in various levels of life. The man having
mathematical knowledge can satisfy easily the necessities of accounts in daily
or overall life. Ability of counting numbers, addition and subtraction, keeping
= accounts, understanding measurement, understanding of measuring land,
‘understanding statistics, etc are the examples of mathematical skills. There are

52 Career Education
three stages of mathematical skills. Such as:
1. Introduction to numbers and general addition and subtraction, general
accounts (primary idea)
2. Necessary and life related mathematical skills
3. Higher mathematical skills
Importance of Mathematical Skills
There is a great importance of mathematical skills in human life. Man does all
works unconsciously with the help of mathematical skills. Such as: budget of
family, all calculation from income and expenses in business to all accounts of
everyday life. Mathematical skills establish man as a rational being. Man learns to
think with logic with it. Mathematical skills have a great role in taking right
decision. As for example, a farmer can determine the valuation of whole work
from sowing the corn to its harvesting, understand loss and gain of his investment.
Later it is easy for him to take decision about cultivation. In such a way
mathematical skills are related integrally to human life.
Means of Acquiring Mathematical Skills
At first it is necessary to get hold of the primary topics of mathematics for
acquiring mathematical skills. Next if we calculate various matters related
closely to our life in mathematical way, our mathematical skills will increase.
Then various hard and difficult mathematical problems will be solved step by
step. Daily accounts, measurement of own house, measurement of land, etc.
must be done by oneself. It is possible to acquire mathematical skills by
coming into contact with the efficient and experienced persons in mathematical
skills. Besides, by participating in different discussions, seminars, training and
workshops on mathematics, mathematical skills can be developed.
Using Mathematical Skills in Career Development
A learner goes forward in future life by overcoming many hurdles. To overcome
all these hurdles many calculations, addition, subtraction or preferences are
identified.To do all these mathematical skills are used. Mathematical skills have a
great role in career development. When any work is done in short time, at that
time those, who are expert mathematically, understand easily what speed is
enough to finish the work on time. Special questions are set to judge
mathematical skills in admission test of different educational institutions or test 2
for employment. It is compulsory to have mathematical skills to answer all these ©

Career Building: Quality and Skills 53
questions. In many times in service we come across some statistical works which
are not possible to finish without mathematical skills. For this reason
mathematical skills are given importance for well development of career.
Aesthetic Attitude
Bangla word ‘Nandonik’ has come from ‘Nandan’ which means to get pleasure
from that or to give pleasure with that. As the source of pleasure is beauty, the
other meaning of the word ‘Nandan’ is beauty. And the meaning of ‘Nandonik’
is beautiful. In doing any work, doing it beautifully, neatly and which appears
beautiful in the eyes, that is called aestheticism. This aestheticism may be
applicable to art as well as to poetry. Even aestheticism exists starting from
minor work of everyday life to massive work of the state.
Aesthetic attitude does not merely mean recognizing or identifying beauty. The
sense, outlook and mentality of doing the work beautifully, making the work
done beautifully and presenting beautifully, is called aesthetic attitude.
Importance of Aesthetic Attitude
Everyone is the worshipper of beauty. It is to know aestheticism and the
attitude should be aesthetic if we want to judge the beauty of anything, to feel
pleasure from beauty. It is to judge the beauty as beauty is not possible for him
who is not aesthetic in attitude. If the attitude is aesthetic, one can get mental
satisfaction and the work can be done with pleasure.
Role of Aesthetic Attitude in Career Building
There is another kind of importance to do work beautifully because beautiful
work is liked by all. If the hand writing of an examinee is arranged neatly and
the presentation is beautiful in examination scripts, the teacher considers him
especially. That learner gets more marks in comparison to the others only due to
beauty. Aesthetic attitude plays an important role in career development. If a
learner does his bestowed works neatly and beautifully, teachers, classmates and
the others become devoted to him and get ready to help him. In the same way if
anyone can show his sense of beauty in his work in service, he is considered
differently in comparison to the others and his honour and dignity remains very
high. Everyone wants intimacy with him and loves him.

« | Group Work

S Getting into small group identify the means of gaining aesthetic attitude.

54 Career Education
Sample Questions
Multiple choice questions
1. What is meaning of self consciousness?
a. Concentration b. Self realization
c. Devotion d. Belief
2. Which one is most important in gaining positive attitude?
a. Education and experience b. History and tradition
c. Culture and values d. Environment and surroundings
3. The meaning of time management —
i. Making a time table
ii. By dividing time, work accordingly
iii. It is a special mode of management
Which one is correct in the followings?
a. i. b. ii & iii
c. i&ii d. i, ii & iii
Read the passage and answer the question no 4 & 5
Komol is the best boy in the class but he does not want to be the captain. When
the teachers ask him to say something in different functions of the school, he
requests them to say with someone else.
4. Absence of which of the followings makes Komol behave like that?
a. Leadership qualities b. Positive attitude
c. Firm determination d. Creativity
S

Career Building: Quality and Skills 55
5. If Komol had that quality

iv. He would get more importance to the classmates

v. He would be successful in achieving the goal

vi. He would inspire his classmates
Which one is correct in the followings?

a. i. b. ii & iii

c. i&ii d. i, ii & iii
Creative Questions
Nasima received training in computer after obtaining BA degree from a
college. She got a job at her first interview of her life. Many of her friends did
not come out successful after appearing at several examinations. They said that
Nasima is lucky, so she got a job. Nasima’s handicapped brother Ibrahim
cannot walk and his both hands are nearly inactive. He hates begging from his
heart. He has firm faith on his efforts. Today Ibrahim is successful with his
small stationary shop. His family is run with the income from the shop.

a. What is time management?

b. Explain one importance of gender equality.

c. Explain the reason of Ibrahim’s success.

d. ‘It is luck that can build up the learners’ career?’ Do you think it is

applicable to the case of Nasima? Explain.
io)
5

Chapter Three
Developing Connectivity and Behaviour in Career
Building
4 or A d/h o Sv IN %
, a vA és é “ef y | i; li}
A Wai /* AL es s4/
eo / X i £
LO (ee slamllasil.2
Go fj Ob | 5 i pli
(f “7d A SSS aL
Pees
=A AH |
By the end of the chapter we will be able to
1. Explain the role of effective connectivity in career building;
2. Identify the techniques of becoming a good listener;
3. Explain the influence of emotion, feelings and sentiment on personal behaviour;
4. Explain the importance of values in achieving success in work;
5. Analyze the importance of personal behaviour in building successful career;
6. Become interested to increase communicative skills for building successful
career;
7. Become interested to listen to the others’ words attentively; and
8. Become inspired to build up attitude and values suitable to career. ws
S
AQ

Developing Connectivity and Behaviour in Career Building 57
Connectivity and Career

Let’s think once what comes first before us when we mean connectivity.
Joining two things or putting together more than one thing, isn’t it? If it is
electronics, it may be connected with electric cable, if it is other material, it is
done otherwise. But is it possible to connect more than one person together?
Then, how do you establish connectivity with the others?

Man is a social being. All people live together side by side in the society. Are
these people mutually connected? What may it be even that all people in the
society are mutually related with any invisible binding? Do we know what the
invisible binding is?

Activity: Thread Ball Game

The learners will stand in a circle in the classroom. The teacher will give the
thread ball to anyone of the learners. That learner holding the one edge of the
thread will give thread ball to someone else according to his choice or will. He,
to whom, it is given, holding the thread will give the thread ball to another one.
In this way each learner holding the thread will give the thread ball to some
other. After getting all in the class the thread, everyone, to whom the thread
ball has been given, will explain why he has given the ball to him.

As a man we respect each other as well as we want to live together irrespective
of sect and creed. All people of the world are really tied with invisible illusory
binding. The degree of illusion is much more to the acquainted persons. We
want to stay close to our acquainted persons and always wish them good. In
this way we see that not only in social life but also in work place, this same
thing is prevalent. All establish mutual relation with an invisible binding in the
workplace.

Many things will be known and learnt to prepare oneself for service. That is
not learnt only by reading books. It needs to maintain relation with the people
of different sections and professions. Besides, it needs familiarity with each
other and directions of the senior to build up oneself according to the need of
own choice from the wide world of service.

Let’s listen to the life story of some people.

Case Study 1: Ashish Ranjan Dey lives in Comilla. He liked to be acquainted
with the strangers from his boyhood. Wherever he met them, he made good
relations with them. He maintained a regular communication with them. After
completing studies Ashish Ranjan Dey got a job. But he had will that he would
establish a business as his own. He talked to different acquainted persons about

58 Career Education
which business will do him good. He sought advice from former acquainted
renowned businessman of Dhaka.

That businessman said to Ashish ‘It is very hard to get fresh vegetables in
Dhaka. It is good to supply vegetables to the big departmental shops in
Dhaka regularly . This business thinking appeared good to Ashish. He found
out that some of his acquainted persons have the same kind of business in
Dhaka. Communicating with them Ashish got to know which vegetable they
need, how much they will pay and how much the need is etc. Then, he talked
to some vegetable farmers of his locality. The vegetabled farmers informed
him that they did not always get good price. Again sometimes it
happened that vegetables got rotten due to lack of customers in seasons of
vegetables. Ashish hired a truck and started to supply the fresh vegetables
collecting from the field to Dhaka. All became happy, the farmers got the real
price of their crops, and the owners of the big shops in Dhaka became
happy for selling fresh vegetables to the customers. All praised Ashish with
five faces. His business was gradually expanding.

Case Study 2: Jannatul Firdaus lives at a small village of Chandpur. After
passing Higher Secondary Examination she serves in her own area as a
volunteer of a non-government organization. Her duty is to make the local
people conscious of the importance of education. When she was reading in
Secondary School, one of her favourite teachers gave her an idea how the
establishing of relation can be of use in service life. Keeping the teacher’s
words in mind, she maintained regular communication with all around her and
whenever she got opportunity, she made an acquaintance with the strangers.
She tried to learn from their life and ideal and to use the learning for the
betterment of all of her own family and society. While doing job she received
various kinds of trainings. During the time of her training she was acquainted
with several high officials and colleagues. Jannatul Firdaus was keeping
regular communication with them. Working as a volunteer she saw that the
severity of diarrhea and other water borne diseases of the children is very high
in her area. The hospital is also far away. Attacked with the diseases many
children die due to lack of treatment. She thought that it was necessary to do
something for them. She talked to many people of her locality, all wanted that.
She communicated with the high officials of Directorate of Health in Dhaka.
They communicated with the Government and foreign aid agencies. Having
received much money, a health centre was established for the children of the
village and receiving training many became health workers. People were made FS
conscious of preventing diarrhea and other water borne diseases. In only two %

Developing Connectivity and Behaviour in Career Building 59
years time the situation got changed. Now, there is nearly no death of the
children by water borne diseases in the area of Jannatul Firdaus.
What did we learn from the life story of these two persons? Relation means
really to be acquainted with the surrounding people of different sections and
professions. But only acquaintance is not enough, we forget if we do not
maintain regular communication. So, relation is that after being acquainted
with anyone, it is to maintain regular communication with him. From the life
story of Ashish and Jannatul Firdaus, we have learnt that the background of
their success in service is their relation with numerous people.

There may be of many kinds of relations. Such as —

e Personal relation (For instance, we establish personal relation with our
classmates; we maintain regular communication with them; we stand by
each other in weal and woe.)

e Professional relation (In professional need, such as business, we are to
establish relation with many; when you will enter into professional life after
completing study, you may establish relation with colleague and others.)

e Social/Political/Cultural relation (Those of us who, live in the same society,
stay socially united by establishing mutual relation.)

Besides these, there may be many more kinds of relations. Whenever it may
be, the meaning of relation is to establish communication and to maintain that
regularly. Without regular communication established relation is disconnected.
As for example, suppose you connect two water loaded containers with a pipe
is, i.e, a relation is established between the two containers. If the container gets
much water, it will not be overflowed; rather it will be preserved in the other
container with the pipe. Now, if you remove the pipe, will any connection
between these two containers exist? If the water of one container is
overflowed, will the other container be of any use? Hence, after establishing
relation with anyone, we should keep regular communication with him
otherwise we will not be benefitted from that relation.

The relation is not established only between person to person. Relation

between institutions or organizations can be established. Such as Bangladesh

has established relation with the United Nations. But here we shall learn about
relation between person to person.

2}

S

N

60 Career Education
Developing Connectivity in Successful Career
Of course, relation will be established with various people for success in
career, profession or life. At present many jobs are given internally, i.e, without
advertising in the newspapers, the acquainted candidates are appointed by
interviews or examinations. Thus the organizations save the costs of long
employment process. So it is necessary to maintain all time communication
with the people of various sections and professions who are acquainted on the
way to life. It is not possible to say beforehand who, when can give you the
news of any work.
Let’s see with whom we will establish relation in service and before getting job
a. The acquainted in neighbourhood, schools and colleges;
b. The newly acquainted face in any function or social gathering;
c. Relatives and friends;
d. The officers and workers of all levels of the same department;
e. The officers of Human Resource Department;
f. The customers of serving organization;
g. With the senior officials.

DO “he N\F [? DA \ 2

AD” 13 fp PY ~

SR ONMULACAL rat?

ix (SF nary /
yp Ur J j X
yj

In business with whom relation is established — ~
1. The neighbours, relatives and friends; s

Developing Connectivity and Behaviour in Career Building 61
2. All the officers and workers of own organization;
3. The customers especially the regular customers;
4. The officers of all other organizations on which it depends in business for

materials and service;
5. Local entrepreneurs;
6. Local government administrators;
7. The advertising mass media.
What to do in establishing relation —

a Exchange pleasantries cordially;

b Ifyou meet someone, of course, discuss together for a while;

c Make inquiries about the acquainted persons in their distress;

d Always speak about the subject of common interest;

e Speak less about personal but not secret or sensitive subject;

f Be joyous and express cordiality to them by words and works;

g Make inquiries about their well being in social festivals and functions

and exchange greetings

h Help if they fall into problem;

i Not only for career, make them understand that you are really cordial;

j Keep honesty, discipline and secrecy in case of relation.
Case Study: Mr. Jaman and Mr. Azhar have been working in the same
organization for a long time. They have good relation with each other. Besides
office, they have access to their houses. Just that day Mr. Azhar went to the
invitation of Mr. Zaman on the occasion of his daughter’s birthday. Though
they have mutual good relation, they have some differences in their behaviours.
Everyday Mr. Zaman comes a little late to the office, because, his house is far
away from the office. But he never deceives in work. He submits all works
after doing them in time. He keeps regular communication with him who is his
direct superior officer. Mr. Zaman is very careful how and when he will help
him. He has also good relation with the subordinate officers. On the other hand
Mr. Azhar is well known in the office as an honest officer. No complaint has
ever been received against him. He has never been late to the office so far. He

x has good relation with the colleagues. Usually he is not found talking at tea
= table. Not that he keeps regular communication with the superior officer under

62 Career Education
whom he works. But he submits all works every day by doing them properly.
Recenntly Mr. Zaman has been promoted.
Activity
Explain which matter has got much importance to Mr. Zaman’s promotion.
Let us be good listeners
It is very important to be a good listener for maintaining communication.
Listening to anything does not mean a good listener, a good listener tries to
listen to the others attentively and what he listens, he thinks about that. Many
around us talk much and
do not listen to the others or if they listen to a little, they do not think deeply
about that. They are in no way good listeners. There are some characteristics
which make us understand that they are good listeners.
> A good listener listens to the speakers attentively, while listening to the
words; they do not become absence minded.
> A good listener usually listens to the speakers keeping eye to eye contact in
most of the times.
> A good listener becomes overwhelmed with the speech, his expression
changes in accordance with what he listens; (Such as — smiling slightly,
getting surprised, expressing grief, etc).
> A good listener does not speak about himself while the others speak,
considering time and opportunity or after the end of others’ speech, he
speaks or makes his remarks.
> A good listener does not start speaking suddenly on any irrelevant matter
during listening to the others or their speech; rather he, who is a good
listener, helps the speaker from time to time confine within the subject
matter by logical views exchanging mutual interaction with him.
Now think, do you have these characteristics? All of us have more or less the
characteristics of becoming good listener. We should try to be good listener,
because it is necessary to be good listener for becoming successful in workplace.
ho)
s

Developing Connectivity and Behaviour in Career Building 63
Let us judge how much we are good listeners —
Read the questions or sentences below (from serial 1 to 10) and according
to how you behave, give “sign on a, b, c, d, e. Here —
a= never do = |
b= do not always make itdo= 2
c = if I wish, I do, if I do not wish, I do not do = 3
d=most of the time do= 4
e = always do= 5
By giving the sign after reading all sentences and putting in the equation,
find out the valuation and know the remark according to valuation.
Serial Statements Never | Do not | If I wish, I | Most of |Always
do always | do, if I do | the time do
make it| not wish, I | gy
do__| donotdo
Po lt ld er
1 When someone speaks, I listen to it c
attentively
2 When someone speaks, I cease some other
work (which disturbs attention
3 Before listening to anything or any speaking
from anyone, I decide mentally what I want
to know
4 I cease to talk to another when someone c
speaks
5 Listening to anything I gather the key words c
so that I can remember the subject matter
If possible, I try to take notes of the
important matters along with listening
7 | IfI can not understand any subject matter c
by listening to anything, I ask the speaker
rational questions about that matter
At the time of listening of something, I look c
at the speaker’s eyes so that I can
understand his expression
At the time of someone’s speaking I cease c
to divert or _ try to divert his attention to
another side
S 10 | After listening to anything I try to
N understand its background

64 Career Education
By counting how many V you have given on a, b, c, d, e in the answer of ten
sentences, put in the equation below and find out your score. Your score = | x
(the number, on how many ‘a’ you have given ¥) + 2 x (the number, on how
many ‘b’ you have given V) + 3 x (the number, on how many ‘c’ you have
given V) + 4 x (the number, on how many ‘d’ you have given VY) + 5 x (the
number, on how many ‘e’ you have given “).

If your score is

From 10 to 20: you are inattentive.

From 20 to 30: you need more attention.

From 30 to 40: you are attentive.

From 40 to 50: you are very attentive.
Techniques of Becoming a Good Listener
Objective and Plan
A talented man does not start any work without aim and plan, neither does a
good listener pay heed to any words without any constructive aim. Before
listening, a good listener decides what information he needs and how he will
remember all that information. For remembrance a good listener adopts some
techniques; such as — devices of remembering some key words (in this case the
listener remembers the key words and merges necessary information with his
former learning as knowledge). But for much information the listener puts
down or notes down them. If the aim is decided before listening or it is decided
what information are necessary to know, it becomes easy to remember the
listening information.
Paying Attention
If one wants to be a good listener, of course, he will listen attentively. It is not
an easy task to listen to anything with undisturbed attention; it needs practice
and efforts. Sometimes, it becomes hard to pay attention to the others or listen
to their words. Again, many can pay attention to the depth of the others’ words
quickly. It needs really efforts and practice.
Settling Mentally and Physically
If one wants to be a good listener, he will be settled mentally and physically
during the time of listening to anything. When someone speaks or delivers his
speech, many do different works, think about many things. Doing such,
nothing is listened with attention; no one can be an attentive listener. If one S

N

Developing Connectivity and Behaviour in Career Building 65
wants to be an attentive listener, of course one should have interest, be settled
mentally and physically.
Speaking Eye to Eye
In our country many think that it is unmannerly to speak or to listen eye to eye
to the elders. But in the case of listening to anything attentively, eye
communication is very important. The listener can guess many things looking
at the eyes of the speaker and build up mental communication entering into the
depth of the matter. As a result, listening becomes meaningful.
Not Speaking During Others’ Talking
When someone speaks, we should not speak. If we speak during the time of
someone’s speaking, we shall not listen to him clearly neither does he listen to
us. So, to be an attentive listener, we shall build up a habit of listening
attentively, keeping silent when the others will speak. At the end of one’s words,
another one will speak.
If we make these means as part of our behaviour by regular practice, we will be
good listeners. It is very important to be a good listener in achieving success in
life, especially in service.

Activity

How would your behaviour be in the case of listening attentively to the

others? Explain.
Personal Behaviour
Personal behaviour is very important for establishing effective relation. The
importance of personal behaviour is undeniable in achieving success in career.
But what does personal behavour really mean? Personal behaviour is the
expression of our emotion, feelings and sentiment. If we want to succeed in
service, our personal behaviour will be refined; our personal behaviour will be
such that it will not only be acceptable to the others but also claimant of praise.
Let’s judge a situation —
Case Study: Hasan Ali works in a non-government development organization as
a field supervisor. His responsibility is to monitor the activities of the
fieldworkers and to coordinate their activities. Once an allegation of corruption
was raised against a fieldworker. Being informed of the corruption. Hasan Ali
justified its truth. As the allegation was proved, he called upon the fieldworker
and asked him to explain why he had committed the corruption. The convicted

66 Career Education
fieldworker started telling about his want and many problems with importunities.
Hasan Ali without being overwhelmed by emotion took serious step against the
convicted person. As a result, no other field worker or worker got involved in
any corruption. It resulted in spreading Hasan Ali’s fame as an honest officer as
well as the image of the organization became bright. If he did not take serious
action against the corrupted worker, he would get involved in more serious
corruption. As a result the image of the development aiding organization was
lessened as well as local people would become the victim of loss.
It is about service life. But before entering into service life, refined practice of
emotion, feelings and sentiments is necessary.
Emotion
It is a kind of emotion that we love our country very deeply. Again, we like
something very much or dislike intensely, that is also a kind of emotion.
Emotion is very meaningful for keeping human race and so our individuality.
Emotion controls our relation and interaction with the people around us in real
life. Emotion is generally short term. But if any matter is related to real life or
based on philosophy, in that case emotion related to that matter lasts long. Our
mutual relation is coupled with emotion. How our relation with our parents,
brothers and sisters, friends or colleagues is that depends much on how our
emotional attitude towards them is. In workplace emotion becomes very
important especially when we work together in group. In workplace sense of
mutual respect, compassion, belief, reliance, etc. are dependent on emotional
attitude.
Every man has emotion. Sometimes, man becomes happy, leaps in joy.
Sometimes he gets excited, sometimes he becomes sad, keeps grudge, and
again sometimes, he becomes agitated. The means of expressing man’s joys
and sorrows are called emotion. Emotion is man’s special mental condition.
The expression of man’s mental condition mixed with his sense is called
emotion. Emotion has both good and bad sides. Positive emotion helps a man
develop himself whereas negative emotion leads him to destruction. So there is
necessity to control emotion. People having emotion cannot accept logic.
Analyzing both good and bad sides and ignoring the importance of own loss or
gain, if one controls one’s emotion logically, it is called emotion control. i.e.
without being overwhelmed with emotion, if we behave rationally, it is called
emotion control.

2

&

Developing Connectivity and Behaviour in Career Building 67

How to control Emotion

In order to get developed of established on life, we must control our emotion.

To control harmful emotions like fear, anger, malice, envy, despair etc. We

need self confidence and continuous practice. We should never be pensive. We

have to keep in mind that childhood and boyhood ate the most beautiful period

of life. At this time no one has to bear heavy burden for responsibility.

Therefore, we have to fully concentrate on studying. If time is available, we

should read some good book besides our textbooks. We have to go for outing,

take part in games and sports. We should express our troubles and problems to

our parents. Anger, envy, fear, frustration are various manifestations of

emotion. The ways of controlling these types of negative of harmful emotion.

The ways of controlling these types of negative or harmful emotions are given

below:

1. To identify the real cause of anger, fear of frustration;

2. To take action to remove the cause/causes;

3. To discuss the matter freely with reliable relatives, near ones, teachers and

friends;

4. To follow the suggestions of reliable people who love themselves;

5. To have firm determination to get rid of fear of frustration;

6. To bear in mind that nobody likes an angry or hot-tempered man.

Controlled emotion makes like beautiful, enjoyable. To be guided by excessive

emotion may cause many troubles. Therefore, it is very important to control

emotion.

Activity
‘Excess of emotion is harmful for professional life’. Give logic to the topic.

Feelings

Feelings last long in comparison to emotion. Any matter, any event that creates

a sense in the depth of our mind or in the closest corner of our heart, is

feelings. Emotion begets feelings in our mind.

Such as, we have permanent feelings of love towards our own persons. Our
= feelings can be different to different matters in our workplace. When we like
“any work, a feeling of our liking to the work is created which inspires us to

68 Career Education
stick to the work or to do the work. When any new matter comes before us, any
new event occurs before us, a sudden feeling to the matter or the event creates
a kind of emotion in us.

There is much importance of feeling in creating relation with the colleagues in
workplace. Even when we appear at any kind of viva voce to get any job, our
manner and behaviour, emotion and feelings etc. also create a kind of feeling
in them who are present before us as examiners. When they decide to select
any candidate for the job, that feeling plays a vital role in taking their decision.
Sentiment

That mood is sentiment which is created in our mind as a result of our emotion
and feelings about any matter, event or doctrine. Sentiment can be of two kinds
—positive sentiment and negative sentiment. Positive sentiment hastens the
success, so negative sentiment hampers the success. Positive activities and
sentiment are acceptable to all. If you really want to be successful, it will be
your first duty to create positive sentiment and to keep it also in the same way.
Perhaps this story is known to all. Two sellers of a shoe company were sent
differently to a remotest locality for determining the prospect of shoe
marketing. Coming back one reported that there is no market for shoes at that
place. Five thousand people live there but none wears shoes. Another reported
that there is a great prospect of shoe marketing at that place because none of
five thousand people wears shoes. Can you tell whose sentiment is positive and
whose sentiment is negative?

A pessimist can find problem in the midst of much prospect and an optimist
can find prospect in the midst of many problems. When you will lead a work,
the work will be completed if you do not have positive sentiment but your
positive sentiment will encourage all to do their best. Positive sentiment is very
necessary to achieve success in workplace. Let’s know how we can be the
owner of more positive sentiment:

Doing the Work in Line of the Goal

Before starting any work, think how it will reach you to your goal. If there is
no harmony between your work and your goal, it is better not to do it. Aimless
work will waste your time and energy.

Staying Firm in Goal

Of course, generally you are to take decision in many cases of life and the
result as you want, the works are arranged accordingly. But to expect a definite 2
result beforehand means if that result is not achieved due to any reason, you &

Developing Connectivity and Behaviour in Career Building 69

will get frustrated from that. Do the best efforts to achieve the goal but do not

think much about the result. If success does not come in one time, efforts will

be carried on again and again.

Building Friendship with the People of Positive Attitude

It is scientifically proved that your brain copies unknowingly the behaviours of

the people around you. It means if you are associated with the people of

positive sentiment, its influence will fall on you. And if you are associated with

the people of negative sentiment, its influence will also fall on you. So you

should try to be associated with the people of positive sentiment.

Taking the Others’ Inability Easy

The working ability of all is not the same. Someone might not have done the

work just in the way you would have done this. To feel disheartened with it or

to laugh at him with someone or to make bad remarks will not be justified.

Praising the Others’ Work

The feeling of gratitude will be built up when you will consider your

attainments great leaving aside the slightest distress of life. You will express

your gratitude with smiling face for the gifts given by the others. You will

not forget to praise the others’ work.

Values in Work Success

We will be surprised to know that the [77

distinguished scientist Albert Einestine | !tY 20t to become a man of success,

started career as a clerk in an office. | but rather uy to eS a man of

From a statement of Albert Einestine it | Value”- Albert Einestine

is understood how far the values are

important for success in work. Not running after success, Einestine spoke of

gaining values. And it is value which can bring forth work success in the real

sense, can introduce one as a honoured man to all in the society. It is said ‘A

rascal though learned should be deserted’. Which values are given importance

in Einestine’s statement or in the proverb, how values help us succeed in our

work or in workplace, we shall learn the topic from this lesson.

We shall discuss some grounds of values in workplace.

Dependency and Reliance

We are to work in group in workplace. Working in group one is to depend
S differently on the others in work. We feel comfort to work in group with them,
“on whom we can be reliant, on whom we can depend by giving them any task

70 Career Education
or responsibility. If you watch, you will notice that you make friendship with
them whom you believe; whose manner and behaviour, thinking, nature you
like; on whom you can depend. Workplace is not different from that. In
workplace all want to make a group with them who are efficient, whose values
are refined, above all giving whom the duty we are relieved.
Honesty
We all know that honesty is a part of refined value. Honesty is not only
priceless in personal or social life but it is also valuable in workplace. All want
to be the colleagues of an honest man, want to give an honest man the work or
the job. All dislike those who are dishonest, want to stay away from them.
Workplace is not different from that. In judgment of the employment or
appointing officer, a job candidate’s honesty plays a vital role. Today employers
are very conscious and they are especially efficient in determining the level of
job candidate’s honesty. If anyone has dishonesty in their mind, the employers
understand that easily, no matter how efficient the job candidate is. In the
business it is the same, none wants to deal with dishonest businessmen.
Discipline and Order
There are some rules and regulations of every organization. Of course, we are
to abide by these rules and regulations to be successful in service. Discipline
and order are the identity of refined values, a man with refined values are
always disciplined and orderly. In the society where he lives or in the
organization where he serves, he tries to abide by the rules and regulations of
the society and the organization.
Punctuality
Punctuality is very important in workplace. It is very important to do any work
in time. These words are realized in proverbs and maxims and even in the song
of Lalon —‘If time is gone, no attainment will be achieved’. In workplace all do
work in group. If someone does not complete his task in time, all fall into
trouble for this. Besides, it is very important to go to office on time or to start
business in time. It becomes easy to gain success if each work is started on time.
Mutual Empathy and Belief
Without mutual compassion and belief in work place no work is possible to do. If
there is no mutual compassion and belief in any group in workplace, it will not be
possible for that group to do any creative work. Besides, all in the group are to take
responsibilities in group work. If anyone has any fault anywhere, others should
come to his assistance so that the group can be successful in performing the duty.
s

Developing Connectivity and Behaviour in Career Building 7)
Personal Behaviour in Career Building
SU eae
acy & Deal
Sy" q ey ee Nie my]
/ A TXT
f 4 A} eZ
2 ft (Carle
Behaviour which is normal Behaviour which should not be practised
Personal behaviour is the most important of all in career building. Because,
your personal behaviour is the only means of expressing what you have in you.
We can understand by the behaviour whether any man is honest or dishonest.
We do not like any ill tempered man, because, his behaviour does not give us
telief. Rather it causes irritation. Behaviour needs to be controlled and gentle
for doing better in professional life. Otherwise it is not possible to go far. Only
by personal good behaviour many ordinary people have been working in extra
ordinary post, have become the owner of large industries from small
entrepreneurs. Before starting the career till its ending personal behaviour
needs to be polite and suitable. Otherwise there occurs problem or hindrance in
the same time or other.
Our mind and mentality, habit and bad habit are all expressed through
behaviour. No organization will want to provide with the job to them who are
impolite. Rather people want to give the job to any polite and gentle one. If
anyone appearing at job interview pushes the hands in the nose, the appointing
authority will consider that he has behavioural problem. All the behavoiurs that
are acquired in building professional life including service, business are —
a
8

72 Career Education
~ to be polite, modest, gentle, neat and clean;
to be conscious of time and there will be the combination between
words and works;
to be polite with both superior and subordinate colleagues;
¢ not to be angry or not to express irritation in serious situation, rather to
manage the situation in cool brain with smiling face;
to sit properly at the time of job interview or when any customer comes
to own organization. Do not sit or stand in such a way that it can express
audacity;
¢ not to do personal work publicly. Such as, cutting nails with the teeth in
the office meeting or cleaning the inside of the nose with hands;
“ to adopt more carefulness in behaving with the colleagues of opposite
gender;
¢ to talk cordially and smilingly to all irrespective of only those who will
be useful;
“ to ask for direct help from the colleagues without importunity if we fall
into any problem and to talk to them keeping proper respect;
to express own inability easily but this inability will not be expressed
first without efforts;
“ to look at the superior officers with respect without getting afraid;
¢ not to share frequently own personal problem with all.
Role Play
A play will be staged in the classroom. Creating the atmosphere of the
office, the learners will play the role of mutual colleagues. A learner will
play the role of an ideal behaviourist and one will show all the behaviours
that will not be done. Then a learner will play the role of a senior officer to
teach him the right behaviours. Characters will be selected by lottery.
ho}
=

Developing Connectivity and Behaviour in Career Building 73
Sample Questions
Multiple Choice Questions
2. What is it said to like or dislike something?
a. Behaviour b. Attitude
c. Emotion d. Reliance
1. Which one of the following values is the most important in successful
work?
a. Honesty b. Punctuality
c. Discipline d. Aestheticism
1. It is applicable to feelings that —
i. It lasts longer than emotion
ii. It is the result of our emotion and feeling about the event or doctrine
iii. In many times it revives the pessimist
Which one is correct in the following?
a. i. b. iii
c. ii d. i&ii
Read the passage and answer the question no 4 & 5
Jesmin behaves tolerantly in both her family and office. But sometimes she
reacts strongly against the behaviours of the colleagues. She praises any work
if it appears good and when it appears bad, she does not make any delay to
express her reaction.
1. What is called this characteristic of Jesmin?
a. Image b. Sentiment
c. Feelings d. Emotion
1. Due to this characteristic Jesmin will get-
i. compassion in workplace
ii. the bad behaviour of the colleagues
iii. the belief and reliance of all

74 Career Education
Which one is correct in the followings?

a. i. b. iti

c. ii d. I & iii
Creative Questions
Nusrat Jahan is a girl of a small town of Bangladesh. She is of shy nature and
does not talk looking at anyone. She has completed honours and masters from
a college. Nusrat is very intelligent. What she does, she does it attentively. She
is ready to try her level best for becoming successful. She applied for several
jobs, some of which she appeared at the interview and written examination; but
she did not get job finally. As Nusrat did not get job, she felt distressed, but she
did not fall down. Rather she tried to find out why she did not get job. It has
appeared to Nusrat that she is weak in English and using Computer in
comparison to the other competitors. Besides, during the time of interview a
behavioural weakness was remembered.

a. What is mentality?

b. Explain honesty.

c. State the weak point of Nusrat’s behaviour during the time of interview.

d. Is Nusrat’s weakness really a weakness in getting job by appearing at a

competitive examination? - Analyze.
Lo)
ES

Chapter Four
Me and My Workplace
% g §
oe % é s
ey
‘ 3
Ge, Soe <
Carey, Sa ee
wats "Others — S = - Govermment employees
+ a
° eo? LX, “anyon,
& a TF a,
: hing
£ & $
a f 2 %
¥ & 8 O
By the end of the chapter we will be able to -
1. Identify the important job sectors at local, national and international levels;
2. Explain the job opportunities of the Bangladeshis in the international arena;
3. Explain the role of mass media and web sites in finding out
job/profession/work;
4. Explain the importance of self-employment;
5. Explain the process of applying for a job;
6. State the strategies of maintaining good relations with the colleagues at work;
7. Present a report by searching different work sectors through using mass
media and information and communication technology;
8. Participate actively in career fair arranged by the school;
9. Become interested in building own future career by knowing about
career in local, national and international levels and
10.Become motivated in lifelong learning for consolidating and more
enriching the career.
S

76 Career Education
Existing Work Sectors in Bangladesh

Time is full of motion. With the motion of time society is changed, our
surroundings, work environment and context are changed. A great change has
taken place in workforce of our country. Only forty or fifty years ago the
profession of most of the people of our country was cultivation or serving in
agro-based industries. Now Bangladesh is more advanced; a great variety has
approached to workforce for keeping pace with globalization. Today what kind of
work opportunity in local and national levels we have, which professions are
possible to accept — that we will know from this lesson. Side by side, we shall try
to know a little about what kind of work opportunity can be created for us in
future. It is very important for us to know deeply about the work place; then we
will be able to accept the profession suitable to our dream and interest.

Local Level

The society and culture of Bangladesh is as diverse as its nature. In thinking
about Bangladesh many say that there is less opportunity of work in our
country especially in local level. This saying is not at all true; since long ago
the society of Bangladesh in local level has been enriched with the collection
of refined and varied workplaces. In every village there were people of many
classes and professions including Potteries, Farmers, Blacksmiths, Fishermen,
Businessmen, Teachers etc. They selected the profession on the basis of family
tradition and their own interest; sacrificing their merit and work to their best
they made the economy of the country and the village moving. So, from the
ancient time this country has been known all over the world as Sonar Bangla,
many races from various comers of the world came to the country with a hope
of changing their luck, they took much asset away from our country. But we
did not become poor; many countries are perhaps ahead of us in asset; in
mentality and intellect we are that original and genuine industrious Bangalee.
There are still many professions around us and there is opportunity to gain
respect as well as to become financially affluent in those professions. It is only
to look at with open eyes, arrange the future newly in a new way by using own
intellect and creativity.

Let us know about the opportunity to take the professions that we have around
us in local level at present.

Cultivation

Cultivation is one of the most primitive professions of the world. Like all the «
countries of the world in this country millions of farmers are working day and &

Me and My Workplace 77
night for fulfilling food demands of the people. Many look at cultivation mean,
think it is a worthless work. Those who think such, are deprived of the light of
humanity, their hearts are not enlightened with the light of education. There are
such many that do not like cultivation and by selling their properties they go
abroad with a hope for better profession. Have we ever found out — how they
are in foreign country and adopting what profession they are leading their
lives. In various countries of the world cultivation is a profitable profession. In
American and many European countries, after receiving higher education in
agriculture, many come back to their own village and do cultivation. Of course,
they do not do cultivation unconsciously like us. They cultivate the land
scientifically and their production is much more. As a result those countries,
after meeting up the internal demand of food, export the food grains abroad
and earn a lot of foreign currencies. Respected farmers of this country can
really move the country to the golden peak of prosperity.
There are fewer countries of the world having such fertile land as Bangladesh.
Hence the country needs modern farmers. Can we be the modem farmers? Do
we know the skills necessary to be a modern farmer? To be a modern farmer, at
first education is necessary. Without being educated it is not possible to get total
idea when cultivation will bring much profit, how it is possible to cultivate
scientifically, by using which fertilizer the production will be good etc. Those,
who are not educated, in most of the time cannot know the right information in
time. Without being educated, it is not possible to read the regulations inscribed
on the packet of the seeds and the fertilizers, as a result these are not properly
used on the land. When any educated man does cultivation, he considers all
matters relating to cultivation, by understanding his loss and gain and his ability
he initiates cultivation. Reading Agriculture Education in secondary level, many
things about modern cultivation are known; if one is educated, it is learnt by
reading other books. Educated farmers can reduce the cost of cultivation by
making organic fertilizer as well as get much production by proper care and
management. Education introduces man with newer technologies. The work
becomes easy by using the new technology and a lot of work is done quickly.
Modern farmers can get much profit from it. By cultivating vegetables today,
many are able to lead a financially affluent life. Do we want to be such one?
Animal Husbandry and Poultry

« the profession of animal husbandry is as old as cultivation. Animal husbandry is

S profitable on commercial basis; it is possible to do that easily. The land of

78 Career Education
Bangladesh is very fertile. If we keep here any land fallen, excess of grass grows
there. Besides, foods for the animals and the birds are produced easily on this
land which is not possible in most of the countries of the world. The climate of
many countries is very cold; very often ice falls. Animal husbandry and poultry
are very difficult in those countries. But in Bangladesh ice does not fall and it is
not as hot as the desert. This moderate climate is best for animal husbandry and
poultry. It is only necessary to rear the animals and the birds consciously with
the help of scientific technology in modern and scientific way. If you want,
many of you can do animal husbandry and poultry in modern way without
looking for job By buying 10 high quality milk cows at the cost of only four
lacs and a half or five lacs taka, and by rearing them in scientific way, it is
possible to earn at least five or six thousand taka everyday i.e.monthly one to two
lac’s taka. Is it not surprising? Let us calculate—

Activity

Write about an educated farmer of your village or your acquaintance.

Analyze by collecting information about how he takes care of the crops,

how he sells the crops with more profit.
A cow of high quality gives 10-15 litres milk every day. Suppose your cow
gives 12 litres milk daily. You have 10 such cows. At present the market price
of milk is 50 taka per litre. Then the amount of milk of 10 cows is 120 litres.
So the daily income will be 6000 taka. Then in a month the income will be
1,80,000 taka.
Again these cows will give birth of calf. By selling them it is possible to earn a
lot. Same kind of profit is gained in poultry (such as — rearing and keeping
duck, hen, etc.) But in every case poultry will be done scientifically; otherwise
it will not be possible to gain profit. And if poultry is done scientifically, first it
will need one to be educated. The related matters will be known deeply.
Job in Local Development Partner Organizations
In all the areas of Bangladesh there are many NGOs which run different kinds of
development activities for the locality. If one does job in these NGOs or in local
development partner organizations, on one side a regular source of income or a
good job is arranged, on the other hand, a role is played for the development of
the people of the country and the society. All these development partner
organizations work in various issues of the society including education, health, &

Me and My Workplace 79
agriculture, animal husbandry, pisciculture, children and women’s right, disaster
management, children protection, etc. To get job in these organizations, on one
side, one is to be skilled in English language; on the other hand, one has to
acquire professional communication skills.
Job in Local Factory
In every area there are some special kinds of factory; such as — ship breaking
industry in Chittagong, launch making in Narayanganj etc. By doing jobs in
these factories we can also lead our lives. Apparently it seems that the salary of
these factories is less. If you notice minutely, you will find out that the salary
of the unskilled workers is less in these factories. Those, who are skilled in
various works of these factories, earn a very handsome amount. It needs
different skills for different factories. We will have to know the requisite skills
and before applying for job, we will have to acquire those skills. Bangladesh
government, through youth development training activities, arranges many
kinds of training. Besides, there are opportunities of acquiring many kinds of
skills in Technical and Vocational Institutes. By knowing and understanding,
we will have to advance forward with proper planning; if one becomes
efficient and hard working, in spite of starting the career from a small range,
one can be great, much reputation can be achieved.
Business in Local Scale
Since the primitive age of the world business is a prestigious profession. Many
think that it is good to do job because it has less risk. But it will be
remembered that business is an independent and prestigious profession. In job
it is to work under other, but business is not like that. Business can be done in
variety of small to large scale; business can be done with various goods. Many
kinds of business can be done depending on interests, skills and capital. The
most common businesses of our country in local level are — raw material
business, fashion material business, cloth business, fruits and vegetables
business, fish business, stationary business, vehicle and transport business, etc.
Whatever the business may be, if it is done with honesty, devotion and hard
work, it will ensure prosperity.
National Level
In Bangladesh there are many kinds of job opportunities in national level.
There are job opportunities in government, non-government, foreign and many
co kinds of multinational companies. Along with that there are opportunities to do
& business in national and international levels. For this reason goal will be

80 Career Education
determined by the learners at the beginning of education life and many kinds of
requisite skills will be achieved accordingly. Those, who are efficient in
professional work, are offered job with various facilities.

Let us know about some of the job and business opportunities that are available
in different sectors of Bangladesh.

There are many opportunities of jobs in national level in our country. Such as,
job opportunities in government, semi-government, autonomous or
non-government organizations. There are defense and civilian sectors in
government job.

Cadre Service

To say about government job in Bangladesh, the name of the job that comes
first is cadre service. There are 29 cadres in Bangladesh. Only educated
citizens of Bangladesh have the opportunity to do job in each of it. Bangladesh
Public Service Commission recommends those for jobs after selecting the
cadre officers by various competitive examinations from the citizen of not
more than 30 years having graduation or post graduation (according to the
characteristics of the cadre). Then the President of Bangladesh appoints the
cadre officers. Besides doing the job of the highest level of the country, the
cadre officers receive many facilities. So it is the first chosen profession of the
educated citizens of the country. If we want to get these jobs, we will study
properly in every level of education.

Teaching

A teacher makes today’s child suitable for future generation. The status of the
teacher is above all irrespective of country, period and race. So, you can start
your career in this knowledge distributing noble profession. If you choose
teaching as profession, on one side, you will get honour and status; on the other
hand there is invitation of beautiful and secured life.

First stage of education level is primary education. Almost every year teachers
are appointed in these institutions. If you want to be an assistant teacher in
government primary school, it needs passing of HSC for female and Graduation
for male and a degree of one year on Certificate in Education from Primary ~
Teachers’ Training Institute (PTI) or passing Graduation or Post Graduation. Ifhe $

Me and My Workplace 81
wants to be a Headmaster, he must have B. Ed Degree besides Post Graduation.
However, teaching career can be started in non government primary schools,
kindergartens and people owned educational institutions.

Every year teachers are also being appointed in secondary educational
institutions. In secondary educational institutions teaching career is started if
one has at least 24 class in Graduation or Post Graduation degree in education
life. In this case those, who pass in the recruitment examination of the
government institutions, are directly appointed. On the other hand it needs
passing of registration examination for teaching in non government
institutions. At present NTRCA gives appointments in the vacant posts of
non-government educational institutions. In higher secondary level there is
difference of appointment process between government and non government
institutions. If one wants to teach in government colleges , one will pass
BCS examination. And if one wants to teach in non government colleges ,
one will have to pass registration examination. In the case of teaching in
college one must have Post Graduation degree with honours in respective subject.
The highest level of teaching is university teaching. Many students have dream
to be the teacher of the university. For this, it needs an excellent result at all
levels of education life. At present NTRCA gives appoinments in the vacant pasts of
non-govt educational institutions.

Law Related Profession

At present all are becoming interested in law profession for honour and
ensured future. Now newer dimensions and prospects have been added to law
profession. In this prestigious profession usually man comes beforehand. Over
time women are coming to this profession. In addition to the opportunities in
the Lower Court as Judges or Lawyers, there are prospects of becoming a
Lawyer or Justice in the Supreme Court. Besides building up the profession as
government pleader in Lower and Higher Court, there is opportunity of
becoming Notary Public.

Besides Judicial Division, the Lawyers have the right to plead the case in
Administrative Court. Even the Lawyers can work in the court and in chamber
and farm outside the court as in-house Lawyers. To be a lawyer, one is engaged
in law profession by passing the competitive examination from the Bar
Council. Of course, this process is for the Lower Court. The process of
becoming the Lawyer of the Supreme Court is the further passing of Bar

82 Career Education
Council examination along with work experience in the Lower Court for a
certain period.

If someone wants to be a Judge, he will have to pass the assistant Judge
Employment Examination of the Judicial Service Commission. If anyone has
the experience of at leastl0 years as lawyer, he will get the opportunity of
becoming the Justice. A Lawyer has the opportunity of becoming efficient in
different subjects, such as family, lands, criminals, writ, company, labour laws
or income tax, etc. In addition to these, some more new sectors have been
created in law profession, such as, intellectual and proprietary right,
trademarks, patent and design related legal work etc. Work range with
environmental laws has been extended throughout the country. Besides, the
sectors of conducting journalist case in Bangladesh Press Council and case
related to customs and VATs are also increasing. As a human right worker,
wider work opportunities have been created in government and non
government agencies. Different government and non government Bank and
Insurance companies of our country are currently employing legal officers. The
opportunity of law journalism has increased more than the former. So in recent
times each of the lawyers is being interested in diverse matters.

Bank and Insurance

There are opportunities for the educated citizens of the country to do jobs in
Bank and Insurance sectors. There are both government and non-government
Banks and Insurances in Bangladesh. It is a very dignified profession. There
are also many facilities in this profession. Besides doing the jobs as officer,
there are opportunities of doing job as various kinds of employees on the basis
of educational qualification in these organizations.

Garments Industry

The Garments Industry of Bangladesh is world famous. The readymade
garments of the country as well as its various ingredients making industries
have worldwide appreciation. Since the 80s the readymade garments has
started to develop as a sector of export. Gradually internal market of this
industry has expanded quickly. The employment opportunity for skilled and
unskilled manpower has been opened by this industry. There was a time when
the educated youth were not interested in this industry. But because of present
work facilities and suitable salary structure many educated youth are starting
their career in garments industry. It is not that the employment opportunity is .,
being created only for the educated people in this evolutionary industry of the S$

Me and My Workplace 83
country; many unskilled and backward youths of the country are earning their
livings with their labour in this industry. There are opportunities of doing the
job in garments industry as Merchandiser, Managing Officer, Accounts Officer,
Fashion Designer, Production Officer, Business Officer etc. In addition to these
posts, there are some more posts where there are also opportunities to do much
work such as Finishing in Charge, Cutting Master, Quality Controller, Dyeing
Machine Operator, Pattern Maker etc. By doing the work in this post, it is
possible to succeed in career. Training is very important and urgent in garments
industry. Without training no success is achieved in any circumstance in the
sector. As there are many divisions in garments sector, it is necessary to receive
training according to the subject on which one will start career.
Vessels and Water Transport Industry
Now the opportunity of becoming the manufacturer of sea going ship is at the
door, because new horizons of prospects in the country have been created
around ship industry. Many companies are exporting international standard
ship to the foreign countries. As the market expands to national and
international level, the skilled manpower is being looked for constantly by the
ship manufacturing companies. As a result, work opportunities are being
increased in this sector. A Naval Architect prepares the design of the ship
according to the need of the customer. Again, the design of the total ship is
divided into several parts. Then, Ship Building Engineer performs the duties of
welding, frittering, printing and ensuring of the use of quality parts etc. All
works are done by minute watching, because the customers give the
responsibilities to different international companies for ensuring the quality in
ship building. In addition to Ship Building Engineering, there are opportunities
of doing work as Assistant Engineer, Supervisor and Quality Control Officer.
There is also a great demand of the profession and work opportunity with good
salary in foreign countries. Under Technical Education Board of Bangladesh
there is government run Bangladesh
Institute of Marine Technology Training Centre in Narayanganj where courses
on Diploma Engineering in Ship Building Technology of four years duration
and Ship Building, Ship Fabrication and Ship Building and Mechanical
Draftsmanship of two years duration are run.
Automobile Industry

x One of the main transports of busy people in busy city is vehicle. In the past

& few years the use of cars has increased greatly in the capital city along with the

84 Career Education
big cities. In comparison to the past, at present cars are being imported many
more in the country. You will be pleased to know that at present in our country
only the chassis of the bus, track, and auto-rickshaw are imported,
manufacturing is done here. Automobile technology industry has flourished
fast for subsequent servicing or repairing of these cars. And skilled Automobile
Engineers are very necessary for many kinds of works of this industry. Those
having interest in this industry, keep their eyes to this side. The key works of
the automobile industry are the making of new cars and selling of them and all
subsequent technical works including repairing and servicing. Generally there
are three categories of works in this industry, firstly production sectors, then
sales and servicing. The Engineers with technical knowhow have a great
opportunity to show their skills in this sector. Sales Department performs the
works of marketing, selling and distributing of the cars. In accordance to the
understanding of the need of the customers, the main duty of this department is
to present the good idea of the car and the detailed information about the
engine. Servicing after sales means various kinds of servicing and repairing of
the car with warranty or with paying the service fees. This is also another main
task of this department.
Receiving training in this industry, without doing job, there is opportunity to
work independently with setting up an automobile workshop.
Assignment :

Make a list of the professions that you know about. To take these

professions where and on which subject are to read and where to get the

work opportunity etc, Now by including the information prepare a report.
Potential Profession: Outsourcing
Not that the word outsourcing is very much familiar in our country, but due to
dishonest businessmen and attractive advertisement now the word gives birth of
many curiosities in the mind of the people and by this time this word is being
well accepted as much familiar word to the Bangladeshis. Again, it is being
blamed to someone. It would not be so. Ten years ago the people of our country
were not familiar with this word. It isn not that the outsourcing was not done
then but it was not like today. In the time of variable and competitive
globalization due to socio-economic instability in the third world countries the
unemployment problem is being increasingly amplified because of economic .
disparity and mismanagement. Bangladesh is also the victim of this &

Me and My Workplace 85
circumstance. As a result unemployed youth as well as low income people are
looking for alternative income source for the necessity of life. Now a talk is
frequently heard in our country, easy online income. But the real picture is a
little different. The difference in outsourcing is that it has the freedom of doing
work and getting the work which the other professions do not have. In a word,
outsourcing is a means of earning in an easy way by doing proper work. To be
successful here, it is necessary to acquire requisite skills and to come to the
proper platform for doing the work.
The key meaning of outsourcing or free lancing is free profession. i.e. It is a
profession of earning by work freely. It is easy to say, different organizations
make various kinds of work done by internet system. All these works getting
done by anyone outside own organization are called outsourcing. Those, who
work outsourcing, are called free lancer. The works in outsourcing sites or
online market places are divided into various divisions. Such as: web
development, software development, networking and information system,
writing and translation, administrative assistance, design and multimedia,
customer service, sales and marketing, business service etc. Doing the work by
internet system, it is possible to earn online. Outsourcing is possible to take as
profession if one has skills. So, it is to prepare oneself beforehand for
determining outsourcing as profession,
As outsourcing is a free profession, here work accountability is much more
than personal accountability. If the work is not proper and if there is no
transparency in work, one does not gain success in this sector. There are such
many web sites where outsourcing works are available. Internationally known
and reliable address of some web sites is given: www.upwork.com,
www.freelancer.com, www.elance.com, www.getacoder.com, www.guru.com,
www.vworker.com, www.scriptlance.com etc.
Projects
Every year Bangladesh government takes up many projects in various sectors to
complete various development works quickly. Skilled manpower is appointed
during the tenure of the projects. The job in the project is short termed, but by
achieving skills here, opportunities are created for another job or self
employment. There are opportunities of employment for both officers and

co employees in the projects.

Ss

N

86 Career Education
Agency of Defense and Security

In government level there are many job opportunities in defense sector. One
can join Bangladesh Army, Navy, and Air Force along with the other forces if
one is sound, physically competent and educationally qualified. By doing jobs
in armed forces one can not only serve the nation, but by serving in
international peace keeping force also play the role in world peace keeping.
So, it is a very attractive job to many. Besides, the appointments are given in a
large scale every year in Police, Anser, and Border Guard. At present many
private security agencies have been initiated. There are job opportunities in
these agencies also.

Besides, more than a hundred professions can be accepted in national level of
Bangladesh. Non government development organizations create many job
markets per year. Engineering and medical sectors are expanding day by day in
Bangladesh. Agriculture, engineering and research sectors are also expanding.
There are a lot of job opportunities in every nook and corner of Bangladesh.
Many multinational companies are running their activities in the national level
of Bangladesh. A lot of skilled and educated workers are needed in these
organizations.

Work Opportunity in International Level

There is someone or other of many of our relatives who works outside the
country. The Bangladeshis working abroad send money to the country for
family. As a result the reserve of foreign currencies especially the reserve of
dollars increases in the county which is very important for our economy. So,
not only solvency comes to own family by serving abroad, but also the
economy of the country is very much enriched. If we think, we can remember
many of the countries where many Bangladeshis are giving physical and
intellectual labour.

There are many opportunities of work outside the country. A great number of
Bangladeshis working abroad send thousands of foreign currencies every year.
By it the economy of our country is running. The Bangladeshis are working in
different kinds of profession in different countries of the world. It is found in
observation, most of the Bangladeshis work in the Middle East. In Europe,
America and Australia a large number of Bangladeshis are working as
Teachers, Physicians, Engineers and workers. There is no chance to look at any
work mean. We call them workers who do physical work. His honour is no less
than a teacher, physician or engineer because if someone or other did not do
physical work, our civilization, society and state would not have built up. So 2
we should pay honour to the people of any profession. s

Me and My Workplace 87
Asia
Technologists and the graduates in Business Education can go with direct jobs
to the Asian countries like China, Malaysia, Singapore, Vietnam, etc.
Receiving technical education in Malaysia, it is possible to get work with high
salary. Reading in University level and receiving higher degree there is
opportunity to get appointment in Malaysia as University Teacher. A great
number of Bangladeshis are showing their competency there as Teachers.
Working in multinational business organizations, with promotion there is
opportunity to work with high salary in these Asian countries, especially for
the students of Business Administration and Engineering. Of course, one will
have skills in that work for which one will go. Otherwise there will be many
problems in foreign land. Before going abroad, necessary training will be
received to stay in that country which is provided officially. Under government
supervision various non government agencies also run the work. If anyone
goes abroad without education, one may fall into many troubles. It should be
ensured first whether any agency showing false jobs is sending people to
foreign countries or not. In that case communicating with Manpower Export
Bureau will be helpful.
Group Work
Everyone in the class will interview the learner beside him. The subject of
the interview will be ‘in which subject do you want to study or receive
training?’ Which country do you think the most suitable to go for work
after finishing education or receiving training?’ After finishing all
interviews, all will present all interviews before the class. Teacher will
assist.
Arab Countries
If we notice we can see that fone J
there is the most opportunity rach OF
: : iraq tran
to work in the Arab Countries, rasrnal ascin
ie. in Saudi Arabia, Qatar, ko
Kuwait, United Arab Emirates, ~y
Bahrain etc. Every year a large Saudi Arabia tak
number of people are hired in UAE
all these countries from abroad ah
for different mills and
« factories, roads, business even
S government works. Majority aa

88 Career Education
of them are the Bangladeshis. The Bangladeshi workers are working
with dedication from constructing high raised building, bridge and culvert,
producing various goods in mills and factories to government organizations,
i.e. hospital, air-port, school, office and court. Those Bangladeshis who are
technically educated, work with high salary in hundreds of sectors including
refrigeration, welding, glass and ceramic, aircraft maintenance, dress making,
automobile technology, machine operator, computer maintenance, car driving
etc. The workers, who are skilled and sound in language, are of more demand.
The mine workers are one of the needs in the Arab Countries, because most of
natural fuel is got in the ground of this locality. So, the work opportunity is
ensured in the Middle East, if one has technical skills of the work of lifting gas
and oil.

Ministry of the Expatriates Welfare and Overseas Employment of Bangladesh
Government always tries to send the skilled workers to the Middle East.
Manpower Export Bureau of the government directly works in this sector. And
government approved several non government agencies, by collecting jobs
from various organizations of the Middle East, arrange the jobs for
Bangladeshies. For this they receive fees at a definite rate. But Bangladesh
government supervises the whole process. In national dailies, on the web sites
of non government organizations engaged in various foreign employment
works and online, the advertisement of foreign jobs is frequently published.
Besides, going to Manpower Export Bureau and the office of the Association
of the agencies of sending manpower abroad BAIRA, it is possible to collect
job news directly.

In the Middle East there is ample opportunity for the professionals, i.e.
physicians, engineers, university teachers, etc. Arab countries mainly make
their works done by the foreign professionals. For that reason every year a
large number of Bangladeshi physicians, engineers, architects go to the Middle
East with the hope of prestigious income. If we communicate with the
embassies of these countries after finishing education at university level, we
can get job information. There is foreign professional employment
advertisement on the web sites of various companies of the Middle East
countries. Searching online it is possible to find it out.

Activity

,
of problem can you face in doing the work and how will you solve that? s

Me and My Workplace 89
The United States and Europe
A large number of Engineers particularly Computer Engineers go to America
with jobs. In this case our neighbouring country India is advanced more. Day
by day Bangladeshi young Computer Engineers by showing their merits are
passing over America. Besides Computer Engineers, the physicians appearing
at Medical License Examination of America are going to work directly as
physicians. Passing over Europe and America for higher education, a large
number of Bangladeshi learners with job settle there permanently. For that
reason in Europe and America work opportunity is much for those who have
studied there. In European countries like Britain, Cyprus, Italy, France etc.
there is much demand of Chef. If one passes over these European countries
after acquiring skills by reading in Culinary Art and Cakes, pastry and baking,
it is possible to earn a lot. Many of you certainly want to go to these countries
for higher education. By acquiring knowledge and skills from these countries,
you can benefit the people of the country by making them know as well as
serving in those countries. By sending foreign currencies, you can play role in
the economic development of Bangladesh.
Australia and New Zealand
There is a special demand of the graduates of Business Studies in Australia. So,
the learners of Accountancy are receiving the jobs in Australian Bank and other
financial organizations by skill migration. Those, who have read in IT, have
ample opportunity to apply for work in Australia. Besides, there is opportunity
to work as cooks with high salary in Australia and New Zealand. Skilled chefs
can go to Australia with work in prominent hotels and restaurants.
Individual Task :

In doing job abroad which countries will you choose? In Which subject is

necessary to read for going to that country? What are the opportunities of

work for the Bangladeshis in that country?

90 Career Education
Self employment
What do we understand by self employment? Is it the creation of own
employment or the opportunity of work created by oneself? Doing business?
Yes, both are right. There are many of us who do not want to work under
someone in others’ organization. Again, there are many who do not manage to
get a job after hard efforts. Or, it is that there is scarcity of job according to
competency. But without income in keeping with daily expenses it is not
possible to lead oneself and the family honestly. To arrange one’s income by
oneself is self employment. It is not that besides self satisfaction, employment
is created for the others if one creates the opportunity for own work. Self
employment may vary in the context of village and town.
In rural context someone can create the opportunity of self-employment by
agriculture, farming and small and cottage industry. It is possible to take
various projects under it.

1. Cultivation of crops, fruits and vegetables in own land or land on lease;

2. Creating farm for hens and ducks, cows and goats;

3. Pisciculture in own pond or local reservoir on lease;

4. Setting up small garments industry like readymade garments, dress

designing, skin print, embroidery etc;
5. Starting with a few people small cottage industries like pottery, making
utensils, and handicrafts;

6. Opening a store of necessary products, etc.
More information about these is possible to get if we can communicate with
Bangladesh Small & Cottage Industries Corporation (BSCIC).
Some Specific Areas of Self-employment
Crops Cultivation
Government facilities are available in all these works of self employment. It
can be communicated with local Agriculture Extension Office for cultivating
crops, seasonal vegetables or seasonal fruits. There are arrangements for
training on cultivation method, more production method, rules of using
fertilizers and insecticides and free agriculture related information there. %
Cultivating crops and fruits by taking loans from Krishi Bank has also started. 8

Me and My Workplace 91
ee ee |
* y ye s : i An y ei Y 4 is He oN ; : ak
a a0 ha et Pr PN en Pama) Vir BOF |
Bl ots Lm las Wags PSM o/h
a ( 4) RP ex 1 ae! mn
Fs US oe eae ee DN IER War SDS ENV ee j A a
ae a are, S| ES WEN Ni
Animal Husbandry
By livestock rearing it is possible to do business with meat and milk. Along
with that, by selling the animals, it is possible to earn a lot. Many livestock
producers supply animals regularly to cities during Eid-ul-Azha. Jt becomes a
good seasonal income. All assistances are available about animal husbandry
from local Livestock Office.
Pisciculture
By pisciculture many youths have become self-dependent. They are leading
solvent life. The main protein of the Bangladeshis is fish, because there are lots
of rivers, canals and marshes in our country. In doing pisciculture, the
necessary advice is provided by local Fisheries Office. They provide
information from where minnows are to be collected, what foods are given to
fish etc. Besides pisciculture, the business with hatchery or hatching minnows
is to do. By hatching minnows, it is sold to the other fishermen.
Small, Cottage and Garments Industry
It is possible to establish garments making, designing, handicrafts and pottery
business by communicating with local office of Bangladesh Small & Cottage
Industries Corporation. For this at first any room of own house is used, it
needs no rental separate space. Afterwards if the business expands, separate
space can be taken. Besides Bangladesh government, different non government
co development organizations provide training and necessary advice for any kind
§ of self-employment.

92 Career Education
Various development organizations provide free training for women on sewing
and dress designing.
Opening a Grocery
If you want to open a grocery, you can buy the goods by communicating with the
local dealers of essential goods and big companies and prepare the store with
these. In case of opening a store, its position is very important. The position will
be selected in the place where the people assemble, on the way of people’s
movement and where it is easy to reach. If the goods are collected directly from
the producers instead of the dealers, it is possible to buy at low cost. Fresh
vegetables, fish and meat can be kept in the store. In that case by communicating
with the local farmers and producers, goods will be collected directly from their
fields and farms so that fresh vegetables and meat can be sold.
Class Work
If self employment is created in rural context, which one of the above work
will you choose? Present to the classroom.
Boutique Shop
Self employment in city can be the launching of food shop, T-shirts shop and
Super
? Vi
I" Koy?
Ze VHA TJ CA ieee \ Sen
NA OVC, | EN
a
2 M (GR Bae) a Ve
SS
shop, business of phone-fax, photocopy, and print, etc. Boutique shops are one ,,
of the example of self employment. At present embroidery shops are much $

Me and My Workplace 93
demanded in city. If it is ensured to supply new designed dress and to sell
creative designed dress, much profit is gained in this business. Women are the
main customers of this business. For this reason, women friendly environment
will be ensured in this business. The business of T-shirts, Vest, Punjabi is also
profitable specially during Eid.
Food Shops
Many people at present open food shop. But foods should be made in hygienic
and clean environment. There is no fear of loss if tasty foods are sold at
affordable price, because foods are man’s main demand. But to initiate a food
shop, position is very important. Along with that the environment of the shop will
be clean. For making hygienic foods, training can be received from many other
non government organizations along with Bangladesh Tourism Corporation.
Phone-fax Printing Shops
University learners do this business alongside their studies. Many initiate this
type of shop as the main profession. There are many opportunities to be self
dependent by this business at little investment. Besides, it is possible to benefit
the learners by doing this business. This type of business is more suitable near
the educational institution. Moreover, it has demand in office area. Besides
mobile recharge, at present there is opportunity of mobile banking in phone-fax
shops. So, it is possible to do many types of business under the same roof.
Trade licence is necessary for all kinds of business. If it is village, then from
Union Parisad, if it is town, then from Pauroshava, if it is city under City
Corporation, then from City Corporation, this lience is collected. It is the
responsibility of all citizens to pay income tax on the income from the business.
In Search of Job
At the end of a level of education, each of us goes to different direction. Again,
many dream of better job after completing higher education. To get a job
according to choice, it needs concentration. To get good job, it is needed to
keep your eyes to it. The media of getting the news of job advertisement are
given below:
1. Advertisement published in the national dailies;
2. Advertisement published on job web sites;
x 3. Personal searching
N

94 Career Education
There are lots of job advertisements in the middle pages of the dailies. There
all details are given how to apply, to which address it will be sent etc.
Nowadays many organizations ask to send the application by e-mail instead of
sending to the office address. Again, many organizations ask to apply by
opening an account in their web sites. But by buying lots of government and
non government job application forms, it is also to apply. In that case definite
rules and regulations are mentioned in the advertisement. Besides national
dailies, there are different magazines for jobs. If one watches in them, it is
possible to find out many jobs. In technology dependant twenty first century
one of the main weapons of searching job is internet. There are some different
web sites enriched with job advertisement. There are lots of job advertisements
in the first ranked web sites among them. They mention, in detail what the
requisite competency is, what the last date of application is, and what facilities
will be given after getting the job. As a result, it is possible to apply online
according to choice, if one wishes.

Besides coming across advertisement, much job information is received from
the acquainted persons. For this reason, it is very important to maintain good
relation with all. Along with that it is necessary to keep them always informed
about job so that they can inform you in time as soon as they get any news
about job. To maintain relation with all is an important skill which has been
discussed in the previous chapter.

Group Work

All the learners in the classroom will find out the necessary competencies,

a job seeker should have, by discussion in groups. After finishing the work,

a group will share the idea with the other group. The teacher will supervise

the whole process. Each group will present the findings to the class.

Assignment :

1. Collect 10 job advertisements according to your choice by finding all
issues of previous seven days of a certain newspaper and bringing it to
the class, show the teacher and the classmates.

2. By searching online, bring out 3 web site addresses which provide you
with job information and show it all in the classroom.

S

Me and My Workplace 95
Case Study
Sohail Ahmed from Khulna had been looking for a job for a long time after
passing Degree. But he did not get it. Not spending much time in search of job,
at a certain time he decided that he would do something by himself. By getting
some money from home he initiated a photocopy, computer compose, print,
mobile money recharge shop beside his Degree College. Though he first
bought a photocopy machine at low price, he set up a new machine as his profit
increased gradually. As Sohail is very amiable and honest, everyone likes him.
All come to work at his shop without hesitation. Sometimes, Sohail Ahmed
gives price discounts to the acquainted and regular customers. In this way his
business expands day by day. Now he has this type of three shops in Khulna.
Total six employees work in his shops. He also advises his younger brothers to
come to this business.
a |
, as ae Gy |
ci =a" YT TD mt L
P i
‘(| RY PNAS
HHP
a 4
wn! LB m/c
In the above story we have seen how Sohail Ahmed has become self dependent
by creating self employment. Not just searching for job, he has established
himself by his own business. Not only that the others have got the opportunity of
work in his shops. If we all create own field of work for ourselves in this way,
immediately the economy of our country will be stronger. Unemployment
problem will be removed. Peace and discipline will be maintained in the society.
You can bring out yourselves such thousand of ways which are not mentioned
iS here. It needs only development of creativity along with gaining skills and
“competency.

96 Career Education
Activity
Which business will you choose if you want to create self employment as a
resident of city? How will you establish your business? Prepare a planning.
Job Wanted: Writing Curriculum Vitae
Curriculum-vitae is essential for all jobs. To apply for a job, of course, it is to
send curriculum vitae to the employer organization. Among many
curriculum-vitaes, the Human Resource Department of the organization chooses
one. For this reason curriculum vitae will be unique and exceptional. In this age
of online, if one searches in internet, he can find out sample or format of many
kinds of curriculum vitae. It is better to collect from any experienced service
holder what kind of format of curriculum vitae he has used in his life. Because,
in the curriculum vitae of the experienced persons there are many sides that can
not come easily in our mind. It will be remembered that the first opportunity of
choosing the candidate by the employer is to choose him seeing the curriculum
vitae. It depends a lot on the curriculum vitae whether the employer will call the
candidate for interview or not.
Curriculumvitae is of two types.
1. Academic curriculum vitae; and
2. Professional curriculum vitae.
Academic curriculum vitae is usually necessary for applying to higher
educational institution at home and abroad. Professional curriculumvitae is
necessary for job application. Here, we shall discuss professional
curriculumvitae.
The basic issues, that a curriculum vitae contains, are —
1. Photo, name, contact address;
2. Name of father and mother, identity, profession;
3. Academic degree, result, name of institution, passing year, details of
professional courses (if any);
4. Co-curricular activities and the achievements;
5. Experience (if any); and
6. Name of two referees,their identity and contact address.
In all, curriculum vitae is not expected to be lengthier, because the
organizations receive many curriculum vitae for jobs. If the curriculum vitae
becomes lengthier, the Human Resource Department of the organization which
completes the employment process, can not find time to read. CV can be sent x
online to the web site of the organization or many organizations ask to send CV &

Me and My Workplace 97
by e-mail. If there is no job advertisement of many organizations, curriculum
vitae can be sent to their web sites so that they can call the preferred candidate
from the curriculum vitae when the vacancy is created.
The characteristics of an ideal curriculum-vitae

1. All information will be mentioned clearly;

2. There will be no spelling mistake;

3. There will be no confusion about any point;

4. So far as possible it will be brief;

5. All achievements of education life will be mentioned in few words;

6. Acquired skills will be mentioned; and

7. Use of language will be unique, exceptional and easy.

Activity
Prepare your own curriculum-vitae.
Good Relation with Colleagues in Workplace
To maintain a good relation with all is the part of our social and moral education.
By bad behavioiur we should not make our relation bad. If we maintain good
relation with all, we can get their help in distress. We notice that our relatives,
friends come ahead when we fall into troubles, because good relation with all is
kept naturally. Just in the same way good relation should be maintained with the
colleagues in workplace. As a result of good relation many jobs are traced as well
as many in service facilities are availed.
i) —
OF
. Sj Fy
C=] iz, a
¢ j N if J
UN 77

98 Career Education
Suppose, you are working in an organization. That time you receive a phone
call from home that you will have to go home. On the other hand, you are
doing a serious work in the office. You have to finish it by today otherwise the
office will fall into a great problem. In this circumstance, it is also important
for you to go home. When you go to the authority to ask for leave, they can say
if anyone takes the responsibility of doing the work, you may go home on
leave. Now, if you have good relation with the colleagues, of course, they will
come forward for you. They will do your work together for that day. You will
go home without worry. To keep good relation with the colleagues is important
for these reasons. Colleagues mean all including the superiors and the
subordinates. It is not possible to work anywhere for a long period if you do
not have good relation with the colleagues, because all offices are the places of
group work. There it is not possible to work alone. It is possible to achieve
collective success if we work together with the assistance of all. By it we can
get both personal and collective satisfaction.
The team, which wins in cricket, the captain frequently, says that it is the result
of a team effort. i.e. the victory has been achieved by the total effort of 11
players of the team. A team of 11 players of general standard having good
mutual bond is stronger than a team of 11 skilled players having no mutual
bond. In the same way many complex works become easy if there is a good
mutual relation among the workers. In big organizations excursion to any
distance place is arranged to enhance relation among the colleagues. There
they are assigned group work besides office work. That may be any game. To
work or play together their relation becomes close. After coming back to
office, it effects on daily work. In modern business administration it has been
paid more importance to maintain mutual relation with the colleagues. To
maintain good relation with the colleagues, the things are necessary to do —

1. Whenever you meet, exchange pleasantries;

2. Ifany colleague falls into trouble while working, ask him from oneself to help;

3. Sometimes talk outside of work with the colleagues at tea table;

4. Avoid talking about personal and sensitive issues;

5. Not to criticize a colleague to the other colleague

6. If you fall into problem in doing work, ask the experienced colleague ,,

politely to help you; s

Me and My Workplace 99
7. If someone becomes angry, without getting angry, calm him;
8. Come ahead in any professional and personal troubles;
9. Of course, always behave well with all.
Benefits of Good Relation with the Colleagues
1. Always get help from them;
2. If one faces tough stress, the way is open to get their help;
3. The colleague stand beside him in distress;
4. If leave is suddenly required for urgent necessity, the colleagues help
him by doing extra work; and
5. Get job satisfaction.
Sample Questions
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Which one is the most primitive profession?
a. Factory worker b. Engineer
c. Agriculture d. Medical
1. Which industry of Bangladesh is world famous at present?
a. Agro industry b. Garments industry
c. Mineral industry d. Building industry
1. Teaching is an excellent profession, because -
i. In this profession prestige and status are achieved in society
ii. In this profession salary and allowance are good
iii. Teachers are the makers of building the future nation
Which one is correct in the followings?
a i. be i & ii
c. ii & iii d. [ii & iii
Read the passage and answer the question no 4 & 5
« Currently Parvez Rayhan has established a company. He will employ sales
& representatives in each Upazilla, District and Divisional level for this company.

100 Career Education
He wants to finish this recruitment process within a short span of time.
1. Which medium will Mr. Parvez Rayhan use for selecting the employees

within a short span of time?

a. Advertisement in National Dailies _ b. Advertisement on job web sites

c. Personal searching d. Distribution of Leaflets
1. By using this medium he-

i. will get many curriculum-vitaes easily

ii. can not get proper persons

iii. the process of sorting curriculum-vitae will be easy
Which one is correct in the following?

a. i b. i&ii

c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
Creative Questions
There are many expenses in Sultana’s family including the family and the
education expenses of the children. Though the income of her husband is good,
Sultana wishes to earn for a better living, wishes to do a job. Sultana thought
how she could assist her husband financially. Suddenly work of outsourcing
peeped into her mind amid various ideas. She read many features about it.
Then she received training for using it practically. Sultana got the magic spell
of income sitting in her room. Today she is successful by managing the extra
stress of family expenses. Besides managing the family and looking after the
children, her work is continued. In Basic Outsourcing Award — 2014 she has
received the first prize in woman division.

a. What is outsourcing?

b. What is meant by profession?

c. Give an account of the main medium of Sultana’s work.

d. Evaluate the issue of receiving prize in the case of Sultana’s work.

The End s
N

sos FAIA (Bret BF, 28 WOT ASH) CHT SPT
For free distribution from academic year 2015 by the Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh

