iC LO
de

Chapter 1
Concept of Chemistry
\
it! i £ aed 1

Once you got this book in your hand, a number of questions are obviously raised
in your minds. - What is chemistry? Why should we learn chemistry? How will
we be benefited with chemistry? Does it have any relation to other branches of
science? - We shall learn answers to these questions in this chapter.

Forma -1, Chemistry Class-9-10

2 Chemistry
® By the end of the lesson, we will be able to:
° explain the concept of chemistry
. identify the scopes of chemistry
. explain the relation of chemistry to the other sciences
° explain the importance of learning chemistry
. describe the methods of investigation and research in chemistry
. plan types of investigative tasks, choose hypothesis and conduct
experiments
. take necessary safety measures while experimenting practically
. explain the phenomenon of natural and physical world in terms of
chemistry
2
g

Concept of Chemistry 3
1.1 Introduction to Chemistry
Natural science is one of the branches of science. Understanding aspects of
nature by means of logic, observation or experimentation, explaining them and
producing hypothesis about them are the areas of natural science. Chemistry is
one of the branches of natural science that discusses structure of matter, their
nature and changes. For example, coal is a matter that contains carbon.
Chemistry discusses how the carbon atoms reside in coal and how these atoms
react with oxygen in air when burnt and how they produce heat. All matters
including animals and objects are its subject. Natural science has branches like
physics, chemistry, botany, zoology, microbiology, astronomy, soil science etc.
What matters are there in your food and how they are there is discussed in
chemistry. Again, think of the new cycle you bought. After some days, the iron
parts of the cycle started to get rust on them. Chemistry discusses that too.
Chemistry started with the creation of this world. But it is probably the moment
when the first man built a fire striking two stones that man started to have their
control on chemistry. From the prehistoric age, humans have used chemistry
when they refined metals, made earthen utensils burning soil, prepared
medicines and perfumes taking extracts and juices from trees and plants. So far,
we know that the first metal human being used is gold. Besides, they have also
used metals like copper, tin, silver etc.
Humans learned to melt copper and tin, mix them and cool the mixture into
another hard alloy named bronze at around 3500 BC. Bronze was used to make
quality weapons. These were used by the people to hunt animals, cultivate crops,
cut fire wood etc. This alloy became an essential product of the then human race.
Bronze contributed a lot to the progress of human civilization.
The ancient philosophers used to think a lot about structure of matters. The
Greek philosopher Democritus declared in 380 BC that, a small particle will be
available at a stage when we synthesize any metal. This particle is indivisible
x and he called it atom. Some Indian philosophers of the age also had similar view.
% But none of these ideas had a practical base. Aristotle opposed this idea. He

4 Chemistry
along with another school of philosophers believed all matters are made of soil,
fire, water and wind. That is why humans did not accept the idea of atom for
quite a long time.

Fig 1.01: Antony Lavorsiere, Robert Boyle, Sir Francis Bacon and John Dalton
In the mediaeval age, some muslim philosophers of Arab tried to make gold out
of cheaper matters like copper, tin and lead. They also tried to get a great mana
which would lengthen the life of humans. Though they failed in their original
attempts yet they wrote down their experiments. Basically, these were the
earliest attempts of systematic study of chemistry or experimentation. These
mediaeval Arab experimentation with chemistry was called Alchemy and the
philosophers were known as Alchemists. The term Alchemy comes from the
Arabic word Al-Chimia which again takes its origin from Chemi or Kimi. The
word chemistry comes from this chemi. Alchemist Jabir Al Hiyan is the first
scientist to hold chemical experiment in a laboratory. That is why he is
sometimes called the father of chemistry. Jabir al Hiyan believed all matters are
composed of four components- soil, fire, water and wind. Therefore, although
experimented, Jabir was not very clear about the mysteries of chemistry.
Scientists including Antony Lavorsiere, Robert Boyle, Sir Francis Bacon and
John Dalton are the first school to start experimenting with chemistry
understanding the real spirit of this science. Antony Lavorsiere is called the
father of modern chemistry.
%S
8

Concept of Chemistry 5
The branch of science that discusses the structure of matter, its nature
and changes is called chemistry.

Table 1.01: Explanation of different incidents in terms of chemistry

A green mango is |There remain various organic acids like succinic acid,

sourwhilea _—_| malloic acid etc. in a green mango which makes it sour. As

ripened mango is _| it ripens, these acids transform into glucose and fructose in
sweet chemical reaction and turn the mango sweet.

Burning of The main component of these elements is hydrocarbon
kerosene, which is a composite form of carbon and hydrogen. When
natural gas and we burn them, carbon and hydrogen react with oxygen of
‘wax air and produce carbon-di-oxide, vapour and heat.

Taking antacid Acidity occurs in the stomach when excess hydrochloric
due to acidity in | acid is generated inside. Antacid contains aluminum
stomach hydrochloride and magnesium hydroxide. These two

compounds neutralize hydrochloric acid.

These incidents are sufficient to tell you that our life is irrevocably related to

chemistry. Therefore, chemistry is one of the important branches of science.

1.2 The Scopes of Chemistry

Wherever there is element, there is chemistry. Various gaseous elements are

there in the air. There are continuous chemical changes occurring in the air. The

same is there in the soil we are living on too. It is happening now, it happened in
the ancient days too. The earth was highly heated at the moment of its creation.

There was no wind, nor any animal. It took millions of years of chemical

6 reactions for the creation of atmosphere, water and thousands of other elements.
§ These altogether contributed to the habitability of the earth for animals. All

6 Chemistry
animals including human beings, microscopic lives like bacteria, amoeba, huge
trees and animals have bodies which contain various kinds of chemicals. Each
body is a kind of chemical factory where chemical reactions are taking place
every moment. We live because of these chemical reactions. Again, with the
advent of civilization, humans have produced various necessary items and
products by means of chemical reactions and put them to their use. For example,
the dresses you put on, the paste you brush your teeth with, the comb you fix
your hair with, the cosmetics you use on your skin- all are chemical products.
Besides, soap, toilet cleaner, life saving drugs, all is chemicals too. We use
fertilizers and insecticides in our crop fields, use petrol, diesel etc. in vehicles.
These are industrial products made out of chemical reactions. To speak the truth,
the scope of chemistry beggars description. The table below tries to present
some of the scopes in brief:
Table 1.02: Some scopes of chemistry
; When we inhale air, the oxygen in it reacts with
Air Mostly oxygen | the food substances inside our body and produces
energy.
Water plays a role in the chemical reactions that
Drinking | Hydrogen, take place inside our body. It also works as
water oxygen and | solvent of various substances in the body. The
mineral salts | poisonous substances in the body mix with water
and get out in the forms of urine and sweat.
Mineral salts such as calcium, magnesium etc.
play a vital role for our body.
oxygen, carbon] Different fertilizers contain compounds of these
phosphorous, | substances. As a result, these fertilizers act as S

Concept of Chemistry 3}
=
magnesium,
potassium etc.
Paper is one of the most significant inventions of
Paper Cellulose human civilization. Bamboo, the outer skin of
sugarcane etc. contain huge amount of cellulose.
The paper mills turn these sources into paper by
means of chemical reaction.
1.3 Relationship Between Chemistry and Other Branches
of Science)
There are various branches of science like chemistry, biology, physics,
mathematics, environmental science, soil science etc. Each of these branches is
related to the other branches. Very much like the other branches are related to
chemistry, so is chemistry related to the other branches. Let us now check the
relationship with some examples.
Relationship with Biology: All plants produce glucose on their green parts in
the photosynthesis process. Photosynthesis is basically a chemical process.
Plants take in carbon-di-oxide from air and water from the soil. Then it uses
chlorophyll of its green parts to produce glucose in the reaction between water
and carbon dioxide. Animals’ bodies synthesize the proteins of animals’ intake
and produce glucose, amino acid etc. All animal bodies are indeed stuffed with
various chemicals. Biology discusses these chemicals and chemical
reactions that take place inside the bodies of plants and animals. That is where
the two sciences are interrelated
Relationship with Physics: Physics discusses magnet, electricity, different
machines etc. Battery used for getting electricity is contribution of chemistry.
Energy gleaned by burning oil, gas or coal is the source for vehicles and electric-
ity. Chemistry is also dependent on physics. Physical chemistry is a branch of
= chemistry, the theories of which are essentially dependent on theories and
“formulas of physics.

8 Chemistry
Relationship with Mathematics: Mathematics has a close relationship with
chemistry. Mathematical theories and formulas act as the base of all formulas
and measurements of chemistry.

In the same way, chemistry is directly and indirectly related to the other branches
of science too.

1.4 The Importance of Studying Chemistry

Imagine what happens on a typical day with you. You use toothpaste once you
get up from bed in the morning. Then you start reading your books. Your mother
serves you biscuits and tea. After finishing that, you take your bath. When you
enter the washroom, you find it a bit unclean. You use toilet cleaner to clean it
and then have bath using scented soap and shampoo. You use lotions after bath.
Then you take your breakfast and go to school. The teacher there uses chalk on
the board to simplify your lessons. Now, do you see, all the things you are using,
e.g. paste, biscuit, tea, toilet cleaner, soap, shampoo, chalk etc. are contributions
of chemistry?

Not only that, we use fertilizers to increase fertility of fields, use insecticides to
keep away insects from our crops, preservatives to store the food longer time.
This way, the whole process of food and cultivation is dependent on chemistry.
Today, cholera, typhoid, tuberculosis etc. are curable diseases but they were once
killer diseases. Millions of people died of them in the ancient days. Humans have
invented cures of them by means of their knowledge of chemistry. Nowadays,
the field of medicine has developed so much that many people are cured of
different cancers too.

Chemical wastes from industries, vehicles, consumer products etc. are doing
harm to our environment. These contain carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide,
sulphur dioxide, various acids, heavy metals like mercury, lead, arsenic, cobalt
etc. When they come in contact with air, air is polluted, when they come in touch
with water, water gets polluted. They enter human bodies and harm them. Again,
use of excess chemicals is harmful for us. Insecticides help us save our crops but ~
excess insecticide gets washed away to the water bodies, polluting the water. S

Concept of Chemistry 9
Some of it gets vaporized and pollute the air. Chemistry tells you all these
natural and life oriented facts.

By now you should have understood that chemistry plays a significant role in
our advancement but excess of it is harmful for us and nature as well. Lot many
diseases are there still which we do not have cures to. Our duty is to study
chemistry and try inventing those drugs. Therefore, learning chemistry does not
only benefit us by means of newer inventions, it also helps us realize how we are
harming our nature. Your learning chemistry will take the world steps ahead.
That is our expectation.

1.5 The Process of Research in Chemistry

The aim of science is the betterment of humanity. Scientists are constantly
working with the same aim in their minds. The term scientist certainly rings the
names of great scientists like Einstein, Newton, Archimedes, Lavoisier, Galileo
etc. They are obviously great scientists. However, the meaning of the term
scientist has the scope for you too to be called so. Indeed, science is that
knowledge which is gleaned out of systematic experimentation. The process to
glean knowledge by experimenting is known as research. One who carries out
such research is a scientist.

Therefore, if you carry out research, you can also be a scientist. Experimenting
through a perfect and systematic process in order to learn something is called
research. It means, there is a certain procedure to carry out a research. Research
in chemistry also follows some procedure. Now we shall learn the steps of this
procedure.

In the first step of a research, you need to determine what you want to learn or
what new thing you want to invent. Suppose, you want to learn whether heat will
be produced or absorbed as ammonium chloride is dissolved in water. This is
known as topic selection.

In the second step, you have to investigate the matter. At this stage, you will read
some books or some papers from internet and other sources in order to learn how
Forma -2, Chemistry Class-9-10

10 Chemistry
such kind of an experiment was carried out by someone else and what result it
did yield. Suppose, you have learned that another chemical compound calcium
oxide, when dissolved in water, produces heat. You will also be able to learn
what kind of apparatus, chemicals and steps were followed in this experiment.
That will give you an idea about what things you will require to conduct the test
yourself. Besides, you will have an idea about the probable result- in this case,
if you dissolve ammonium chloride in water, heat will be produced.
Again, you will be able to decide what kind of materials you are going to use and
what will be the steps of the experiment. You came to know that you would need
beaker, water, ammonium chloride, thermometer, glass rod, balance etc. First
you will take water in the beaker. You Table 1.03: Dissolving ammonium
will record the temperature of water in Chloride in water
the beaker with the thermometer. | Quantity ofdissolved Temperature
Then, you will weigh ammonium
chloride in the balance and mix that |Water of beaker Be
and dissolve that with the glass rod in
the water a number of times. Each
time, you need to check the
temperature of water. It is the process.
Now you can start your experiment.
Take 250mL water in the beaker and check the temperature. Suppose, the
present temperature is 25°C. Record it in your notebook. Now, with the help of
the balance, weigh 5g ammonium chloride and mix it in the water. Use the glass
rod to stir so that it gets dissolved. As soon as the chemical is dissolved, measure
and record the temperature. Now the temperature is 20°C. Add, mix and dissolve
another 5g of ammonium chloride in the beaker. See what the
temperature is with 10g chemical in the water. Follow the same process again.
Now the beaker’s water has 15g of dissolved ammonium chloride and let’s
suppose the temperature is 10°C. Record the data in your notebook.

S

Concept of Chemistry 11
If you analyze the data shown above, you will see, the more ammonium chloride
is dissolved in water, the less the temperature of water becomes. You will decide,
since dissolving ammonium chloride in water decreases the temperature of
water, ammonium chloride absorbs heat from water in order to get dissolved.
The result is dissolving ammonium chloride in water results in absorption of
temperature. The steps followed by you in the above experiment can be shown
in the following flowchart:
— Acquiring —— ; Data Result
eset  -eeicenrens meen ee Do
oni analysis resolution
Fig 1.02: Steps in a research in Chemistry
Whenever you are dealing with some research in chemistry, you are required to
follow the same steps.
1.6 Adopting Safety for using Chemistry Laboratory and
Using Chemicals in the Laboratory
The place where scientific experiments are held is called the laboratory.
Similarly, the place where experiments of chemistry are held is called Chemistry
laboratory. It is understood, there will be various chemicals in a chemistry
laboratory. Almost all chemicals are harmful to some extent for us as well as our
environment. Some chemicals are prone to explosion, some are flammable,
some harm our body directly and some are dangerous for nature. Most of the
apparatus in a chemistry laboratory are made of glass. Therefore, we need to be
cautious from the moment of entry into the laboratory to the moment we come
out. Lack of caution may result into accident, e.g. if acid falls on your body,
~ you'll get injury; if acid falls on your dress, the dress will be spoiled. Besides,
S there may be accidents including fire or explosion in a laboratory. Therefore, you

12 Chemistry
need to wear apron. The apron will be knee-long and its hand will cover up to
your wrist. Its colour will be white. You will use gloves in hand and safety
goggles on your eyes. Some of these safety measures are given in the following
picture:
(te a a
(Nar gs &
ee —
Fig 1.03: Safe dresses and kits in alaboratory
We need to learn the nature of a chemical before we start to use it. We need to
know whether that is flammable or radio-active. These are made clear using
some signs on the containers. To introduce a globally harmonized system about
this, the United Nations organized a conference named Environment and
Development. This conference gave a set of harmonized signs for different risky
substances and their level of risk. The table below contains some signs and their
explanations identifying risk, extent of risk and precautions.
Lo)
=

Concept of Chemistry 13
Table 1.04: signs and their explanations identifying risk
Sign Risk, Extent of risk and precaution
We need to be very careful about these substances. We
“2S must keep in mind that friction and fire may cause
serious explosion from these which will be harmful for
our body as well as the laboratory. We need extreme
‘ caution in handling these. TNT, organic peroxide,
Explosive substance | ~* . .
nitroglycerine etc. are such kind of substances.
Alcohol, ether etc. are flammable. These may catch
fire quickly. Therefore, we need to keep them away
from fire or heat.
Flammable substance
Substances with this sign are poisonous. If we come in
touch with them or inhale them, they may cause harm
to our body. Benzene, chlorobenzene, methanol, etc.
are such substances. We must wear apron, hand gloves
Toxic substance |and safety goggles when handling them.
Cement dust, light acids, base, nitrous oxide etc. cause
irritation on skin, eyes, breathing system. We must
wear apron, hand gloves and safety goggles when
handling them.
Irritant substance
Direct contact on skin or inhalation of such substances
may cause short or long term harm to our health. They
$ may affect our breathing system or even cause disease
like cancer. Benzene, toluene, xylene are such
substance. We must wear apron, hand gloves and
Hazardous substance | safety goggles when handling them.
90
3
N

14 Chemistry
These substances emit harmful rays which may cause
diseases like cancer or impair somebody. We need to
be extremely cautious in handling these. Uranium,
radium etc. are of this kind.

Radioactive substance

Substances with this sign are dangerous for
environment, meaning, they harm both animals and
plants. They require caution when in use. Again, they
have to be gathered in a place after use. They have to

Dangerous for be recycled as much as possible. That way, they cannot

environment do much harm to the environment.
These cause injury to body in contact. Inhalation of

4 such substances may cause injury inside the body.
Hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid etc. are examples of
the kind.
Corrosive
(?) Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Which of the following substances is used for preserving processed

food fora long time?

a. preservatives b. vinegar

c. ethylene d. acetylene

J
8

Concept of Chemistry 15
2. What does the following sign indicate?
a. explosive substance b. flammable substance
c. radioactive substance d. flame of fire
3. Which of the following signs indicate at radioactive substance?
a. e) db. é ,
4. Which of the following metals is melted and mixed with copper to produce bronze?
a. iron b. zine
c. tin d. lead
Creative Questions
a _—
Fie,
a. go
A B
Fig A: Boy taking pills —_ Fig B: Spraying insecticide in the agriculture field
a. What is research?
b. Why does ripe mango taste sweet?
c. How is the figure A related to chemistry- explain.
co od Which of the activities of the stem, when done excess, is harmful for
&  environment- answer with reasons.

16 Chemistry
2;
<> o>
was
Sign 1 Sign 2 Sign 3
a. What is chemistry?
b. Why do we take antacid for acidity in the stomach?
c. How are the substances containing sign 3 harmful for human beings-
explain.
d. Chemical substances containing sign 1 and sign 2 are risky
when in use- explain.
=
iJ
AQ

Chapter 2
States of Matter
[|—(hLLON
Vad - t 2 ee!
==
wt E ee — :
Matter is such a physical entity that has mass and occupies space. Chair, table,
notebook, pen, ice, water, air- each of them is a matter. All matters may exist
three different states- solid, liquid and gaseous states. They have their own
characteristics and properties in all three states. This chapter will focus on these
issues.
Forma -3, Chemistry Class-9-10

18 Chemistry
® By the end of the chapter we will be able to
° explain the physical properties of matter in terms of the postulates of
kinetic theory of particle
. explain diffusion and effusion with the help of kinetic theory
° explain the relationship between physical state of a matter and heat
. demonstrate practically the increase in the rate of diffusion with the
increase of heat
° describe melting and sublimation of solid and distillation of liquid
. demonstrate practically melting and sublimation of solid and
distillation of liquid
° show interest in explaining the real happenings in nature in terms of
chemistry
° use chemical compounds and thermometer properly
2
g

States of Matter 19
2.1 Three States of Matter
Anything that has a certain mass and occupies space is matter. At normal room
temperature some matters may exist as solids, some as liquids and some as
gasses. For example, at normal room temperature sugar, edible salt, marble etc.
exist as solids; water, oil, kerosene etc. exist as liquids and nitrogen, oxygen,
carbon dioxide etc. exist as gasses. Again, changing the temperature, the same
matter’s state can be transformed into any of solid, liquid or gaseous states.
Below is given a short discussion on the properties and characteristics of solid,
liquid and gaseous matters.
2.1.1 Solids
A solid matter has a specific mass, volume and shape. Molecules of all matters
have a force of attraction. It is known as inter molecular attraction. This force is
the most in the solid matters. As a result, the molecules in solids stay very close
to each other in a fixed state and they take a fixed dimension which cannot be
compressed with pressure. Again, a solid matter hardly changes shape when
temperature is raised.
2.1.2 Liquids
Liquids have specific mass and volume but do not have a shape. Liquids take the
shape of their container. Since the molecules of a liquid remain farther from each
other than those of solids, the inter molecular force of attraction is also less than
the other. Such matters don not change volume when force is projected on them
but the volume increases at raise of temperature. This change volume is greater
than that of solids.
2.1.3 Gases
Gases have specific mass but they do not have specific volume or shape.
Whatever quantity of gas is put into any size of container, it takes over the full
size of that container. The molecules in gases stay further than those of liquids
S or solids. The inter molecular force of attraction is also very low among them. A

20 Chemistry
small quantity of pressure is enough to compress gases and the same way, a small
amount of temperature is enough to increase the volume of such matters.
2.2 Kinetic Theory of Particles
Every substance is made of small particles which remain together by means of
inter molecular force of attraction. These molecules also have kinetic force in
them. The attempt to prove the states of substances using inter molecular force
of attraction and the kinetic force of the particles is known as the kinetic theory
of particles. When the particles inside a substance remain in very high force of
attraction, they stay together and cannot move that much. This is the solid state.
When heat is applied on such solid substance, the particles start to vibrate. When
Solid substance Liquid substance Gaseous substance
Fig 2.01: Kinetic Theory of Particles
more heat is applied, the particles lose some of their force of attraction and they
start some movement. This state of matter is called liquid. Liquid takes the shape
of the container without changing their volume. When more heat is applied on
this liquid state of the substance, the particles receive the heat and the kinetic
force in them is increased. This kinetic force is increased to a level where they
lose inter molecular force of attraction almost completely and start to move
freely. This is the gaseous state. When more heat is applied at this state of the
substance, the particles will only increase their speed of movement.
ES
S
Q

States of Matter 21
2.3 Diffusion
The tendency of solid, liquid or gas to spread spontaneously and uniformly in
any medium is called diffusion. In diffusion process, solid, liquid or gas moves
spontaneously from a place of higher concentration to lower concentration.
Remember, what happens if you leave a perfume bottle with its lid opened at a
corner of a room? Within some time, you will find the full room perfumed. This
is an instance of diffusion. If a matter takes lesser time to spread, its rate of
diffusion is higher and vice versa.
Now, read through the following experiments.
@) Individual Task
( Experiment 1 \
In the room temperature, take some pure water in a glass jar. Add a small
quantity of solid pink Potassium permanganate (KMnO,) into it. You will
see, after sometime, the KMn0O, grains are dissolving into a pink solution.
Indeed, the KMnO, particles are getting motion and scattering freely in the
water. In this case, some solid matter is diffused in water or liquid. The rate
of diffusion of solid matters in water is slow, however, if heat is applied, the
rate will increase.
Similarly, if we do the experiment of
diffusion of Potassium permanganate in hot
water, the water will turn into pink solution y
faster. In this case, the KMn0O, particles will
get added motion due to heat and scatter
faster. This shows that the presence of heat
increases the rate of diffusion of solid rain
Fig 2.02:KMnO, solution in water
8

22 Chemistry

@) Individual Task
Experiment 2
In the room temperature, take some pure water in a beaker and add some
liquid blue in it. Within a few moments, you will see that the water has turned
blue. That means, the particles of blue solution or some liquid have diffused
in the water. The temperature being the same, has taken the liquid less time
to diffuse in another liquid than solid KMnO,. That means, the rate of
diffusion of liquid matter in another liquid is faster than that of solid matter.
Presence of heat will increase the rate. In the room temperature, or in
presence of heat, gaseous matter diffuses faster than other matters.

Fig 2.03: Difffusion of Liquid solution in liquid

@) Individual Task

|

| Experiment 3 |
Take a glass tube with both faces open. Take two cottons. Soak a piece of
cotton in heavy hydrochloric acid (HCl) solution and soak the other in
ammonium hydroxide (NH,OH) solution. Now close the glass tube fixing
each of the cottons to a side of it. Here hydrogen chloride gas from HCl wo

\ solution and ammonia gas from NH,OH solution will get diffused. S) s

States of Matter 23
| Within a few moments, you will see a white smoke filling up the tube. It is }
ammonium chloride (NH,Cl), produced in the reaction between hydrogen
chloride gas and ammonia gas. The white smoke will not be positioned in
the centre of the tube; it will be nearer to the hydrochloric acid solution. That
means at a same given time, hydrogen chloride gas has gone lesser distance
than ammonia. That also proves that ammonia gas spreads faster than
hydrogen chloride gas because of its faster rate of diffusion. The reason
behind it is difference in their atomic mass. A gas with lesser atomic mass
will have better diffusion rate. Here ammonia gas (atomic mass 17) has

spread faster than hydrogen chloride gas (atomic mass 36.5).

white smoke of NH,Cl
ee conan wih HET solution wet cotton with NH,OH solution
Fig 2.04: Diffusion of two gases
Atomic mass of H,, He, N,, O, and CO, gases are 2, 4, 28, 32 and 44 respectively. Since
hydrogen is the gas with the least atomic mass, its rate of diffusion is faster than others
while carbon dioxide’s being the most, is the slowest.
= \ J

24 Chemistry
2.4 Effusion
The passage of gases from a high pressure zone to a low pressure zone through
a fine pore is called effusion.
Take a balloon and fill it air or helium. Stick a scotch tape on the balloon. Now,
make a small pore on the balloon through the scotch tape and see what happens.
The air from the balloon will come out through the pore with force (Don’t try it
without the scotch tape; the balloon will burst). Air pressure inside the balloon
was higher than outside. So, when the air found the get-away, the air from the
balloon rushed toward the low pressure region. It is effusion. Like the rate of
diffusion if heat is applied, the rate of effusion increases.
We use CNG (compressed natural gas) as fuel in our vehicles. Basically, it is
compressed methane gas at high pressure. When we run our vehicle, this gas
comes out of the cylinder with high pressure and runs the engine. This is also
effusion of gas. Again, propane and butane gases are compressed at high
pressure into liquid and put into cylinders to use them for cooking in the
households. When we open the cylinder for cooking, it comes out in gaseous
form with pressure. It is another example of effusion.
Effusion and diffusion are by nature, same kind of actions. The basic difference
between them is, effusion requires presence of pressure but diffusion does not
depend on pressure. In diffusion, solid, liquid or gas matter spreads around in a
pliant medium but in effusion, only gas matter comes out through a fine pore
from the container to a gaseous matter. If we open the cylinder but do not ignite
our cooker, the gas from cylinder will just come out and mix with air. This is
effusion. Then, the gas that came out would spread around the room, which is
diffusion. Therefore, both the actions may take place one after another.
ES
8

States of Matter 25
2.5 Burning of a Candle and the Three States of Wax
Wax is a mixture of various hydrocarbons.
Organic compounds made of hydrogen and
{ carbon are known as hydrocarbons. In the
(\ burning of a wax, three states of matter can be
CNS . observed simultaneously. There is a thin liner
~— Lignid Wax inside the wax. When we add fire to it, the
hydrocarbon particles around the liner melt
into liquid. The liquid wax absorbs heat and
Solid Wax vaporizes first. Then the vaporized wax starts
reaction with oxygen of air and produces
carbon dioxide, water vapor, light and heat. A
portion of the liquid wax remains and turns
Fig 2.05: Burning of Wax solid again. Thus, in the presence of heat we
see three states of wax.
2.6 Melting and Boiling
The process of transforming a solid matter into liquid by means of applying heat
is called melting. At normal pressure (1 atmospheric pressure), the temperature
at which a solid matter turns into liquid state is called the melting point of that
solid. Each pure solid matter has its own melting point, like the melting point of
ice is 0°C.
The process of transforming a liquid matter into gas by means of heat is called
boiling. At normal pressure (1 atmospheric pressure), the temperature at which a
liquid matter turns into gaseous state is called the boiling point of that liquid.
Each pure liquid matter has its own boiling point, like the boiling point of water
is 100°C. Boiling process requires heat but solidification requires removal of
heat.
Forma -4, Chemistry Class-9-10

26 Chemistry
@) Individual Task
Experiment 4 |
Suppose, we want to find out the melting point of urea, a solid matter. First,
we need to put a net on a tripod, upon which we shall place a watch glass.
Now we shall put some urea on the watch glass. Fix a thermometer with a
liner on a stand and put the bulb of thermometer in the urea. Now start giving
heat to the urea. You will find, the urea will start to melt at 133°C
temperature and all the fertilizer will
melt at the same temperature. This
Stand 133°C is the melting point of urea.
off Again, let’s find out the melting point
Liner of an impure matter, wax. In order to
find it out, first we need to turn the
Urea wax into powder. Collect the wax
powder inside a glass tube with one
FT wach side closed. Now fix a thermometer
é Biss inside following the fig 2.07. Sink the
Abs | & glass tube in the beaker in such a way
— i so that water can’t get inside the tube.
Now, start heating the beaker slowly.
Fig 2.06: Melting point of urea You will find the wax melting at a
specific range of temperature instead
of a fixed temperature. This range of
temperature is the melting point of
wax.
=
Rg

States of Matter 27
| Melting point of impure matters is lesser |
than that of pure matters. It is opposite in the
case with boiling point. A mixed matter will
have no fixed melting and boiling point.
Since all pure solids have a specific melting
Ge _F point, they melt at that temperature. If a
di, solid substance melts in any other
Nim temperature, the solid can be declared
eT impure. Again, if it melts at a range of
2 =F —_ temperature, it is impure too. For example:
,— the melting point of sulfur at 1 atm is 119°C.
as But in an experiment, if sulfur melts at any
> = other temperature or range of temperature,
go the sample of sulfur can be declared
Fig 2.077: Melting point of wax adulterated. Therefore,finding the melting
mee point can be a way to find the purity of solid
XQ substances. )
@) Individual Task
Experiment 5
Boiling Point of Liquids
Some sample of the liquid (Example: water), the boiling point of which
needs be determined, is taken in a beaker. The beaker is fixed with a
thermometer. Now, the beaker will be heated carefully with a Bunsen
burner. At a certain temperature, the water in the beaker will turn into vapor.
That temperature is the boiling point of water. All the water in the beaker
will vaporize at 100°C.
That sets the boiling point of water at 100°C (at 1 atm). Since each liquid
= | matter has a specific boiling point, so a boiling point can’t be same for two

28 Chemistry
( liquids. Again, if a liquid is adulterated, it will boil at a different temperature. °
For example, if we add some alcohol to water, it will boil at a different
temperature than 100°C. So, boiling point can be a determiner of purity of a
liquid.
Stand Clamp
(, |___—_—_— Thermometer
|
aa
cf Water
r Tripod stand
> : ee i Bunsen burner
Fig 2.08: Boiling point of water
You have learned, the heat used in boiling and melting does not change the
temperature of the matter. It only transforms the state of the matter.
The experiment below will tell you what will happen if we apply heat on a solid
to melt it and then heat it more to boil.
Individual Task
( Experiment 6
Let’s take some ice cubes in a beaker and heat it carefully. We shall keep
watch on an attached thermometer throughout the process. Let’s assume,
the initial temperature of the ice was -40°C. &
S
J, a

States of Matter 29
Y Axis
120 — Vapor
c
100 D
3
8 %~ Melting
«| Point line Boiling point
3 ofice —/—— Water of water
é 4
° A B
aa = X Axis
Time
——>
Fig 2.09: Graph of applying heat on ice
When the temperature of the ice reaches 0°C absorbing the heat, they melt
into liquid. The temperature remains stagnant at 0°C until all ice cubes
melt into water. That proves 0°C as the melting point of ice. The straight
line in the temperature is called the melting point line. In the fig 2.09, line
AB is the melting point line. Both ice and water exist through the length
of the line. If we apply more heat, the temperature of water starts to rise.
When it reaches 100°C, you’ll see more heat will not be able to raise the
temperature of water anymore. Rather, the water transforms into vapor.
All the water will vaporize at this 100°C temperature. If we apply more
heat after that, the temperature of the water vapor will increase. The
boiling point of water is 100°C. CD is the line of boiling point. Water and
co vapor co-exist at this line.

30 Chemistry
Again, collect the data of cooling the water vapor and set them on a graph
sheet with X axis telling time and Y axis telling temperature. It will be like
fig 2.10.
y Axis
MO") Vapor
120
> 80
: .—— Water
60
ne
& 20
CS el | ceceeeeees
point *o _- ice
-40 7 x Axis
Time
Fig 2.10: Cooling curve of vapor
The graph shows the initial temperature of water vapor is 140°C. When in
the process of cooling it to 100°C, the vapor starts to turn into water. It
remains 100°C until all vapor is turned into water. Further cooling starts to
decrease the temperature of water. When it reaches 0°C, the water starts to
transform into ice. It remains the same until all water is turned ice and then
the temperature of ice decreases from 0°C. The fig 2.10 shows decrease of
temperature of ice to -40°C.
z .
R

States of Matter 31
2.7 Distillation and Sublimation
The process of heating a liquid and turning it into gas is called evaporation or
vaporization. When water from hot tea in a tea cup flies away, that is an example
of vaporization. Again if we cool that vapor, the vapor turns into liquid. This
process is called condensation. For example, water vapor emits heat and turns
into water, which is condensation. The process of heating a liquid into vapor and
then retrieving the liquid from the vapor by cooling it is called distillation. That
means,
Distillation = vaporization + condensation

The process in which heating a solid directly turns that solid into gaseous
substance instead of liquid, is called sublimation. Sal ammoniac (NH,C1),
camphor (C,,H,,O), Naphthalene (C,,H,), solid Carbon dioxide (CO,), Iodine
(L), Aluminum Chloride (AICI, etc. are matters that do not turn liquid if heat is
applied. Instead, they vaporize. These substances are called sublimated
substances.

Experiment 7

Take some solid aluminum chloride gaseous state

salt in a beaker. Put a glass lid on its m7 >

open face. Put some ice cubes on apinene, | @ é ® ®

the lid. Now, apply heat slowly on \ @ . |e

, 20009 © @?"
the beaker. You'll see the solid cS e-.@
. . . Vata W a Oe e~

AICI, is tuming imto gaseous " ro o

substance absorbing heat. This solid state

gaseous AICI, again reaches the lid

and under the influence of ice, Fig 2.11: Sublimation of substance

condensing itself underneath the

lid.

=
g

32 Chemistry
If a sublimated substance is oa ice cube
mixed with some solid matter, it CES > a
can be retrieved by means of ited
sublimation process. For —— Bosker
example, if some ammonium
chloride (NH,Cl) is mixed with A eee
some edible salt (NaCl), itcanbe = <2x-a ee
separated by the process of ~
sublimation. If heat is \ \ 2
continuously applied to ( 5 Bunsen bumer
sublimated substance, the matter | i
vaporizes. In iodized salt, iodine
is a sublimated substance. If you
apply heat to that salt, the iodine ee eee
will be vaporized from there. — EOS
The vapor can be cooled into solid iodine. However, since the mixture of sand.
and glucose does not contain any sublimated substance, therefore, you cannot
separate them by sublimation.
(?) Exercise
ANS
ats Multiple Choice Questions
1. What kind of action takes place when hot tea is kept in a tea cup?
a. vaporization b. sublimation
c. diffusion d. effusion
=
8

States of Matter 33
2. What will happen to the particles when water vapor is condensed?
a. size will reduce b. will remain in movement
c. will vibrate at the same position d. energy will evolve
3. Which of the following pictures is applicable for sublimation?
Zo 87 Lo) <a)
— @°0 . ic}
. > bi oor:
° > SRE
fo Oo” \
®@ 0 66. °
c. gouge > |vo Se d. |esetor| |? 0
4. Heating curve of unknown solid matter Z tells us:
i. melting point of Z is 54°C
ii. Z is volatile “ Heating curve of ;
‘umimown substance Z
iii, AB and CD curves indicate thel cs
boiling and melting lines of Z cS) 4 8
. i isa /y B
Which is correct of the below: |
a.iandii  b. ii and iti se
c.iandiii d. i, ii and iii 1 55 oR
Time (Minute) ——>
5. Which of the followings has the highest rate of diffusion?
a. CO, b. NH,
c. HCl d. H,SO,
6. Which of the followings can be sublimated?
a. Iodine b. Edible salt
c. Copper sulfate d. Soda ash
Forma -5, Chemistry Class-9-10

34 Chemistry
Creative Questions

1,

a. What is diffusion?

b. When you open the gas —_> <>
cylinder used for cooking, Shere Ende wil fei mui enue
which action takes place first- edible Salt
diffusion or effusion? I~ és

c. Ifyou increase heat, which of A pe q
the matters in the stem will —
vaporize first? Explain. A B

d. Can you separate the elements of the two mixtures using the same process?
Show reasons for your answer.

2. White smoke of NH,Cl

a. What is effusion? A | 40cm 60cm B
boiling point different for
the same matter? Wet cotton with HCI solition Wet cotton with NH,OH

uti

c. What kind of change is the solution
process of the stem?

Explain.

d. Why white smoke is produced at the end A of the tube? Explain with logic.

3. A beaker containing some ice cubes is slowly heated. With the passage of

time, the changes in the state of ice are observed.

a. What is distillation?

b. What do you understand by diffusion and effusion?

c. Present the action of the stem on a graph sheet.

d. What will happen if you replace ice of the stem with naphthalene?
Analyze. x

Chapter Three
Structure of Matter
fe) (o) 43,
ae ee A 2
Ae e
oO) ss (2)
Electronic configuration in different energy level of hydrogen
Have you ever thought what the things around us are made of? What is your
body made of? Yes, like you, the ancient philosophers also used to think of these
questions. The ancient Greek scholars used to think, there were four basic
elements- soil, water, air and fire. All other things according to them were made
of these four elements. Greek philosopher Democritus was the first to say that all
matters have a unit which is very small and indivisible. He called it Atom. This
however did not get any recognition as it lacked any scientific proof. Finally,
John Dalton, the British scientist, gave a theory on atom in 1803 which was
based on data collected from various experiments. He said, every matter of the
_ universe is made of small, indivisible particles. He honoured the Greek
S philosopher by naming these particles Atom. Later on, it was proved that atoms

36 Chemistry
are not indivisible. Any atom can be divided into electron, proton and neutron.
This chapter will focus on various models of atom, configuration of electron etc.
® By the end of the chapter, we will be able to

* — write symbols of elements from their English and Latin names

¢ describe the characteristics of fundamental and stable particles

. describe atomic number, mass number and relative atomic mass

* calculate the relative molecular mass from the relative atomic mass

. calculate the number of electron, proton and neutron of an atom

¢ explain the uses of isotopes

* describe the Rutherford and Bohr models of atom’s structure

* explain which of the Rutherford and Bohr models is more

acceptable
* arrange electrons of atoms in orbits and different sub-orbits
5

Structure of Matter 37
3.1 Elements and Compounds
Elements
Certainly you have seen gold, silver or iron. No matter how far you divide pure
gold, you will get nothing but gold there. The same is applicable in the cases
with silver or iron. The matter which does not yield anything but itself if divided,
is called element. Besides the above three, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus,
carbon, helium, argon magnesium, sulfur etc. are also elements. So far, a total of
118 elements have been discovered. Out of them, 98 elements are available in
nature and the rest are made in laboratory. The second group is known as
artificial elements. Do you know that your body contains as many as 26 different
elements?
Compounds
You have already known that an element yields the element only. If water is
analyzed, we shall find two different elements- hydrogen and oxygen. The same
way, if we analyze writing chalk, we get calcium, carbon and oxygen. The
matters which, if divided, give away two or more elements are called
compounds. In a compound, elements will always exist in the same ratio. For
example, chemical analysis of any water sample collected from any place will
show two hydrogen and one oxygen. That means, the ratio of hydrogen and
oxygen atoms in water is 2:1. Characteristics of compounds are different than
those of elements they are made of. Again, for example, at normal room
temperature, hydrogen and oxygen are gaseous elements but when they make
water, it is a liquid.
3.2 Atoms and Molecules
Atoms are the smallest particles of elements that contain the characteristics of
elements. For example: Nitrogen atoms contain the characteristic features of
nitrogen while oxygen atoms contain the same of oxygen.

% When two or more atoms remain connected with each other in chemical bond, it

§_ is known as molecule. You will learn about chemical bond in details at chapter

38 Chemistry
five. Two oxygen atoms (O) bond each other to form an oxygen molecule (O,).
Again, a carbon atom (C) bonds with two oxygen atoms (O) to generate a carbon
dioxide (CO,) molecule. When more than one atoms of a specific element bond
each other, they produce that element’s molecule, like O,. When atoms of
different elements bond together to produce a molecule, it is called molecule of
compound, like CO,,.
3.3 Symbols of Elements
Table 3.01: Is of El
The abbreviated form of English or able 3.01: Symbols of Elements
Latin name of element is called its
symbol. Each element has its own | Hydrogen | H |
symbol. There is a system of writing |Oxygen [0 |
symbol of element.
a. The first letter of English name of an element is usually the symbol and that has to
be written using capital letter.
Table 3.02: Symbols of Elements (First letter same)
Table 3.02: Symbols of Elements (Latin Name)
‘Tead—|Phumbum [P|

Structure of Matter 39
b. When the first letter of two or more elements is same, one of them is
expressed by the first letter. The other element(s) get the first two letters; the
first letter is capitalized, followed by small hand second letter.

c. Some elements have got their symbols from their Latin name.

@) Individual Task:

( Collect names and symbols of some elements from the Periodic table given in |
chapter four and show it to your teacher.

3.4 Formula

Aken ESA ORS 18 SARE Table 3.04: Formula of Molecules
through H,. It means, there are two

Hydrogen atoms in that molecule. XESS SET
Again, one molecule of water is Nitrogen IM
expressed through H,O, meaning, it | Ammonia |NH,

contains two Hydrogen atoms and an | Chlorine | cl,

Oxygen atom. The following table Sulfuric Acid H,SO,

shows formulas of some common Hydrochloric Acid | HCl
molecules:

3.5 The Particles Inside an Atom

Each atom consists of three permanent particles- electron, proton and neutron.

Proton and neutron remain at the nucleus in the center of atom while electron

continues to move round the nucleus.

Electron: Electron is one of the permanent particles of atom containing negative

& charge. The amount of this charge is -1.60x10"? coulombs. It is expressed
N

40 Chemistry
through the symbol e. An electron has the mass of 9.11x1078 g. The relative
charge of electron is taken to be -1 and the mass of electron is 1/1840 of proton
and neutron. That is why, the relative mass of electron is taken as 0.
Proton: Proton is one of the permanent particles of an atom containing positive
charge. The charge is +1.60 x10" coulomb. It is expressed by p. The mass of
proton is 1.67 x 10 g. The relative charge of proton is taken as +1 and relative
mass is taken as 1.
Table 3.05: Different Particles
Name of |Symbol| Actual Charge | Actual Mass | Relative | Relative
ord il a
FBewron |e [ae 10 ent aaio~10 5 [1 | 0 _|
Proton [p16 10 ouims| 267s 1%— [A | a _|
PNewon [= [0 —fustsnio™g [0 | 1 |
Neutron: Neutron is another permanent particle of an atom containing no
charge. Neutron prevails in atoms of all elements but hydrogen. Expressed by n,
a neutron has a mass slightly above than proton. Its relative charge is 0 and
relative mass is 1.
3.5.1 Atomic Number
Atomic number of an element is determined by the number of protons present in
the nucleus of that element’s atom. For example: an atom of Helium (He) has
two protons in its nucleus, so the atomic number of Helium is 2. Again, an
Oxygen atom has eight protons in its nucleus, so the atomic number of Oxygen
is 8. The atomic number denotes an atom. If the atomic number is 1, we
understand it is Hydrogen, if the atomic number is 2, we understand it is Helium,
if the atomic number is 9, we understand it is Florin. Thus, atomic number is the
permanent identity of an atom. Proton number or atomic number is expressed by
Z. Since all atoms are charge neutral, so it contains the same number of electrons
as is the number of protons at its nucleus.
S

Structure of Matter 41
3.5.2 Mass Number

The mass number of an atom is denoted by the total number of proton and
neutron in its nucleus. The mass number is expressed by A. Since the atomic
number is summation of electrons and protons, we can get the number of
neutrons in an atom by deducing its proton number from mass number. The mass
number of Sodium (Na) is 23, its proton number is 11; so the number of neutrons
in sodium is (23 - 11) = 12.
The atomic number of an atom is written at the lower left corner of its symbol
while its mass number is written at the upper left corner. In the case with Sodium
(Na), it will be written

Mass Number nN

Atomic Number/ a

Proton Number (7)

Table 3.05: Short Form oDifferent Elements
Symbol Atomic/Proton arn Number Number of |  ghort
ym Number (z) ae i ree Ree (A) Form
1 1 1 1
pet oe fete § |e
2
(@)) Individual Task
Student Task: Find out the mass number, number of protons and electrons
from {Li and 5Be.

Forma-6, Chemistry Class-9-10

42 Chemistry
3.6 Atomic Model

3.6.1 Rutherford’s Atomic Model

Rutherford has given a model on the structure of atom in 1911. The model
stands:

a. In the centre of atom there is a positively charged dense central core. This core
is called the nucleus of the atom. Proton and electron are situated inside and out
this nucleus respectively. Since, compared to the whole volume of the atom, the
volume of electron is zero, so proton and neutron inside the nucleus determines
the whole mass and positive charges of the atom.

b. Nucleus is very small and most of the space inside an atom is void.

c. Electrons in an atom always move round the nucleus in different orbits like
the planets revolve round the sun in the solar system. The number of electrons
in an atom is same as the number of protons it has got. Since charge of electron
and proton in an atom are equal and opposite, therefore the overall charge of an
atom is zero.

d. The electrons with negative q. <$ Electron
charge are attracted to the positively OG > ___ Neucleus
charged nucleus. The force of this e (>

attraction is centripetal and due to this ox © Orbit
centripetal force, electrons move round OQ

the nucleus like our earth does round the Fig 3.01: Rutherford’s Atomic Model
sun.
Rutherford’s model is known as the solar system model for its continuous
parallelism to the solar system. Again, as Rutherford’s model first gave the idea
of nucleus, it is also called the nuclear model.

2
ES

Structure of Matter 43
Limitations of Rutherford’s Model
Rutherford is the first scientist to introduce the ideas of nucleus and orbits of
electron. Although his model is the first acceptable atomic model, it has some
limitations. They are:
a. Rutherford’s model did not give any idea about the size and shape of the orbits
along which the electrons move.
b. Planets in the solar system are electrically neutral but electrons and nucleus
are charged. A parallelism between some charge neutral elements and charged
elements is not quite correct.
c. There is no satisfactory explanation ee
al ~

regarding how the electron will move round Va “ yp ig Sy
the nucleus in case of atoms having more / i i . ~~ % *,
than one electron. L yy S@r 1 ' !

\ Neer, t

a 5 NN ~ 4 fos
d. According to Maxwell’s electromagnetic s.UTTT Le” o
theory of radiation, any charged particle ~
moving in a circular way, always emits Fig 3.02: Electron falling on nucleus
energy and its radius will gradually grow
smaller. At a stage, it is supposed to fall on the nucleus. That will be the end of
the atom or at least its permanence will be in trouble. However, that doesn’t
happen in nature; in other words, according to Maxwell’s theory, Rutherford’s
atomic model is not correct.
3.6.2 Bohr’s Atomic Model
Scientist Neils Bohr gave some corrections to Rutherford’s atomic model in
1913. This corrected model is called Bohr’s atomic model. The main postulates
of this model are:
a. Around the nucleus there are some circular stable axes on which electron
= moves around. They are called energy level or orbit. They are also known as
QQ

44 Chemistry
shell or permanent orbit or principal energy level. Electrons do not absorb or
emit any energy when they revolve round these fixed orbits. If we express the
permanent orbit as n, then n= 1, 2, 3, 4 etc. In other words, ifn = 1, the principal
energy level is K, when n = 2, L is the principal energy level, when n = 3, M is
the principal energy level, when n = 4, N is the principal energy level etc.
b. According to Bohr’s model, the angular momentum of electron in an
energy level is mvr = nh/2z . Here,
m = the mass of electron ( 9.11x10*' kg)
r= the radius of the orbit that electron follows
v= the velocity of electron in the permanent orbit
h = Plank constant (h = 6.626x10* m? kg/s)
n= principal energy level or principal quantum number (n = 1, 2, 3, 4,
According to this, the energy level with lesser value of n is lower energy level
and the energy level with higher value of n is higher energy level.
n=2 n=2
- Energy level -
Q
Positive charged
neucleus
fe
Absorbed energy ~
Fig 3.03: Bohr’s Atomic Model
When an electron moves round its principal energy level, it doesn’t absorb or
emit any energy. However, it absorbs energy when it moves from lower to higher
energy level. The same way, an electron emits energy when it moves from higher
to lower energy level. This absorbed or emitted energy is hv = hc/A. Here, =
S
aq

Structure of Matter 45
c = velocity of light (3x10*® ms")
v = frequency of absorbed or emitted energy (unit s! or Hz)
4.= length of energy wave absorbed or emitted (unit m)
The light emitted when an electron moves from higher energy level to lower
energy level creates atomic spectra when driven through prism.
Success of Bohr’s Model
a. Rutherford compared the orbits of electrons around nucleus to that of the
planets in the solar system. It did not mention anything about the size of the
energy levels. Bohr’s atomic model specifies the circular size of the energy
levels.
b. Rutherford’s model does not mention about the changes in structure of atom
when they absorb or emit energy. The Bohr model states that the electron moves
from lower to upper energy level when the atom absorbs heat and it moves from
upper to lower energy level when the atom emits heat.
c. The Rutherford model doesn’t explain the atomic spectra but the Bohr model
can explain the atomic spectra of hydrogen (H) atom with one electron.
Limitations of Bohr’s Model
a. Although Bohr model can explain the spectrum of hydrogen containing one
electron, it cannot explain the spectrum of ions or atoms containing more than
one electron.
b. When electrons are transferred from one energy level to another,
according to Bohr, there will be a single line in the spectrum. But highly
sensitive apparatus shows every line consists of several fine lines. Why each line
is the summation of various lines is not explained in Bohr.
c. The Bohr model specifies that orbits of electron in an atom is circular.
However, later on, it was proved that the orbits can be of oval shape too.
3.7 Orbital Electronic Configuration of Atoms
The Bohr model states about the principal energy level. Each principal energy
co level can contain 2n’ electrons at the highest, where n = 1, 2, 3 etc. According to
S this formula:

46 Chemistry

For energy level K, n= 1, so, the highest number of electrons in K is 2n? = (2x

17) =2.,

For energy level L, n = 2, so, the highest number of electrons in L is 2n? = (2 x

27) =8.

For energy level M, n = 3, so, the highest number of electrons in M is 2n? = (2x

37) = 18.

For energy level N, n= 1, so, the highest number of electrons in N is 2n? = (2x

4) = 32.

Table 3.06: Electron Configuration of Elements [H(1) — Zn(30)]
Ste PAYS) Uso [TE |

Number Number
ate at | | es 2 [a fo |
Ce eee
ps fe fz fa | | te far [2 [os [os |
fa fe [2 fz] [| isk [2 [a fo fo |
ps [Bla is | [| zea [2 [8 |e fe |
fe fe fz ja] fT | a [se [2 [a [9 fo |
7 Na ts | oT | et 2 [ae fio] |
le fo jz jo] | | ow fy fa |e [a
Ee ee ee cee
po fe [2 |e] | | 5 fam [2 [a [a3 [2
pr [Na fz {s ja] | 26 [Fe [2 |e [aa] |
2 [Me |2 {8 jz] | iz [co [2 [8 [as fa |
3 fal [2 [se [3 | | ze [i [2 |e [a6] |
pe {si [2 fs fa | | [cu [2 [oe [as [a |
ste [2 [a fs | | [30am | [a a8] |
S

Structure of Matter 47
The atomic number of Hydrogen is 1, meaning it has one electron which will
reside in energy level K. The atomic number of Helium is 2, meaning it has two
electrons which will reside in energy level K. The atomic number of Lithium is
3, meaning it has three electrons. Since the principal energy level K cannot
contain more than two electrons, one electron will go into energy level L. Again,
the atomic number of Sodium is 11, meaning it has eleven electrons. Since the
principal energy level K cannot contain more than two electrons, and L cannot
contain more than 8 electrons, one electron will go into energy level M.
A careful look will tell you electron configuration from Hydrogen to Argon
follows the rule stated above. However it doesn’t remain the same in the case
with elements from Potassium (K) onward. We know that the highest capacity of
third principal energy level (M) is 18. But the 19" electron of Potassium and 19"
and 20" electrons of Calcium enter the fourth principal energy level (N) even
before fulfilling the third. In the case with Scandium (Sc), the 21st electron has
returned to third principal energy level after its 19° and 20" went to fourth
principal level. Beginning from the atomic number 19 onward, two electrons
enter the fourth level first and then the rest return to level three. Still, we find
exception in the case with Cr and Cu. We need to understand the idea of sublevel
of energy before we attempt to understand it.
3.7.1 Concept of Energy Sublevel
We have seen all energy levels are specified with n. These levels are again
divided into sublevels which are expressed by 1. The value of 1 is from 0 to n-1.
These sublevels are called orbital. They are identified with s, p, d, f etc.. The
value of | for different orbital is shown below:

When n = 1, 1=0. There will be one orbital: 1s.

When n = 2, 1=0, 1. There will be two orbital: 2s, 2p.

When n = 3, 1=0, 1, 2. There will be three orbital: 3s, 3p, 3d.

When n = 4, 1 =0, 1, 2, 3. There will be four orbital: 4s, 4p, 4d,

4f.

2
8

48 Chemistry
When n = 5, 1 =0, 1, 2, 3, 4. There will be five orbital. However, if all electrons
are configured in the 4s, 4p, 4d, 4f orbital, then there won’t be any necessity for
the fifth. The same is the case with n = 6, 7, and 8.
Each orbital contains 2(21 + 1) number of electrons. We already know each
principal energy level has 2n? number of electrons. Now we shall see that the
summation of all orbitals turn into this 2n’:
Table 3.07: Electronic Configuration in Energy Levels (n = 1-4)
Leveln | Sublevel 1 Name Symbol | of Electrons in| of Electrons in
according to | according Orbital 2(21+1)|Energy Level
n tol 2n?
Pato Ts ts a
| a Pe ft ae6es
ee ee
rr 216410
ee ee ee ee
Poo ts ws
3.7.2. The Principles of Electronic Configuration in Atoms
Electron first enters the lowest energy orbital of an atom and then gradually goes
into the highest energy orbital. That means, electron will enter the lowest energy
level first and the highest level later. The energy level of orbital is determined by
the summation of value of principal energy level (n) and value of energy
sublevel (1). The orbital that has lesser value of (n + 1) is of lesser energy level
and it gets the first entry of electron. The orbital that has higher value of (n + 1)
is of higher energy level and it gets the later entry of electron.
%
8

Structure of Matter 49
For 3d orbital, n = 3 and 1 = 2, so the value (n + 1) becomes (3 + 2 = 5). Again,
for 4s, n= 4 and 1=0, so the value (n + 1) becomes (4 + 0 = 4). It shows 4s orbital
is lower energetic than 3d orbital. Therefore, electron will first enter 4s and then
will go to 3d. Again, if the value (n + 1) of two orbital are equal, then the orbital
with lesser value of n is lower energetic and electron will enter here first. Same
way, the orbital with higher n gets the electron later for being higher energetic.
For example, the values (n+l) of 3d and 4p are 3+2 = 5 and 441 = 5
respectively. Here in this case, since the value of n in orbital 3d is lesser than
orbital 4p, so it is lower energetic and orbital 4p, being higher energetic will get
electron later. According to this system, the gradual sequence of energy of
orbital in receiving electron will be:
1s < 2s < 2p < 3s < 3p < 4s < 3d < 4p < 5s < 4d < 5p
< 6s < 4f < 5d < 6p < 7s < 5f < 6d < 7p < 8s

We can easily remember the sequence
of energy level from the chart below: ee
We have seen, the orbital s can contain a ee
maximum of two electrons, the orbital p ee
can contain a maximum of six electrons, ES
the orbital d can contain a maximum of
ten electrons and the orbital f can a"
contain a maximum of fourteen
electrons. Following this, we can
configure electrons of the following Fig 3,04: Sequence of Energy of Orbitals
elements.

K(19)— — 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p® 4s?

Ca(20)—> 1s 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p® 4s”

Sc(21)—> 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p® 3d! 4s?

V(22)-> 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s” 3p® 3d? 4s?
Forma -7, Chemistry Class-9-10

50 Chemistry
Since the 4s orbital is lower energetic than 3d orbital, so the 19th electron of
Potassium enters 4s instead of 3d. Again, in the case with Scandium, 19th and
20th electrons go inside 4s and then the 21st electron goes to the higher energetic
3d orbital.
Always remember, when writing the electronic configuration, do write down all
orbital of an energy level side by side; otherwise there is chance of making
mistakes. For example: the configuration of Fe (26) will be
n=1 n=2 n=3 n=4
Fe(26) 1s? 2s? 2p° 3s? 3p° 3d° 4s?
3.7.3 Some Exceptions in Electronic Configuration
Commonly, if the orbital of the energy sublevel p and d are half full (p*, d°) or
complete (p‘, d®°), that kind of electron configuration is the most stable. That
way, the electronic configuration of Cr(24) is supposed to be Cr(24) — 1s?2s?
2p 3s? 3p 3d‘ 4s? . But the interest of 3d to be half full brings one electron from
4s. That way, the final configuration stands Cr(24) — 1s? 2s? 2p° 3s” 3p* 3d° 4s! .
(@)) Individual Task
( Doit: )
The electronic configuration of Cu(29) is Cu(29) 1s?2s? 2p*3s? 3p°3d!%4s!
| whereas it is supposed to be 1s”2s”2p°3s”3p°3d?4s . Explain the reason.
3.8 Isotopes
Atoms of the same element with equal number of protons but different numbers
of neutrons and mass are called isotope of each other. The three atoms in the
table below have the same number of protons. Therefore, they are isotope of
each other. Hydrogen has seven isotopes (1H, 7H, 3H, *H, °H, °H, 7H). Three of ~
them are available in nature and the rest four are laboratory made. S

Structure of Matter pil
Table 3.08: Three Isotopes of Hydrogen
Name Symbol | Proton Mass Neutron
Number Number Number
Z A A-Z
iH 1 1

Hydrogen or 1

Proteum
3.9 Atomic Mass or Relative Atomic Mass
We already know that, the mass number of an element’s atom is the summation
of the numbers of proton and neutron present in its nucleus. It certainly implies
the idea that the mass number is an integer. But you will see the atomic mass of
copper is 63.5 and the atomic mass of chlorine 35.5. How is that possible?
Indeed, it is the relative atomic mass. What is it and why is it necessary?

The mass of an atom of Fluorine is 3.16x10 g

The mass of an atom of Aluminium is 4.482107 g
It is really hard to use such small mass. That is why, 1/12 th of a Carbon 12
isotope is taken as a unit and then the atomic mass of other atoms are determined
relative to that.

1/12 th atomic mass of Carbon 12 is otope is 1.66 x10 g
Therefore, the relative mass of element:
mass of one atom of element
+b of mass of a Carbon 12 isotope
S

52 Chemistry
If we know the actual mass of an atom, we can determine its relative atomic
mass. We have to divide the total real mass of an atom by 1.66x10 g to get the
relative atomic mass. Example:
The real mass of an Al atom is 4.482 x 1073,
So, the relative atomic mass of an Al atom is = sabato = 27
1.66 x 10-248
The relative atomic mass is a ratio of two masses, so it doesn’t have any unit.
3.9.1 Determining the Average Relative Mass of an Element from Percentage
of Isotope
Most of the elements in nature have more than one isotope. We calculate the
average relative mass of those elements having more than one isotope from their
percentage of availability in nature. The steps in this calculation are:
Step 1: Multiply the mass numbers of all isotopes of that element with the
percentage of natural availability of those isotopes.
Step 2: Get the summation of all those results of step 1.
Step 3: Divide the total of step 2 by 100. This will give the average
relative mass of that element.
Suppose, an element A has 2 isotopes. If the mass number and natural
availability of one of these isotopes are p and m respectively while the same of
the other are q and n, then,
: : : xm + qx
The average relative atomic mass of that element is = an
Example: There are two isotopes of chlorine in nature,**Cl and *’Cl.
Naturally available percentage of **Cl=75%
Naturally available percentage of *’Cl = 25%
' ‘ ‘ a 7X2
So, the average relative atomic mass of chlorine = Oe = 35.5
°0
g

Structure of Matter 53
In the periodic table also, you will see that the average relative atomic mass is
shown as 35.5. The periodic table displays the average relative atomic mass.
Example: If there are two naturally available isotopes of an element, then we
can calculate the percentage of those isotopes available in nature from the
average relative atomic mass.
Suppose, in nature Cu is available in x% and ©Cu is available in (100- x) %
the average relative atomic mass of Copper = ss = 63.5
or, x = 75%
Naturally available percentage of Cu = 75% and
Naturally available percentage of Cu = 25%
3.9.2 Getting the Relative Molecuhr Mass from Relative Atomic Mass
We can get the relative molecular mass of an atom by getting the summation of
multiplied value of relative atomic mass of the atoms with their respective
number of atoms. Generally, relative atomic mass is considered as atomic mass
and relative molecular mass as molecular mass.
The atomic mass of Hydrogen (H) atom in a H, molecule is 1 and it has two
atoms, so the relative molecular mass of H, molecule is 1x2 = 2.
Similarly, in a H,SO, molecule, the relative atomic mass of H is 1 and number
of atoms are 2. The relative atomic mass of Sulfur is 32 and number of atom is
1. The relative atomic mass of Oxygen is 16 and number of atom is 4. Therefore,
the relative molecular mass of sulfuric acid will be 1x2 + 32x1 + 16x4 = 98.
eS
5

54 Chemistry
3.10 Radioactive Isotopes and Their Uses
We have already learned about isotopes in this chapter. There are some isotopes
the nucleus of which spontaneously synthesize themselves and emit alpha (a),
beta (B) gamma (y) rays. They are called radioactive isotopes. So far, scientists
have gathered information more than 3000 isotopes. Some of them are natural
and some are laboratory made. The physics book for your class discusses about
various isotopes and their radioactivity in details. We will learn about their uses
here.
Controlled use of radioactive isotopes has made many impossibility possible.
Presently, such isotopes are used in medical science, agriculture, preservation of
food and seeds, electricity generation etc. fields.
3.10.1. Medical Science
Medical science employs radioactive isotopes for various purposes.
Diagnoses
We can take pictures of the affected area using radioactive isotope. Technetium-99
(Tc) is injected inside the body in this system. When it gathers at a particular isotope
at a certain place inside the body, the isotope emits gamma ray. The gamma ray
identification camera from outside can take the photo of that spot of the body. The
lifetime of this isotope is 6 hours. Since it loses its radioactivity in short time, it is safe.
Treating Diseases
Radioactive isotope was first used to cure thyroid cancer. The patient is let with "I
solution to drink. This isotope reaches the thyroid and emits beta ray which destroys the
affected cells. Iridium isotope is used to treat brain cancer. °Co isotope is used to
diagnose and treat tumors. The gamma ray emitted from this isotope destroys the
cancer affected cell and tissue. *“P isotope is used for treatment of leukemia.
sy
S
aq

Structure of Matter 55

3.10.2 Agriculture Sector

Nutrition of Crops

Sufficient fertilizers are required for nutrition of crops. The quantity of fertilizer

is an important issue. Excess fertilizer costs more than necessary. It is also

harmful for environment. Again, less than necessary fertilizer won’t be of any

help. Radioactive isotopes help to determine the amount of Nitrogen and

Phosphorus present in the soil. Plants absorb radioactive Nitrogen and

Phosphorus via its roots which is then transferred to different parts of its body.

Geiger Muller counter helps to identify the presence of these isotopes and helps

to determine the presence of the two elements in soil. Then we can determine the

remedy too.

Getting Rid of Harmful Insects

Harmful insects are always a threat to a good crop. They not only lessen the

production of crops but also they introduce various harmful microbes to the

plants. We use insecticides to rid of these insects. These insecticides are harmful

for our body and environment as well. These insecticides also manage to kill

other insects that were of help for our crops. Insecticides enriched with

radioactive isotopes have helped us to determine the standard of use of

insecticides for a particular crop.

Development of Crops

Radioactive isotopes also play a significant role in developing hybrid varieties

by bringing genetic changes in the original crop.

3.10.3 Generation of Electricity

Huge amount of heat is found in fission reactions or breaking some atoms

into smaller atoms. Driving this heat energy through generators, we can

produce electricity. We call such power plants, nuclear power plants. The

fourth chapter of your physics book discusses in details on them.

The government of Bangladesh is going to establish a nuclear power plant
o in Ruppoor of Pabna. It is hoped that the power plant will be able to
a produce 2400MW electricity.

56 Chemistry
Se (on 4 ed we
- ae ine S ne =
= . i "iy ~~ — ——

Fig 3.05: Rooppoor Nuclear Power Plant
3.10.4 Impact of Radioactive Isotope
It is true that radioactive isotopes are there for our good number of benefits. But
at the same time, they have the potential to harm us too. The alpha, beta and
gamma rays emitted from such isotopes can bring ahout genetic changes of cell
which may cause cancer. The atom bombs used in Hiroshima and Nagasaki of
Japan during the WWII killed lacs of people. The Chamoby] accident of 1986 in
Russia has killed numerous people and has done harm to the adjacent
environment.

3

Structure of Matter 57
(?) Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Z is an element with its 111 protons and mass number 252. Which is the most
appropriate expression for the atom? :
a, 117 b. 38z
c. 7527 d. 72227
2: What is the relative atomic mass of the Teatape Percentage of
element X? (Here, X is just a symbol, not an Le Availability
element)
a.148 b.150
c.152 d.153
3. If the real mass of an element is 4.482x10° then its relative atomic mass will
be-
a. 25 b. 40
c. 29 d. 27
4. The formula a Al Al shows that the element has
i. proton number 13
ii. mass number 27
iii. | electron number 10
Which of the below is correct?
a. iand ii b. ii and iii
c. i and iii d. i,ii and iii
5. What is the atomic number of Potassium?
a. 15 b. 17
c. 19 d. 21
Forma -8, Chemistry Class-9-10

58 Chemistry
6. How many energy sublevels are there in N shell?
a. 1 b.2
c.3 d.4
7. The atomic number of Sc is 21. Which is the correct electron configuration of
Sc?
a. 1s? 2s” 2p§ 3s? 3p® 4s! b. 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p® 4s?
C. 1s? 2s? 2p§ 3s? 3p® 3d! 4s? _— dd. 1s? 2s? 2p® 35” 3p
@ Creative Questions
1.Farid, a class 9 student drew the following picture as he was asked
to draw an atom model.
a, What is atomic number? ——_—TTo
“ ied ~ N,
Sov ™. "SX
/ Z OS
64 ! Oia ye Y
b.The nucleon number of 7*x and \ if as. 13
64 29 \\ Orb 7 |
39’ atoms are same but they differ in * SMS ad y 7
the number of neutron- explain. SSL 6 or
c. The picture drawn by Farid refers to the limitations of an atomic model.
Describe that model.
d. The drawn picture shows that an atom would not be permanent- elucidate.
2. Element A = “Co, element B = *P and compound C = H,SO,
a. What is symbol?
b. When is the spectra created in atom? Discuss
c. Find out the relative molecular mass of compound C.
d. The isotopes of A and B play significant roles in our lives. Explain.
2
§

Chapter Four
Periodic Table
Eg fi
Pre ORES a
ei Cae |
as Bi<c=H |
JH824 2 ee=2eabseeeek>
i Bash teas? meee soo)
4° BQ stam-enad Sus
ee Some oom ee eee es
©. ste’ ER OSae8n
Bawmmdem/ m= F-
A special periodic Table
A total of 118 elements are identified on earth up to the year 2016. Study and
research in chemistry requires some idea about the physical properties and
characteristic features of all these elements. Some of these elements among them
show some common features. There had been efforts among the scientists for a
long time to group such elements together and put all elements in a chart. It took
hundreds of years of efforts of various scientists, numerous changes and
extensions to get us such a complete table so far, which is known as Periodic
Table. It is a significant achievement in chemical research. A sound knowledge
of this periodic table and its features enables anyone with knowledge about not
only the elements but also the compounds formed with them. This chapter will
ew give you some introduction to this periodic table and properties and
S characteristics of elements in the table.

60 Chemistry
® By the end of the chapter, we will be able to-
. describe the background of development of periodic table
° determine the relation of the principal groups of elements of
periodic table with the electronic configuration of outermost
energy level
. determine the period of an element
. assume the physical and chemical properties of an element in
relation to its position in the periodic table
° describe the reasons for special naming of elements
° explain the significance of periodic table
. demonstrate in practical the similar properties of the com
pounds of elements in a same group
. make proper use of glass apparatus at the time of experiments
° take precaution at the time of experiments
. show interest in assuming the properties of elements
following the periodic table
5

Periodic Table 61
4.1 Background of Periodic Table
Periodic Table is the outstanding collection of chemical concepts gathered over
hundreds of years. It is not an achievement of one single scientist or a one day’s
effort. Various scientists have given their tireless effort after it to get the present
state of the table.
In 1789, Antoine Lavoisier first divided the elements like Oxygen, Nitrogen,
Hydrogen, Phosphorus, Mercury, Zinc, Sulphur etc. into metals and non-metals.
Then on, there was constant effort to divide the elements in groups having the
same characteristics.
In 1829, the scientist Dobereineir found that each three elements show the same
kind of features. First, he organized the elements into threes according to their
atomic mass. Then he marked that atomic mass of the second element is half or
near about half of the summation of first and third’s atomic mass. Dobereineir
identified Chlorine, Bromine and Iodine as the first trio of chemical elements. It
is known as Dobereineir’s Law of Triads.
For the elements detected up to 1864, English scientist John A R Newlands gave
a theory called Law of Octet. According to it, if elements are organized
following a sequence of lower to higher atomic mass, there is evident similarity
in physical and chemical properties of each eighth element.
In the year 1869, Russian scientist Mendeleev published a table in an attempt to
contain elements with similar properties in the same group. Reviewing the
physical and chemical properties, he theorized, “Physical and chemical
properties of elements return periodically as atomic mass of elements increase.”
Following this theory, he organized the 63 elements identified till then in eight
vertical columns and 12 horizontal lines. Thus he proved that elements
belonging to each column have the same physical and chemical properties and in
each line, they change gradually as they progress from left to right. The table was
named Periodic Table.

x

&

62 Chemistry
1
1 1 1
H
2 Group number 6
Hydrogen
aacegicer Atomic number| 24 32 | Atomic mass
2 3 u 4 9 C
‘ r
Li Be Period number 4 Symbol
Lithium | Beryllium Chromium
fafearn | care a Name of element
alah 23 | 12 24
3
Na |Mg
Sodium |Magnesium 3 4 5 6 ‘i 8 9
citar = porta
4 19 39 20 40 21 45 | 22 48 23 51 24 52 125 55 126 56 |27 58
K Ca Sc |Ti |V Cr |Mn ([|Fe_ |Co
Potassium | Calcium Scandium | Titanium | Vanadium Chromium |Manganese |Iron Cobalt
sora | area safery | babi | ote aia spree = ah carers
37 «85.5 | 38 88 39 89 | 40 91 | 41 93 42 96 «|43 98 |44 101 |45 103
5
Rb |Sr Y Zr |Nb |Mo /Tc_ |Ru [Rh
Rubidium | Strontium | Yttrium | Zirconium | Niobium jolybdenum | Technetium |Ruthenium /Rhodium
é 55 133 56 6«137_—«| staicfae | 72 1785 | 73 181 | 74 184 |75 186 |76 190 |77 192
Cs |Ba [™, |Hf |Ta Ww [Re (|Os_ [Ir
Caesium | Barium 1 Hafnium | Tantalum Tungsten [Rhenium [Osmium iridium
faferrt | cafe refer | Sorby rece caer feria |Rfafears
7 87 = 223 88 226 arrafase | 104 261 | 105 262 106 263 107 262 108 265 |109 266
Fr |Ra [te | RE | Db Sg |Bh |Hs [Mt
Francium | Radium 103 Rutherfordium! Dubnium § Beaborgium |Bohrium |Hassium (Metrenium
57 139 | 58 140 [59 141 | 60 144 or 145 [62 150 [63 152
Elementsof = |La |Ce |Pr |Nd Pm (Sm [Eu
Lanthanide series a 7
anthanum | Cerium |PraseodymiumNeodymium | Promethium|Samarium |Europium
ore | Pifsare area | fefeiier carafe jsf eocafara
89 227 | 90 232 |91 231 92 «238 93 237 |94 244 |95 243
Element of Actinide | Ac Th Pa U Np |Pu |Am
series Actinium | Thorium |Protactinium | Uranium leptunium | Plutonium |Americium

Periodic Table 63
18
. . 2 4
Modern periodic Table He
13 140 150 167“ pen
fara
5 11 6 12 7 14/8 16 9 19 10 20
B (C N O F Ne
Boron Carbon Nitrogen Oxygen Fluorine Neon
rrr we areca =| wfscerr ater fart
13 27 14 28 15 a1 16 32 17 18 40
Al Si P S 35Cl | Ar
10 11 12 Aluminium | Silicon Phosphorus | Sulfur Cholorine | Argon
28 59 29 63.5 30 65 31 +70 32 73 33 75 34 79 35 80 | 36 84
Ni Cu Zn Ga |Ge |As Se Br |Kr
Nickel Copper Zinc Gallium —|Germenium | Arsenic Selenium Bromine | Krypton
freee ea fae conf = fetter | ators aria | aia feria
46 106 | 47 108 48 112 | 49 115 50 119 51 122 52 128 | 53 127 | 54 131
Pd | Ag Cd |In |Sn /|Sb Te I Xe
Palladium | Silver Cadmium Indium Tin Antimony | Tellurium | Iodine Xenon
spenfearr | frensta rotary feary fa faa coafeary areatfer CORT
78 195 ag 197 80 201 81 204 82 207 83 209 84 209 85 210 | 86 222
Pt | Au Hg |Tl |Pb_ |Bi Po |At |Rn
Platinum | Gold Mercury Thallium | Lead Bismuth Polonium Astatine Radon
ata CARS asf seat | ae forte cotcenfrraty | BpPaIBIaT | cor
110 «269 | 111 272 112 285 113. (284 | 114 285 115 288 | 116 293 117 «294 | 118 294
Ds_ |Rg Cn |Nh |Fl |Mc_ jLv Ts | Og
[Darmstadtiun) Roentgenium [opernicium | Nihonium | Flerovium | Moscovium [Livermorium |fennessine )ganesson
BSovera sours celtics | Meee | axafea | sewfeas Pretacatita | Geriga | enter
64 157 | 65 159 66 163 | 67 165 | 68 167 | 69 70 173 | 71 175
Gd |Tb Dy |Ho |Er |wTm/Yb  |Lu
Gadolinium | Terbium IDysprosium | Holmium | Erbium Thulium Ytterbium | Lutetium
soreerateara | brides ferret | <a | afta afrata Saeam | aha
96 247 | 97 247 98 251 | 99 252 | 100 257 101 258 | 102 259 | 103 262
Cm |Bk cf Es |Fm |Md_ |No |Lr
s© | Curium Berkelium Californium EEinsteinium | Fermium Mendelevium | Nobelium awrencium
S | fears aicérara Rater iSaccirar | kare areriearm | cic | araairart

64 Chemistry
Another success of Mendeleev’s table is his correct forecast about the
existence of some elements. He kept some cells in his table blank as there were
only 63 of them detected till then. Later on, these cells were accommodated by
detected elements, proving Mendeleev correct.
There are some flaws in Mendeleev’s table. According to his theory, elements
with lesser atomic mass were supposed to be set before the elements with higher
atomic mass. However, in Mendeleev’s table, Argon with its atomic mass 40 is
placed before Potassium with atomic mass 39. He did this to group according to
similarity of physical and chemical properties. There are some other cases with
similar flaws and other flaws in Mendeleev’s table.
In 1913, scientist Mosley proposed to organize elements according to their
atomic number instead of atomic mass. When the table was reorganized
according to atomic number of elements, Argon (18) came automatically before
Potassium (19) and thus the flaw in Mendeleev’s table was corrected.
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (TUPAC) has so far detected
118 elements. IUPAC supervises and controls different matters of chemistry and
applied chemistry- like creating various rules and regulations, overseeing
which of the escalating changes or inventions are to accept or discard etc.
Lavoisier started with only 33 elements which became 63 detected and 4
undetected elements in Mendeleev’s table. Now, that attempt has turned out to
be the modern periodic table with 118 detected elements.
4.2 Characteristics of the Periodic Table
The periodic table is basically a table of elements. It also features columns and
rows. In the periodic table, the rows from left to right are called Periods and
vertical columns are called Groups. There are a total of 118 elements
accommodated in the cells of the table, which is there for you at the beginning
of this chapter.

ES

Rg

Periodic Table 65
The modern periodic table has some prominent characteristics. You can find
these features if you take a closer look at the table.

a. There are seven periods (horizontal rows) and 18 groups (vertical

columns) in the periodic table.

b. All periods start with group 1 at the extreme left and extend up to group

18 at the extreme right.

c. A small table of 2 horizontal rows and 14 columns displays the
lanthanide and actinide elements beneath the main periodic table. These
are part of period 6-7 of main periodic table.

d. Period 1 contains only two elements. Periods 2 and 3 contain four
elements each. Period 4 and 5 contain 18 elements each. Periods 6 and 7
contain 32 elements each.

e. Group | contains 7 elements. Group 2 contains 6 elements. Group 3 has

32 elements. Groups 4 to 12 contain 4 elements each. Groups 13-17 have
6 elements each. Group 18 contains 7 elements.
Fifteen elements with atomic numbers 57 to 71 are called Lanthanide elements.
Fifteen elements with atomic numbers 89 to 103 are categorized as Actinide
elements. Physical and chemical properties of elements belonging to each of
these two categories are so close that they have been put separately in two
separated rows.
Now consider the periodic table in terms of properties of elements.
1. Properties of elements change from left to right in the same period.
2. The physical and chemical properties of elements of the same group are
almost similar.
Forma -9, Chemistry Class-9-10

66 Chemistry
4.3 Determination of the Position of Elements in the
Periodic Table from Their Electronic Configuration

We can easily determine the group and period of an element from the electronic
configuration of that element. The system of finding out the place of an element
in the periodic table is discussed below:

Determining the Period Number

The number of the outermost main energy level in the electronic configuration of
an element is the period number of that element. For example: the electronic
configuration of Lithium is Li(3) —>1s?2s! . Since the outermost energy level of
Lithium is the second one, so the element belongs to the period 2 of the table.
Same way, the electronic configuration of Potassium is K(19) >
1s?2s?2p°3s?3p*4s! . Since the outermost energy level of Potassium is the fourth
one, so the element belongs to the period 4 of the table.

Determining the Group

The group number of an element can be determined in a number of ways.
System 1: If the outermost energy level of an element consists of s orbital only,
the total number of electrons in that s orbital is the group number of that element.
The electronic configuration of Hydrogen is H(1)1s!. Since the outermost energy
level of Hydrogen consists of s orbital and it contains only 1 electron, so the
element belongs to the group 1 of the table.

System 2: If the outermost energy level of an element consists of s and p orbital
only, the total number of electrons in those s and p orbital added with 10 is the
group number of that element. The electronic configuration of Boron is
B(5)-1s?2s?2p' Since the outermost energy level of Boron consists of s and p
orbital and they contain 2 + 1 =3 electrons, so the element belongs to the group
3 + 10 = 13 of the table.

System 3: If the outermost energy level of an element consists of s orbital which
is preceded by d orbital in the inner level, the total number of electrons in those
s and d orbital is the group number of that element. The electronic configuration S

Periodic Table 67

of Fe is Fe(26)-1s?2s?2p* 3s73p°3d°4s? . Since the outermost energy level of Iron

consists of s and is preceded by d orbital and they contain 6+2=8 electrons,

so the element belongs to the group 8 of the table.

To understand you, the electronic configuration of outer most energy level is

denoted by red colour.

Table 4.01: Electronic Configuration of Elements and their Groups
EC
ED
LC
CO
CC A
sao
KOs) [stators ae [a [rome ———_—|
cao) [asta ap aeaprs® [a [atom a) ‘|
EC

ce

68 Chemistry
Student Activity: Fill up the blank spaces of elements with atomic
number 3, 4, 6, 11, 13, 16, 21, 26 of the above table with necessary
information.

4.4 Electronic Configurations of Elements are the Main Basis of

the Periodic Table)

Electronic configuration serves to identify the group and period of an element in

the periodic table. Again, elements having the same electron arrangement at

their outermost orbit belong to the same group. On the other hand, elements with
different configuration of electrons at their outermost shell belong to separate
groups.
Table 4.02: Group and Electron Configuration
[soni td) Cf Sd
lectronic Configuratio: | Element | lectronic Configuration|
°0
Ss
N

Periodic Table 69
The elements with one electron at the outer shell in electron configuration
generally tend to give away electron and become positive ions. Sodium has one
electron at its outer shell. So, it donates the electron and become positive ion.
Na (1s?2s?2p°3s') 1——+» Na‘ (1s72s?2p) + &°
Again, elements with seven electrons at the outer shell in electron configuration
generally tend to accept an electron and become negative ions. Chlorine has
seven electrons at its outer shell. So, it accepts one electron and become negative
ion.
Cl (1s?2s?2p%3s*3p°) ——-» CT (1s?2s?2p°3s?3p°)
So, electronic configuration helps us to determine the position of an element in
the periodic table and explain various characteristics of them as well. Therefore,
electronic configuration is considered as the main basis of periodic table.
4.5 Some Exceptions in the Periodic Table
a. The Position of Hydrogen: Hydrogen is a non-metal. However, the periodic
table displays hydrogen alongside strong electropositive alkali metals like Na,
K, Rb, Cs, Fr etc. in group 1. It is because the outer shell of H contains only 1
electron like the alkali metals. Besides, many properties of Hydrogen are similar
to those of alkali metals. On the other hand, Hydrogen also is able to accept an
electron like the Halogen elements (F, Cl, Br, I), meaning it has some similarities
with Halogen in terms of properties. However, since most of the properties of
Hydrogen have similarity with alkali metals, it is placed alongside alkali metals.
b.The Position of Helium: The electronic configuration of Helium is He(2) >
1s*. According to its configuration, it was supposed to be positioned in group 2.
But the elements of group 2 are strong electropositive. They are called alkaline
earth metal. On the other hand, Helium is an inert gas. Its properties are similar
to other inert gases like Neon, Argon, Krypton, Xenon and Redon. And its
properties are not at all similar to the alkaline earth metals. Therefore, Helium is
eS
S placed alongside the inert gases in group 18.

70 Chemistry
c. The Position of Lanthanide and Actinide Groups: The Lanthanide
elements are supposed to be set in the period 6 and group 3 of the periodic table.
The original position of Actinide group is in period 7 and group 3. If they are
placed in these positions, that hampers the beauty of the table. Therefore, to
maintain the beauty of the table, these two groups of elements are moved to a
separate table just beneath the main table.
4.6 Periodic Properties of Elements
The elements in the periodic table have some properties, like: metallic
properties, non-metallic properties, atomic radius, ionization energy, electro
negativity, electron affinity etc. These properties are called periodic properties
a. Metallic Properties: Elements which are glossy, produce metallic sound
when struck, and conductor to heat and electricity, we call them metals. Modern
definition goes, the elements that turn into positive ions donating one or more
electrons are metals. This property to donate electron by the metals is called
metallic property. The more an element is prone to donate electron is regarded to
be endowed with more metallic property. Lithium (Li) is a metal as it donates an
electron and becomes Li*. lio Litt e
Any period in the periodic table has got the most metallic on the left and
gradually elements are less metallic as the period extends to the right.
b. Non-metallic Property: Elements which are not glossy, don’t produce
metallic sound and non conductor of heat and electricity are called non-metallic.
In the modern terminology, the elements which turn into negative ions accepting
one or more electrons are called non-metallic elements. This tendency to accept
electrons is called their non-metallic property. The more an element is prone to
accept electron is regarded to be endowed with more non-metallic property.
Chlorine (Cl) is a non-metal as it accepts an electron and becomes CI.

cl+e > ct S

Periodic Table 71
Any period in the periodic becomes more non-metallic as it extends to the right.
Some elements are there which sometimes behave like metals and sometimes
behave like non-metals. They are called sub-metals. According to modern
definition, elements that sometimes tend to donate electrons and sometimes
accept electrons are called sub-metals. Silicon (Si) is a sub metal.
In the periodic table, the left periods are metals, middle periods are sub metals
and the right side periods are non-metals.
c. Atomic Radius/ Size of Atom: The size of atom or the atomic radius is a
periodic property. The more a period progresses from left to right, the size of
atom/atomic radius decreases. Again, vertically in the periodic table, the lower
we go from upper part, the size of atom increases.
In a period, the more we move from left to right, the atomic number increases,
but the shell number remains unchanged. As the atomic number increases,
number of proton in the nucleus increases and so does the number of electron.
The attraction between the increased number of electrons and protons also
increases, resulting in the electron containing shells getting closer to the nucleus.
As a result, the atomic radius decreases. oe, The size of atom decreases from left
Again, in a same group, the lower we to right of a period
move from upper part, a new shellis & OC) ®@® Oe
nm
added to the outer layer. These added 2 &
shells increase the size of atom. 5 b
=@@ce

Noteworthy that, newer shells increase g 5
the size of atom more than the added % 2
electrons and protons decrease the size. BS °c C) C) OC QO
That is why, the lower part of the &
periodic fable contains elements ‘with Fig 4.01: Periodic Property of Atomic Radius
bigger atoms.

cy

S

nN

72 Chemistry
d. Ionization Energy: The energy
that is required to transform an
element into one mole positive ion
removing one mole electron from Elemination of
its one mole atom in its gaseous aneleofron
state is called ionization energy of (0) \7 => (0)
that element. It is a periodic
property. In the same period,
elements of the left side have ~ i
greater radius than those of the Theacecron inEsmm ME en asin
right side. When the atomic radius Fig 4.02: Ionization of Element
is less, the ionization energy is
greater and vice-versa.
Example:
The ionization energy of Si is greater than Na, Mg and Al because the atomic
radius of Si is the smallest among all these elements. On the other hand, Na,
having the biggest radius among them is endowed with the least ionization
energy.
Of the alkali metals in group-1, i.e. Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs and Fr, Li has the
smallest atomic radius and the highest ionization energy.
Again, of the elements in group-17, i.e. F, Cl, Br, I and At, F has the smallest
atomic radius and the highest ionization energy.
e. Electron Affinities: The energy emitted when we try to transform an element
in its gaseous state into one mole negative ion by injecting one mole electron
into its one mole atom is called the electron affinity of that element. It is a
periodic property. In the same period, elements of the left side have greater
radius than those of the right side. When the atomic radius is less, the electron
affinity is greater and vice-versa.
2
&

Periodic Table BB
(@)) Individual Task

Problem: Of the elements Be, Ca, Sr, Ba, Mg and Ra, some display greater
electron affinity and some lesser.

Solution: All these elements belong to group-2. Be among them has got the
lowest atomic radius and that is why, its electron affinity is higher. Again, Ra
among them has the highest radius and the least electron affinity.

Problem: Of the elements Na, Mg, Al, and Si, which has the strongest
electron affinity and which has the least?

Solution: All these elements belong to period-3. Na among them has got the
highest atomic radius and that is why, Sodium’s electron affinity is the least.
Again, Si among them has the least radius and the highest electron affinity.

f. Electronegativity: When two atoms turn into a molecule in covalent bond, the
atoms in that molecule attract the electrons toward themselves. This attraction is
called electronegativity. It is a periodic property. In the same period, elements of
the left side have greater radius than those of the right side. When the atomic
radius is less, the electronegativity is greater and vice-versa. For example, The
Na atom in the period-3 of the table has the least electronegative attraction and
Cl has the most.

4.7 The Special Names of Elements Present in Various Groups
Elements were bestowed special names at different times basing on their
physical and chemical properties. Apart from metals, non-metals and sub metals
already discussed, there are also some others.

Alkali Metals: There are seven elements in Group-1 of the table. Apart from
Hydrogen, the six other elements here (Lithium, Sodium, Potassium, Rubidium,
Cesium and Francium) are called alkali metals. They are called so as all of them
are soluble in water and when dissolved in water, they produce Hydrogen gas
and alkali.
Forma -10, Chemistry Class-9-10

74 Chemistry
Alkaline Earth Metals: The periodic table contains six elements- Beryllium,
Magnesium, Calcium, Strontium, Barium and Radium in its Group-2. These
elements are called alkaline earth metals. They are available as various
compounds in soil and all of them produce alkali. That is why, they are grouped
under alkaline earth metals.
Coin Metals:Copper, Silver, Gold and Rontzanium are four metals belonging to
Group-11. The first three of them are called coin metals as they were used to
produce coins from the ancient age and were used as a means of trade and
commerce.
Halogen Group: Six elements of Group-17 are called Halogen. They are
Fluorine, Chlorine, Bromine, Iodine, Astatine and Tennesine. The meaning of
halogen is salt maker. Metals bonding with these elements produce salts, like Na
and F bond together to produce Sodium Fluoride, Na and Cl together produce
Sodium Chloride etc. The main source of halogens is the sea salt. They
themselves form di-atomic molecules by sharing electrons, like CL,, I, etc.
Inert Gas: Elements belonging to Group-18 are called inert gas. They are
Helium, Neon, Argon, Krypton, Xenon, Redon and Oganeson. As their
outermost energy level is filled with electrons, they do not show any tendency to
form compound by accepting, donating or sharing electrons. This inaction in
chemical reaction or chemical bonds gave them their group name. They remain
in gaseous form in normal temperature.
Transition Elements: Elements of Group-3 to Group-12 are known as
transition elements. Compounds produced with these elements get some colour.
These transition elements act as catalysts in chemical reactions. Nickel of
Group-10 is an example of this kind which is used in various organic reactions.
2
Rg

Periodic Table 75

@) Individual Task

Problem: Why is Ca called an alkaline earth metal?

Solution: Different compounds of the metal Ca are available in soil which

makes it an earth metal. Again, Hydroxide compound of Ca, Ca(OH), is an

alkali. Therefore, it is also alkaline. Together, these two information contribute

in Ca being called alkaline earth metal.

Problem: Why is He an inert gas? Explain.

Solution: He doesn’t bond with the other elements of its group. Neither is it

interested to bond with other elements. So, Helium is an inert element. Since, in

normal temperature, it remains in gas form, so we call it an inert gas.

4.8 Advantages of the Periodic Table

The periodic table is a highly significant contribution of various chemists of

different ages. Practice of chemistry is not possible without modern periodic

table. Some of the advantages of this chart are presented below.

a. Simplifying Study of Chemistry: We know that a total of 118 elements are

identified till 2016. If we consider only four physical properties (melting point,

boiling point, density and state of matter) and four chemical properties (reaction

with Oxygen, water, acid and alkali), then that turns out 118 x (4 +4) = 944

properties for these elements. It is impossible memorize all these information.

The periodic table has simplified that task. If we know the common properties

belonging to each group in the table, we will also be aware of the common

properties of all these elements. Again, since we will be familiar with the

common properties of elements, we will also know the properties of compounds

made with them.

b. Detection of New Elements: there were some blank cells in the periodic
x table even some decades ago. The periodic table gave us prior idea about the
S elements that will be accommodating those cells and their properties even

16 Chemistry
before they were detected. You have already known that, Mendeleev had
mentioned about four elements in his periodic table which were later detected.
c. In Research: The periodic table has large contribution in the field of research
too. Suppose, a scientist is interested to invent a new matter to meet up a specific
purpose. In that case, he must have some conception about what the properties
would be of the new matter and what kind of elements will be able to produce
the new matter. He will get this idea from the periodic table.
You will gradually come to know about the other advantages of the periodic
table.
4.9 Reactions Occurring in the Elements of the Same Group
An experiment will tell you that elements of the same group exhibit same kind
of properties.
The gases F,, Cl,, Br,, L, etc. belonging to Group-17 react with Hydrogen and
produce HF (g), HCl (g), HBr (g), HI (g) gases respectively.

H,(g) + F.(g) ———> 2HF (g)

H,(g) + Clg) ———» 2HCI (g)

H,(g) + Br2(g) ———» 2HBr (g)

H,(g) + L(g) ————» 2HI (g)

Again, if we dissolve these gases into water, they produce hydrohalide acids,

i.e. Hydrofluoric acid, Hydrochloric acid, Hydrobromic acid, Hydroiodic acid.

HF(g) + H,0 (I) ———> HF (aq)

HCl(g) + H,0 (1) ———> HCl (aq)

HBr(g) + H,O (1) ———> HBr (aq)

HI(g) + H,0 (I) ———> HI (aq)
These hydrohalide acids react with any carbonate salt and produce Carbon
dioxide gas, e.g. Calcium Carbonate and Hydrofluoric acid produce Carbon
dioxide:

ES
ES

Periodic Table 77
CaCO; + 2HF (aq) ————» CaF, + CO, + H,0
The same kind of reaction will take place with Hydrochloric acid:
CaCO; + 2HCI (aq) ” CaCl, + CO, + H,0
So, the above reactions convince you that the elements of Group-17 exhibit the
same properties and reactions. Mg and Ca of Group-2 also exhibit the same
properties and reactions.
Magnesium Carbonate (MgCO,) in its reaction with light Hydrochloric acid
produces Magnesium Chloride, water and Carbon dioxide gas. Calcium
Carbonate (CaCO,), in the same reaction produces Calcium Chloride, water and
Carbon dioxide gas.
MgCo, + 2HCl ———> MgCl, + CO, + H,0
CaCO,+ 2HCl ——— CaCl, +CO,+H,0
@) Experiment
| Name of Experiment: Identifying Carbon dioxide gas in the reaction
between Calcium Carbonate and light Hydrochloric acid.
Principle: Calcium Carbonate and light Hydrochloric acid produce
Calcium Chloride, water and Carbon dioxide gas.
CaCO;+ 2HCl ———— CaCl, + CO, + H,0
Apparatus: a. one conical flask b. a thistle funnel c. a u-shaped delivery
tube made of glass d. some gas jars e. cork with bore.
Chemicals: Calcium Carbonate, dilute hydrochloric acid and water
8

78 Chemistry
- Procedure: |

1. Take some small pieces of calcium carbonate in the round bottom

flask.

2. With the help of the cork, put in the thistle funnel and the delivery

tube inside the Wolf bottle.

3. Put in some water in the round bottom flask through the thistle

é Thistle funnel
bent glass tube
co
| a |
|_|
|= = ———| round bottom -— gasiar
flask
A
_i—. = ——=_ | .-—$_$ _____, ]
HCl CaCO;
Fig 4.05: Preparation of Carbon Dioxide
funnel so that the chemicals within and the edge of the thistle funnel
remain submerged.
4. Set the other end of the exhaust tube inside a gas jar.
5. Now, slowly add dilute hydrochloric acid through the thistle funnel.
You will see, the carbon dioxide gas bubbles produced in the reaction is
coming out through the exhaust tube.
6. Let’s preserve the carbon dioxide gas in the gas jar. Since the gas is
heavier than air, it will gather at the lower part of the jar. ; ce
>
XQ

Periodic Table 719
| Checking the Properties of Carbon Dioxide Gas: \
1. Let’s check the colour of the produced gas in the jar. It is

colourless like carbon dioxide.
2. Let’s hold a lighted matchstick on the open face of gas jar. It will
be extinguished. It is decided that carbon dioxide helps to
extinguish fire.
3. Let’s pass the produced gas inside a test tube containing lime
water or calcium hydroxide. First, a small quantity of gas will enter
the tube and create white calcium carbonate residue at the base.
The lime water will be dull. Now pass more carbon dioxide gas
into the solution. This will produce calcium bicarbonate which will
clear the lime water.
Caution:
1. Measures were taken so that the end of the thistle funnel was
submerged in the water.
2. The round-base flask was fixed with a stand.
The same experiment can be done with snails, oysters, egg shell as
substitute for calcium carbonate and vinegar substituting hydrochloric
acid.
s

80 Chemistry
(?) Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. What is the main basis of modern periodic table?
a. atomic number b. atomic mass
c. relative atomic mass d. electronic configuration
2. A-> 1s? 2s? 2p* 3s? 3p* 3d? 4s. Which group of the periodic table does the
element belong to?
a. Group-2 b. Group-5
c. Group-11 d. Group-13
Answer questions 3 and 4 from the following table:
It is an intersection of a group from periodic table :
x | Here X and Y are suppos ition, not symbols of an actual element
37K
3. Which period of the periodic table does the element belong to?
a, 3 b. 44
58 d. 6
4. The shown elements have-
i. one electron at their outer shell
ii, atomic radius decreases as we top down
iii. element Y is more active than element X
Which is correct?
a, i and ii b. ii and iii &
c. i and iii . i, ii and iii 5

Periodic Table 81
@ Creative Questions
1,
peep
Diagram of the stem is a part of the periodic table.
a. Write down the Triads Law.
b. Why is Barium called alkaline earth metal?
c. Which of the elements in the stem is the biggest in size? Explain
d. Analyze the electron affinity of the elements in the stem as we move
periodically from left to right.
2:
[oi 2 os
ee
_
i
a. Write down the modern formula of periodic table.
b. Why is B called an alkaline earth metal?
c. Explain the change in the size of atom from A to B.
d. Analyze the change in ionization energy as we progress from A to C.
Forma -11, Chemistry Class-9-10

Chapter Five
Chemical Bond
We know, all substances consist of molecules and atoms. Hach of these matters
has ita own atoms. Out of these substances, atoms of one or more elements make
a substance’s molecule. Atoms do not remaim scattered in the moleculs of
substances. They remain highly organized. The force of attraction that binds two
atoms in a molecule is called chemical bond. This bomd may be of various
upon compounds made of ionic bond, covalent bond or metallic bond, their
process of banding and their properties.
=
&

Chemical Bond 83
® By the end of the chapter, we will be able to-
* explain the concept of valence electrons
* write the symbols of elements, formula of radicals and the
formula of compounds using their valency
¢ — explain the stability of inert gases
¢ — explain the concept of octet and duet rules
* explain chemical bonds and the cause of their formation
e — explain how and why ions are formed
* — explain the formation of ionic bonds
* — explain the formation of covalent bonds
* — explain properties like melting point, boiling point, solubility,
electric conductivity and crystal formation with ionic and covalent
bonds
¢ explain the concept of metallic bond
¢ explain the electric conductivity of metals with metallic bonds
* identify ionic and covalent compounds among the easily available
objects
5

84 Chemistry
5.1 Valence Electrons
The number of total electrons at the outermost principal energy level of an
element is called the valence electron of that element. For example, electron
configuration of Potassium and Oxygen show 01 and 06 electrons at their
outermost energy level.
e®
fom x og on
QO
Q lau ‘ Pe
= Oxygen
Potassium
Fig 5.01; Valence Electron of Potassium and Oxygen.
Therefore, K has 01 valence electron while O has 06 valence electrons. The
following table shows valence electron number of some elements from their
electronic configuration:
Table 5.01: Valence Electrons of Elements
Plemen Electronic Configuration valence
EC ee
F(9) 2 7 7
P(15) 2 8 5 5
ca) 2 | 8 | 7)
Ca(20) 2 8 a | 2 | 2
Here, Nitrogen has 2 electrons in its K orbit while 5 electrons in L orbit. L orbit
is the outermost energy level of Nitrogen. So, Nitrogen has five valence
electrons. %
S
XQ

Chemical Bond 85
(@)) Individual Task
| Student Activity: Find out the number of valence electrons of F, P, Cl
\ and Ca, J
5.2 Valency
You already know that, atoms of different elements donate, accept or share
electrons of their outermost energy level with atoms of other elements to form
molecules. The capacity of bonding of an atom with another atom of an element
while forming a molecule is called valency.
Usually, the valency of Hydrogen is taken to be 1. Valency of an element is
determined by the number of atoms of the same element, H or Cl one of its atoms
can bond with.
An atom of Hydrogen bonds with another atom of Chlorine to form an HCl
molecule. So the valency of chlorine is also 1. Again, an atom of Oxygen bonds
with 2 Hydrogen atoms to produce H,O. So valency of Oxygen is 2. 1 atom of
Na bonds with 1 Cl atom to produce NaCl, therefore, the valency of Na is 1.
The number of oxygen atoms that can be bonded with an atom multiplied by 2
determines the valency of that atom. Example: a calcium atom (Ca) bonds with
one oxygen atom (O) to produce calcium oxide (CaO). Therefore, the valency of
calcium is 1x2 = 2.
Some elements have more than one valency. This kind of valency is called
variable valency. For example, variable valency of Fe are 2 and 3. The difference
between the highest valency of an element and its active valency is considered
as latent valency. For example, in the compound FeCl, the active valency of Fe
is 2 while its highest valency is 3. Therefore, the latent valency of Fe here is
% @ — 2) = 1. Again, in FeCl,, the highest valency of Fe is used, which is 3.
§ Therefore, in this case, there is no latent valency of Fe.

86 Chemistry
Table 5.02: Valency of Different Elements
x |
P|
||
Table 5.03: Valency and Compounds of Various Atoms
Atom Atom
[Sodium [Na | 1 | Nacl |
rogine [fa [at |
‘pews [B_ | 3 (Bch
Pome eS leet
5 | Pcl,
3 FeCl, 2 | CuCl,
Oxygen |o | 2 [HO |
anne
4 | Pbcl, 4 | CH,
5 N205 4 | SO,
6 | SO;
§

Chemical Bond 87

5.3 Radicals and Their Valencies

Sometimes, a bundle of atoms from more than one element combine together,

receive positive or negative charge and act as an ion of an element. They are

called radicals.

Radicals may be of positive or negative charge. The number of charge of the

radicals is their valency. For example, three H atoms and one H* combine with

one N atom to produce the radical named Ammonium (NH,’) ion. Since its

number of charge is +1, so its valency is also 1. Charge may be positive or

negative but valency is always the number only.

Table 5.04: Radicals and Their Valencies
5.4 Chemical Formula of Compounds

The symbols and numbers belonging to the atoms that together produce a

molecule of the compound are used to express a compound. For instance, two
= hydrogen (H) atoms and an oxygen (O) atom combine into a molecule of water
g

88 Chemistry
(H,0). Here, is the chemical formula of water’s molecule. Therefore, a chemical
formula is the way of expressing the compound molecule through the symbols,
formulas and the numbers of atoms of elements and radicals. The numbers of
atoms and radicals are written in subscript.
The System of Writing Chemical Formula
a. The number of atoms there are in an element’s molecule has to be written in
subscript after its symbol. Since nitrogen molecule has two atoms, its formula is
N,. One molecule of Ozone has 3 oxygen atoms, so its formula is O,. Some
elements, like all metals, do not form any molecule, which are expressed
through their symbols only. That way, iron is written as Fe only. The same
system is applicable to all inert gases too, as in Helium, He.
b. Sometimes, a compound’s molecule is made of atoms of two different
elements. If their valency is not divisible by a common number, then, the
symbols of both the elements are written side by side and each is followed by the
valency of the other. For example, valency of aluminum is 3 and oxygen is 2.
These numbers are not divisible by a common number. In the case with any
compound consisting of these two elements, first goes the symbol of aluminum
(Al), followed by the valency of oxygen (2). Then the symbol of oxygen (O)
comes followed by the valency of aluminum (3). An example is Al,O,. In the
same way, valencies of calcium and chlorine are 2 and 1 respectively. The
formula of calcium chloride is supposed to be Ca,Cl,. Since, 1 doesn’t need
mention, so we write, CaCl,. Again, valencies of magnesium and phosphate are
2 and 3 respectively. Therefore, the formula of magnesium phosphate is
Mg, (PO,),. Noteworthy that if a radical is there in a number more than 1, then
the formula of the radical goes inside first bracket along with its number and the
valency of the other element follows outside the bracket. For example,
ammonium phosphate (NH,),PO,, aluminum sulfate Al,(SO,), etc.

ES

8

Chemical Bond 89
c. If the valencies of the two elements are divisible by a common number, then
the quotient after dividing will be writer following the formula stated in rule b.
For example, carbon dioxide is a compound made of carbon and oxygen.
Valencies of carbon and oxygen are 4 and 2 respectively. Since they can be
divided by 2, therefore, we have to write the quotients C,O,. Again, since 1 is not
necessary to mention, we will write, CO,. In the compound ferrous sulfate, the
valency of ferrous is 2 and that of sulfate ion (SO,”) is 2. Therefore, after divid-
ing them both with 2, the formula stands FeSO,. Same way, valency of boron
and nitrogen is 3. Therefore, the formula of boron nitride stands B,N, = B,N, =
BN.
5.5 Molecular Formula and Structural Formula
The formula of using symbols and the number of atoms of the kind/ kinds of
element(s) that constitute the molecule of an element or compound is called the
molecular formula or chemical formula. We have just learned about it. Again,
the formula of expressing a molecule through the symbols and bonds of atoms,
otherwise known as organization of atoms, is called the structural formula. For
example, three carbon atoms combine with eight hydrogen atoms and produce
propane (C,H,) molecule. This C,H, is the molecular or chemical formula of
propane. Again, the three carbon atoms here bond with each other like a chain
and the rest valencies get complete with hydrogen. Thus, valency of each carbon
becomes 4. The structural formula of propane is shown below:

HHH

I tl

H-C-C-C-H

I tl

HHH
Again, the molecular formula of water H,O is written in structural formula:

(e]
N\
HH

Forma -12, Chemistry Class-9-10

90 Chemistry
CH,, which is the molecular formula of methane is written in structural formula:

H

|

H-C-H

i
Each line between carbon-carbon and carbon-hydrogen above is a bond. These
are covalent bonds, you will learn about this bond in this chapter. The structural
formula tells us how many atoms of which element are there in a compound and
how they bonded with each other as well.
5.6 Octet and Duet Rules
All elements tend to make the electronic configuration of inert gases at their
outermost energy level. All inert gases other than helium have 8 electrons at their
outermost energy level. When constituting molecule, an element obtains the
electronic configuration of inert gases, holding electrons by means of donating,
accepting or sharing electrons. This is known as octet rule. The central atom C
of CH, molecule has 8 electrons in its outermost energy level. Four of these eight
electrons are carbon’s own while the rest four comes from hydrogen
(figure 5.02).
Due to some limitations of the octet rule, H ()
scientists have presented a new rule, which OO:
is called “Duet rule”. This new rule is more EB H
modern than the octet rule and it has better (oF ©) £0)
utility too. Very much like the inert gases
having 2 or 8 electrons at their outermost “See
energy level, when constituting a molecule, 4 (O)
atoms will have one or more pairs of
electrons at their outermost energy level. Fig 5.02: octed rule in Methane molecule
This is the duet rule. This means, any molecule’s atom will bear one or more
pairs of electrons at their outermost energy level.
The Be atom at the centre of BeCl, has 2 pairs or 4 electrons at its outermost «
energy level. B atom at the centre of BF, has 3 pairs or 6 electrons at its outer a

Chemical Bond 91
most energy level. C atom at the center of CH, has 4 pairs or 8 electrons at its
outermost energy level. Not only that, beside the central atom, other atoms like
Cl will have 4 pairs or electrons at its outermost energy level. Likewise F will
have 4 pairs and H will have 1 pair of electrons at their outermost energy level.
This proves, all atoms are following the duet rule. Noteworthy that, elements
1-20 in the periodic table basically follow the rules of octet and duet.
5.7 Inert Gases and their Stability
You have learned about the inert gases or Group-18 elements from the periodic
table. Electronic configuration of these gases are presented again below for your
convenience:

He(2) — 1s?

Ne(10) > 1s?2s*2p®

Ar(18) > 1s72s?2p°3s73p°

Kr(36) > 1s72s?2p°3s?73p°3d!4s74p°

Xe(54) — 1872s?2p°3s73p°3d2°4s74p°4d"5575p°

Rn(86) > 1s?2s?2p°3s73p°3d1°4s74p%4d!04f"45575p°5d"6s6p°
Helium has 2 electrons at its outermost energy level. Since it required this
number of electrons to fulfill its outermost energy level, helium’s electronic
configuration is stable. Other inert gases have 8 electrons (ns? np®) at their
outermost energy level. Any element having 8 electrons at its outermost energy
level has got the highest level of stability. Two electrons at the outermost energy
level form a duet while 8 electrons form octet. Since these gases fulfill both the
duet and octet, they are stable. This stability drives them not to donate any
electron to other elements. They do not receive electrons from other elements
either. Chemically, they lack affinity or become inert. No other element has this
fulfilled electronic configuration at its outermost energy level. As a result, they
are not that stable. They tend to fulfill the duet or octet at their outermost energy
level. That is why, they donate, accept or share electrons with other atoms and

= create mutual bonds.
8

92 Chemistry
5.8 Chemical Bonds and the Causes of their Formation
Two hydrogen atoms mutually bond together into hydrogen (H,) molecule.
Similarly, atoms of hydrogen and chlorine bond with each other to constitute
hydrogen chloride (H-Cl) molecule. In hydrogen molecule, a kind of attraction
force is effective among the two H atoms. In the hydrogen chloride also, there is
an attraction force working among the H and Cl atoms. Basically, this kind of
attraction force is chemical bond, meaning the attraction force that forces the
atoms to stay together is called chemical bond. This raises two questions- why
didn’t the atoms stay separate and why did they bond together to create the
molecule?

We have already learned that all elements tend to form the stable electronic
configuration of inert gases at their outermost energy level. When two atoms of
the same element or different element stay close to each other, they donate,
accept or share electrons in order to assume the electronic configuration of the
nearest inert gas. Thus, they create the chemical bond among themselves.
Therefore, it can be said that the reason of chemical bonds is the tendency of the
atoms to assume stability of electronic configuration at their outermost energy
level.

5.9 Cations and Anions

We know, at normal situation, the number of positive charged proton in the
nucleus of an atom is complemented by the same number of negative charged
electrons outside its nucleus. As a result, the atom becomes charge neutral. If one
or more electron from the outer energy level is removed from such a charge
neutral atom, its neutrality will no longer exist. Then, it will turn into an ion with
positive charge. Such ion with positive charge is called cation. Usually, the
elements or metals at the left side of periodic table donate one or more electrons
from their outermost energy level to gain the electronic configuration of inert
gases and become cations. For example, lithium atom donates one electron from
its outermost energy level in order to get the configuration like helium and ,
produces lithium cation (Li*). The figure below shows it. s

Chemical Bond 93
Similarly, Na atom donates an electron from its outermost energy level in order
to get the configuration like neon gas and produces Sodium cation (Na’). (Fig:
5.04)
Can you tell why do the metals
donate electrons to produce e
cations? ° ©) = () + 0
We know, in any period of the
periodic table, elements Li Li*
gradually lose their metallic Fig 5.03: Formation of cation Lithium (Li*)
property as we progress from left to right. Simultaneously, the non-metallic
property increases in them in this case. It means the elements on the left side of
a period are metals and on the right side are non-metals. Again the more
rightward we progress in a period; the size of atom also decreases. This is the
reason why the metals are larger than other elements. The outermost energy level
of metals usually contains 1, 2 or 3 electrons. Due to the bigger size of the
metals, the outermost energy level is comparatively far from their nucleus which
implies weaker attraction force toward nucleus or weaker bond. As a result, their
ionization energy is far lower. As a result, if a bit of force is applied, these metals
donate one or more electrons from their outermost energy level and turn into
cation. On the other hand, the
00 OO non-metals don’t create
O _ Cations. They are there at the
s ©) SO mS Ss + é right side of any period. They
© usually have 5, 6 or 7
-— 00 electrons at their outermost
Sodan Sodium ion energy level. Being smaller
than metals in their size, the
Fig 5.04; Formation of sodium cation (Na*) outermost energy level of
these elements stay comparatively closer to their nucleus and undergo stronger
s attraction force. That means their ionization energy is also stronger. It requires
™ stronger force to remove one or more electrons from such elements which is not

94 Chemistry
there in a normal chemical reaction. That is why the non-metals do not create
cations.
So, what kind of change occurs in the outermost energy level of the non-metals?
Since their outermost energy level usually lacks 1, 2 or 3 electrons to become
octet, they easily accept them from other elements and assume the electronic
configuration of their nearest inert gas. In other words, their electron affinity is
high. This acceptance of electron from other elements increases the number of
electrons than protons in them and the negative charge in them as well. Thus, in
general, the atoms of non-metals are negative charge. These negative charge
non-metal atoms are known as anions. For example, Cl atom accepts one
electron to reach the electronic configuration of argon (Ar) gas and thus
produces chloride (CI) ion. (Fig 5.05)

© OO

OO OO

ome) 656 +O @ 8H OO
OO OO
OO OO
Chlorine atom Chloride ion
Fig 5.05: Formation of chloride anion (Cl)

5.10 Ionic Bond or Electrovalent Bond
We have already learned that the metals having lower ionization energy easily
give away electrons from their outermost energy level and turn into positive
charge cations. On the other hand, the non-metals having higher ionization
energy easily receive electrons into their outermost energy level and turn into
negative charge anions. An electrostatic force remains effective on these
opposite charge cation and anion. This electrostatic or Coulomb force keeps
them together. The attraction force by which cation and anion formed by S
exchanging electrons are held within the atoms of a compound is called ionic  “

Chemical Bond 95
bond. For example, Na atom donates one electron from its outermost energy
level and forms Na* cation with its 4 electrons at the outermost energy level. On
the other hand, Cl atom receives one electron donated by Na in its outermost
energy level and forms Cl anion with its 4 electrons at the outermost energy
level. These two mutually opposite charge are attracted towards each other in a
bond of electrostatic force. This attraction force is ionic bond. In other words, in
the chemical bonding between a metal and a non metal, the bond that is enforced
when the elements turn into positive and negative charge is called the ionic bond.
The compound that has ionic bond is called ionic compound.
Na — ‘Nate
cl+e ——-» (Cl
Na + Cl———_ Na + Cl = Nacl
o Na © Cl Nat* oo Cl
OO OO MO OO
Q
OO OO OO OO
OO Oo
Sodium atom Chlorine atom Sodium chloride
Fig 5.06: Formation of sodium chloride
In the MgO molecule, Mg donates 2 electrons to get the electronic configuration
of Ne and become Mg" with 8 electrons.
Mg ——— Mg” 4+ 2e
The O atom accepts those 2 electrons to get the electronic configuration of Ne
and become O* with 8 electrons.
x Now, Mg” and O* come closer to form an ionic bond.
>
NN

96 Chemistry
In the NaH molecule, Na atom donates an electron to get the electronic
configuration of inert gas and become Na* with 8 electrons.

O0+2e ——> 0?

OO hg?* @O~_ 02"
te OO
—
ef
OO OO
- CO ee,
Magnesium atom Oxygen atom Magnesium Oxide

Fig 5.06: Formation of Magnesium oxide
The H atom accepts that electron to get the electronic configuration of inert gas
and become H- with 2 electrons.

Na ————?>Natte

H+e ——~}H
Now, Nat and H- come closer to form an ionic bond.
In the CaO molecule, Ca atom donates two electrons to get the electronic
configuration of inert gas and become Ca” with 8 electrons.

Ca ——+ Ca + 2e°
The O atom accepts those electrons to get the electronic configuration of inert
gas and become O- with 8 electrons.

O + 2e°9 ————» 07
Now, Ca”* and O* come closer to form an ionic bond.
Notable, the metals belonging to Group 1 and 2 and the non-metals of Group 16
and 17 of the periodic table usually commit themselves to ionic bonding. Each
rule has some exceptions. Here in this case, Al of Group-13 commits itself to
ionic bonding. Other elements do not show this tendency to donate or accept
electrons as they have too many electrons at their outermost energy level. As

2

ionic bonding takes place through electrostatic force, it is very strong. R

Chemical Bond o7
5.11 Covalent Bonds

You have just learned how a metal and a non-metal commit to ionic bonding in
order to form compounds. That cannot be possible in the case of a reaction
where both the elements are non-metals. So, how do they come together? Yes,
two non-metal atoms can combine into a molecule too, like when two chlorine
atoms are kept close, they bond chemically together into a chlorine molecule.
But how is it possible for each of them has 7 electrons at their outermost energy
level?

The electronic configuration of Chlorine is ¢] (17) + 1s? 2s? 2p* 3s? 3p°
Since it has 7 electrons at its outermost energy level, chlorine will tend to receive
electron instead of donating. But in the absence of donator atom, the receiving
will not happen also. Therefore, when two chlorine atoms come closer, 1
electron from the outermost energy level of each comes together as a pair and the
pair of electrons positions itself in between the two nucleuses of the two atoms.
This is known as electron sharing. Thus, both the atoms assume the electronic
configuration of inert gas at their outermost energy level. The result is that the
two nucleuses of chlorine cannot leave each other or remain in a bonding. The
kind of bonding is called covalent bond. Therefore, it can be said, in a chemical
bonding of two non-metal atoms, the atoms create a pair of electrons by sharing
one each from their outermost energy level. Both of the atoms continue to share
the pair together in a bond which is called covalent bond. The compounds that
are endowed with covalent bond are called covalent compounds. In each
covalent bonding, two electrons participate. The covalent bonding is denoted by
a line (-) and the electrons are denoted by dot (.) or cross (x) marks.

A chlorine molecule has two chlorine atoms and its formula is Cl,. Many
non-metals remain as molecules, like hydrogen (H,), oxygen (O,), nitrogen (N,),
sulfur (S,), phosphorus (P,), bromine (Br,), Iodine (I,), fluorine (F,) etc.

Forma -13, Chemistry Class-9-10

98 Chemistry
Covalent Bond in Hydrogen: The electronic configuration of hydrogen is
H(1) > 1s?. When 2 H atoms come close, both of them share one electron from
their outermost energy level each. That means, they create a pair of electrons
which makes the configuration same as inert gases. This creates (H-H) covalent
bond.

H-+-H ———>>H-H
©.
@® }+ =p O
()
Hydrogen atom Hydrogen atom Hydrogen molecule
Fig 5.08: Formation of covalent bond in Hydrogen molecule

Covalent Bond in O, Molecule:The electronic configuration of oxygen is
O(8) — 1s? 2s? 2p*It lacks two electrons in its outermost energy level than that
of inert gas. When two O atoms come close, both of them share two electrons
from their outermost energy level each. That means, they create two pairs of
electrons which makes the configuration same as inert gases. This creates (O=O)
covalent bond. Here the number of bond is two.

CO. OO. OO. OO.
“ns.
$ | 8g 3 me & e 8
Led
oxygen aton oxygen aton oxygen molecule
Generally,
O+0O ———» 0-0 oF, 0,
Fig 5.09: Formation of covalent bond in Oxygen molecule ~
S
N

Chemical Bond 99

Covalent bond is also available in compound’s molecule made of more than one

non-metallic element. For example, in water’s molecule, O atoms share one of

their electrons from outermost energy level with one electron of H atom. Thus

two (O-H) covalent bonds are created and water’s molecule is structured.

OO OO
6 O H—o CO
2H + fo) |
H
Fig 5.10: Two (O-H) covalent bonds in water molecule

In the H,O molecule, two pairs or 4 electrons of O atom didn’t participate in any

bonding. However, if required, they also can create bonds which you will learn

in higher class.

O atom is capable to participate in both ionic and covalent bonds. Na atom

however is never able to participate in covalent bonding; it always participates

in ionic bonding only. O atom can accept 2 electrons from other elements in an

ionic bond and can share 2 electrons with another element in a covalent bond. Na

atom, on the other hand is capable only to donate electrons to other elements in

an ionic bond.

Molecules of elements with covalent bond (N,, O,, Cl,, Br,, I, etc.) are called

covalent molecules and compounds with covalent bonds (CH,, CO,, HCl, NH,

etc.) are called covalent compound molecules. Many covalent molecules (CO,,

NH,, O,, CL.) remain in gaseous state in normal temperature and pressure. Some

of them remain in liquid state (H,O, C,H,OH etc.) in the same situation while

some others (C,,H,, 5,, L) are found in solid state. When two covalent molecules
« come close, a weak attraction force remains effective among them. This force is
= called Vander wall’s attraction force. The covalent molecules remain attached

100 Chemistry
with each other due to this attraction force. That’s why, it is easy to alienate them
with a bit of force. Melting and boiling points of these molecules are also low.
Again, Vander Wall’s attraction force is hardly effective on gaseous covalent
molecules. They remain as gaseous single molecule due to this.

5.12 Characteristics of Ionic and Covalent Bonds

(a) Melting Point and Boiling Point

The compound consisting of ionic bond is called ionic compound and the
compound consisting of covalent bond is called covalent compound. The
melting and boiling points of ionic compound are higher than those of covalent
compound. Ionic compounds contain positive and negative charges which
remain tightly connected with each other. Many such positive and negative
charges are organized in an ionic compound in a three dimensional way to create
a crystal. These results in a higher inter atomic force among them and that
makes it tough to alienate them from each other. Therefore, they require higher
amount of heat energy to melt or to boil. Inter atomic force in covalent
compounds is comparatively weaker as it is constituted because of Vander
Wall’s force. Therefore, they can be boiled or melted with a lower amount of
heat energy. You can easily experiment this with ionic compounds like NaCl,
CuSO,, NaNO,, KCl, CaCl, etc. and covalent compounds like glucose, sugar, or
even water. All the experiments will prove the boiling point and melting point of
ionic compounds higher than those of covalent compounds

(b) Solubility

Take some water in a beaker or a glass jar. Add some NaCl, an ionic compound
and continue to stir it. Then, d the same thing with washing soda
(Na,CO,.10H,O), Copper Sulfate (CuSO,5H,O) or some other ionic
compounds; you’ll find them all soluble in water. However, you’!l not find the
same result with silver chloride. That means apart from a few exceptions, ionic -
compounds are soluble in water. Try the same experiment with covalent S

Chemical Bond 101
compounds like naphthalene, mustard oil, kerosene etc. covalent compounds.
You will find none of them soluble in water. Although there are few exceptions
like sugar, glucose etc, most covalent compounds are not soluble in water.
Why are some covalent compounds soluble in water? The reason lies in the bond
structure of water. Water is a covalent compound itself where two hydrogen
atoms are connected with one oxygen atom by electron sharing. But since
oxygen is more electronegative than hydrogen, the two electrons of covalent
bond of water move toward oxygen a bit. As a result, oxygen atom becomes
partially negative charge while hydrogen becomes a partially positive charge,
meaning a partial positive and a partial negative =
end is created in water molecule. This kind of 0 ‘a 5
charged covalent compound is called polar ee
covalent compound. So, water is a polar soluble. O
Remember, the attraction force of an atom when 4 XX
it tries to attract the electron pair of a covalent H
bonding to itself is called the electronegativity H
of an atom. The figure 5.10 uses + 8 (plus delta) 6 + (e) +
and —5 (minus delta) to express positive and
negative charges. ‘ . se oe
Fig 5.11: + 6 and —6 indicate
When ionic compound is added to water, the _ partial positive and partial
polar solvent, water molecule’s cation attracts Negative charge
the anion of ionic compound. The same action takes place between the anion of
water molecule and cation of ionic compound’s molecule. When this attraction
force becomes greater than that between the cation and anion of the ionic
compound, then they become alienated from each other and become surrounded
by water molecule. Thus ionic compound is dissolved into water.
NaCl is an ionic compound and being so, it gets dissolved in polar solvent, water.
Methanol (CH,OH) is a polar compound and so it gets dissolved in polar solvent,
water. Since methane (CH,) is neither ionic compound nor polar compound, so it
= does not get dissolved in water.
N

102 Chemistry
On the other hand, there is no cation and anion in covalent compounds. They
don’t become attracted or distracted by cation and anion of water. As a result,
they do not break down as ions in water or get dissolved.
However, partial polarity is seen in some covalent compounds like ethanol
(C,H,OH). These covalent compounds only get dissolved in water.
(c) Electrical Conductivity
Take some water solution of edible salt (NaCl) y
in a beaker and some water solution of sugar in
another. Now put two graphite rods or any other
kind of metallic rod into each solution and 9 ee E
finally connect battery and bulb to each of them WoO AR
accordingly with the figure 5.12. You will see,
the bulb in salt water solution is lighted while = ey at
the one with sugar-water solution is not. That =
shows the salt water solution is able to conduct Fig 5.12: Electrical conductivity
electricity while sugar water is unable. You may of water solution of edible salt(NaCl)
come to decide that ionic compounds in solution with water are electricity
conductive while covalent compounds are not.
You can also guess the reason very well. Electro-conductivity requires alienated
positive and negative ions. In the salt water solution, Na* and CI act as positive
and negative ions respectively and conduct electricity. As in water solution,
ionic compounds remain as alienated cations and anions, therefore, all water
solutions with ionic compounds are electro-conductive.
On the other hand, covalent compounds do not conduct electricity in water
solution as they do not carry alienated ions.
co
3
nN

Chemical Bond 103
In CaCl, solution, there is Ca’* and Cl. HCl solution contains H* and CTI.
Therefore they can conduct electricity. Glucose (C,H,,O,) does not carry any
ion, so it does not conduct electricity.
Group Work
{ Formation of Crystals b
_ ee , Each group will take two beakers. One beaker
La y y aiS a hig will have salt and another, sugar. Add water
A ik, aint ay || to both and heat them a bit and dissolve as
at ye 7 SF | much salt (NaCl) and sugar (C,,H,,0,,) as
one ee? fe Py possible. Now preserve both beakers for
“te A wv ie. | some days along with a cotton liner hanging
| a en inside each. After some days, pick up the
sgh gee li will find salt ( . via
ea) % oe iners- you ind salt and sugar crystals
Be A 3 <eqee . have formed around them. Usually, all ionic
i sl SS == | compounds remain as crystals. On the other
Fig 5.13: Crystals of salt hand, though some form crystals, usually,
ati uae covalent compounds are not available in
__ crystal form.
5.13 Metallic Bonds
We have seen that, a metal and a non metal element create ionic bond among
themselves while two non-metal elements create covalent bond among
themselves. But when two metallic elements come closer together, there is
created a metallic bond. It means, the attraction force that keeps the atoms in a
piece of metal interconnected is called the metallic bond. You have obviously
3 seen copper wire, knife, scissors, window grill or gold ornaments etc. Numerous
AQ

104 Chemistry
atoms of the same element are interconnected by means of metallic bond inside
these things.

The outermost energy level of each metallic atom usually contains 1, 2 or 3

electrons in its electronic configuration. Since the size of them is bigger than the

non-metallic elements of the same period, the attraction force of nucleus on them

is less strong. As a result, atoms donate one or more electrons from their

outermost energy level and turn into positive ion. This positive ion is called the

atomic core. These atomic cores are three dimensionally organized in a metal’s

lattice.

Delocalised electron Atomic core
© : ) ) )
@) 0)
Oo O.@
S © © eS)
OO Oe® ©
Fig 5.14: Metallic bonds

In the metal lattice, the donated electrons come out of the orbit and move freely

at the center of the atomic core. Such electrons are called Delocalized Electrons.

They become electrons of all the metallic ions of that piece of metal instead of

remaining under a particular atom. It can be said that the ions remain organized

like a lattice in the sea of electrons. When a delocalized electron is situated

amidst two metallic ions, both the ions are attracted toward the electron with

electrostatic force. This causes the two ions to remain connected, which is the

basic feature of metallic bond. These delocalized electrons are responsible for

conductivity of heat and electricity. Similarly, they are the reasons for metal’s

flexibility, brightness, and charge-resistance etc. features of metal. &
S
NQ

Chemical Bond 105
Electro Conductivity of Metals
All metals are electrical conductor. The delocalized electrons in the metal lattice
are the carrier of electricity in them. If we connect the two ends of a piece of
metal to positive (+) and negative (-) edges of a battery, the electrons will rush
from the negative edge to the positive edge. That means, there will be flow of
electricity from positive end to negative end. There would not have been any
electricity flow in the absence of delocalized electrons.

7 @ © @ @ @

ae er
+{[O@ ©
) @
© a” o> oe & ©
&
tOO@O@O@
Fig 5.15: Mechanism of electrical conductivity of Metal.

Heat Conductivity of Metal
When you heat an end of a piece of metal on fire, you’ll find that the other end
also is getting warmer fast. It means, metals are heat conductors too. The reason
is again delocalized electrons. When heat is applied, these electrons receive
energy and increase their velocity. They rush from the heated end toward the
comparatively cooler end. Thus heat is conducted in a metal.
Forma -14, Chemistry Class-9-10

106 Chemistry
(@) Individual Task
/ Identifying ionic and covalent compounds among locally available \
products
Put edible salt, kerpoor, naphthalene, washing soda etc. in different
beakers containing water. Stir them with glass tube and mix them
properly. Those which got dissolved in water are ionic compounds and
those which did not are covalent compounds. You can divide all
\._ compounds into two categories in the same process :
(?) Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1, What is the name of the attraction force which keeps the atoms bonded in a
molecule?
a. Electron affinity b. Electronegativity
c. chemical bond d. Van Der Waals force
2. The formation of which molecule below attains at the electronic
configuration of neon?
a. KF b. CaS
c. MgO d. NaCl
S

Chemical Bond 107
Answer the questions 3 and 4 on the basis of the following electronic
configurations:
O
OO OO
O O
@ Q
O
OO 00
OO
A B D
3. Which valency is impossible for the element marked by D?
a. 2 b.3
c.4 d.6
4. The element B
i. forms two types of bonds
ii. donates electron to A
iii. Dissolves in water combining with A
Which of the followings is correct?
a. iii b. ii and iii
c.ianditi — d. i, ii and iii
5. Which of the followings denotes the formula of aluminum sulfate?
a. Al,(SO,); b. Also,
c. Al(SO,); d, ALSO,
6. What kind of compound is calcium oxide?
a. covalent b. ionic
c. metallic d. polar
s

108 Chemistry
7. Which of the following compounds is not electro conductive in water
solution?
a. NaCcl b. CaCl,
c. Hcl d. C,H,,0, (Glucose)
Creative Questions
1.
e) 'e) OO
@
(@)) (@)
QO © @
Q fe) on
x Y
(Here X and Y are symbolic. Not symbols of any element)
a. What is covalent bond?
b. Why is there a difference in the size between Na and Na+ ions?
c. What kind of bond is there in the compound YX of the stem? Explain.
d. Though X is capable of forming both covalent and ionic bonds, element
Y never goes into covalent bonds — Explain with logics.
2. Read the following stem and answer the questions
(a) CH, (b) Nacl = (c) CCl, (d) CH,OH
a. What is covalent bond?
b. Why is water a polar compound? Explain.
c. Which compound of the stem forms crystal? Explain
d.The compound (b) of the stem is soluble in water but compound (c) is ~
not. Analyze 8

Chapter Six
Concept of Mole and Chemical Counting
~~
RB) yh all
fi Dai | oa
Chemistry basically deals with two kinds of analysis- qualitative analysis and
quantitative analysis. Identification of an element and its properties is qualitative
analysis whereas determining the amount of a substance is known as
quantitative analysis. Quantitative analysis deals with calculations which
altogether are denoted by the term chemical counting. These calculations usually
use mole as the unit to determine the amount of a substance. In this chapter, we
will discuss what is mole, how to use mole in calculations, how to determine the
cubic measurement from mole etc.
=
S

110 Chemistry
® By the end of the chapter, we will be able to:
¢ do the simple mathematical calculations using the concept of mole
* prepare solutions of certain concentration
¢ determine the percent composition of elements present in the
compounds using the given data
¢ determine the empirical and atomic formula using the percent
composition
* write chemical equations and balance the equation using symbol,
formula and valency of elements and radicals
* solve mass related mathematical problems of reactant and product
from the quantitative significance of chemical reaction
¢ calculate the percent composition of lattice water of copper sulphate
¢ do measurement of chemical substances using balance

Concept of Mole and Chemical Counting lil
6.1 Mole
The word mole is the unit of any chemical measurement. Suppose,
12 nos of O, = 1 dozen of O,
100 nos of O, = 1 hundred of O,
1000 nos of O, = 1 thousand of O,
Similarly, 6.02 x 10% nos O, = 1 mole O,
1 mole atom contains 6.02x 10” atoms
1 mole molecule contains 6.02 x 10” molecules
1 mole ion contains 6.02x10” ions
Therefore, the number 6.02x10”? is used in the case with atoms, molecules and
ions etc. This number is called Avogadro number.
The amount of a chemical substance that contains as many as the Avogadro
number (6.02x10”) of molecules, atoms or ions is called the mole of the
substance, For example, 12 grams of C contains 6.02x10” number of C atoms,
Therefore,
12 grams of C = 1 mole C atom.
Again, 18 grams of H,O contains 6.02x10¥ number of H,O molecules.
Therefore,
18 grams of H,O = | mole H,O.
The expression of atomic mass of atoms and the molecular mass of molecules
into gram unit is called one mole of a chemical substance.
The Process of Determining the Molecular Mass of a Molecule
The summation of atomic mass of all atoms that constitute a molecule denotes
the molecular mass of the molecule. Cl, molecule, for example, has two Cl
atoms.
Therefore, the molecular mass of Cl, = atomic mass of Clx 2 =2 x35.5=71
x One mole Cl, =71 g Cl.
S
aq

112 Chemistry
A NaCl molecule has 1 Na atom and 1 Cl atom. Therefore, the molecular mass
of NaCl = atomic mass of Na + atomic mass of C] = 23 + 35.5 = 58.5
One mole of NaCl = 58.5 g NaCl
CuSO,.5H,O contains 01 Cu, 01 S, 09 O and 10 H atoms. Therefore, the
molecular mass of CuSO,.5H,O = atomic mass of Cu x 1 + atomic mass of
S x 1+ atomic mass of O x 9 + atomic mass of H x 10
=1x 635+1%x 32+9x16+10x1
= 249.5
A mole of CuSO,5H,0 = 249.5 g CuSO,5H,0
@) Examples
Problem: What is the mass of 1 H,O molecule?
Solution: We know, 1 mole H,O = 18 g H,O = 6.023x10” no of H,O
molecule
Here, the molecular mass of 6.02x10” H,O molecules = 18 g
8 a
Therefore, the mass of 1 H,O molecule = as g =2.99x 10°73,
Problem: How many H.SO, molecules are there in 1g H,SO,?
Solution: We know, 1 mole H,SO, = 98 g H,SO, = 6.023x10¥ no of H,SO,
molecule
Here, 98 g H,SO, = 6.023x10” no of H,SO, molecules
Therefore, the mass of 1g H,SO,= Sossxio = 6.14x107' H,SO, molecules.
Problem: Calculate the mole of H,O present in Sg H,O.
Solution: We know, 1 mole H,O = 18 g H,O = 6.023x10* no of H,O
molecule
Here, 18 g H,O = Imole H,O
1g H,0 = = mole HO .
Therefore, 5 g H,O = is = 0.277 mole H,0. s

Concept of Mole and Chemical Counting 113
Individual Task: Determine the number of H, S and O atoms in | g H,SO J
6.1.1 Molar Volume of Gas
The volume that 1 mole of a gaseous substance occupies is called the molar
volume of that gas. 0°C temperature and 1 atm pressure together is called the
standard temperature and pressure or standard condition. The volume of 1 mole
gas in this standard condition is 22.4 liter.
If n = mole number
w= mass in gram
V = Volume in liter
N = Number of molecules
M = Molecular mass
_ w
<M
_ Vv
Or, = "224
Or _ N
> 76.023 x 10
@) Example
Problem: How many molecules are there in 1 liter CO, gas in standard
temperature and pressure?
Solution: 1 mole CO, = 44 g CO, = 6.023x10” no CO, molecules = 22.4 liter
CO, gas in standard temperature and pressure
In standard temperature and pressure 22.4 liter CO, gas contains = 6.023x10* no
CO, molecules
Therefore, 1 liter CO, gas contains = sozssa0 = 2.69 x10?? molecules
| Individual Task: How many H atoms are there in 5 liter CH, gas in standard)
\_ condition? )
Forma -15, Chemistry Class-9-10

114 Chemistry
Problem: What is the volume of 5 mole CO, gas in standard temperature and
pressure?
Solution: Here, it is given, mole n = 5, we require to find out volume V =?
We know n=——
22.4

Or5=——

22.4
Therefore V = 5x 22.4 = 112 liter
Individual Task: What is the volume of 5 CO, molecules in standard condition?
Problem: What is the volume of 10 g Hydrogen gas in standard condition?
Solution: Here, it is given, mass w = 10 g, molecular mass of H,, M = 2. We
require to find out volume V =?

_w_ iV

n= M224

10. ~V

2° 224
Therefore V = 22.4 x 22.4 liter = 112 liter
6.1.2 Mole and Molecular Formula
There is a relation between mole and molecular formula. The quantity in gram
determined when we express the molecular mass of a substance gotten from its
molecular formula is called 1 mole of that substance. For example, molecular
formula of water is H,O and its molecular mass is 18. Therefore 18 gram is
called 1 gram molecular mass water or 1 mole water. It is clear here that, mole is
also the gram molecular mass.
Molecular formula provides some other information too. For example, in the
case with HO:

1. H,O is water.

2. The formula of 1 molecule water is H,O. Sy

g

Concept of Mole and Chemical Counting 115
3. The formula of 1 mole water is H,O.
4. 1 molecule H,O contains 2 hydrogen atoms and an oxygen atom.
5. 1 mole H,O molecule contains 2 mole hydrogen and 1 mole oxygen
atoms.
6. In 1 mole H,O molecule, the mass of H atom is 1x2 = 2 g and the mass
of O atom is 16x1 =16 g. Therefore, the total mass of 1 mole H,O
molecule is 2 + 16 = 18 g.
7. In 1 mole H,O molecule, the number of H atom is 6.023 x 107x
2 = 1.20 x 10” and the number of O atom is 6.023 x 10¥x 1 = 6.023 x
10” and the number of H,O molecule is 6.023 x 107.
6.1.3 Molar Solution
Suppose a solute is dissolved in a solvent. At a fixed temperature, if one mole
solute is dissolved in 1 liter solution, then that solution is called molar solution
or 1 molar solution. If 2 mole solute is dissolved in 1 mole solution, that solution
is called 2 molar solution.
An example can make us clear about solute, solvent and solution. Take about
half a glass of water. Add some edible salt to the water and mix it with a spoon.
You will see the salt is no more visible in the water after a while. This mix of salt
and water is a solution. Here water is the solvent and salt is the solute. Liquids
such as water, acid, alcohol etc. are
necessary in preparing solutions. In this
chapter, chiefly we shall use water as the
solvent. When water is used as solvent in
° : . dilute concentrated
a solution, the solution is called water . solution
. solution
solution.
Solution = Solute + Solvent
You may come across the terms Dilute
x Solution and Concenicaled . Solution Fig 6.01: Dilute and concentrated solution
S frequently. 10 gram salt mixed in 250 mL

116 Chemistry
water is a solution. Again, 15 gram salt in 250 gram water is also a solution. The
one with lesser amount of salt is dilute solution while the other is concentrated
solution. Again, 10 gram salt is mixed in two glasses containing 250 mL and 200
mL water each. The solution containing more water is dilute solution while the
one with less water is concentrated solution. Similarly in the laboratory, smaller
amount of solute in a fixed amount of solvent creates dilute solution and greater
amount of solute in the same amount of solvent creates concentrated solution.
Actually, there is no specific rule to determine which is dilute and which
concentrated solution is.
The number of mole dissolved in every liter of solution at a certain temperature
is called the molarity of the solution. If 2 mole solute is dissolved in a one liter
solution at a fixed temperature, then the molarity of that solution is 2. When
there is 0.5 mole solute in 1 liter solution, that is semi-molar solution and when
that same 1 liter solution has 0.1 mole solute, that is called decimolar solution.
The molarity of a decimolar solution is 0.1 while 0.5 is the molarity of a
semimolar solution.
Preparation of Solutions with Different Molarity
There is necessity of preparing molar, semimolar and decimolar solutions in the
laboratory. It can be done easily following various steps. Firstly, you need to
select a volumetric flask. Secondly, you need to weigh the substance that you are
interested to prepare the solution of and put it in the flask. Thirdly, you need to
add some water and shake the flask to prepare the solution. Then, you need to fill
water to a certain mark in the flask. There is relationship in between molarity of
solution, volume of solution, mass and molecular mass of the solute.
Mass of solute in gram unit
_ molarity of solution x volume of solution in milimeter unit x molecular mass
~ 1000
Here, if we take Mass of solute in gram unit =w

Molarity of solution = S

volume of solution in milimeter unit = V S

Concept of Mole and Chemical Counting 117
molecular mass of solute = M
Then w = —
To solve the molarity related problem, we can use the above equation
@) Example
Problem: How will you prepare 0.2 molar NaCl solution in a volumetric flask
of 250 mL?
Solution: Given, volume of solution V = 250mL, molarity of solution S = 0.2
molar, molecular mass of NaCl = 23 + 35.5 = 58.5
Therefore, 1 mole NaCl = 58.5 g
0.2 molar NaCl solution in 1 liter or 1000mL requires 58.5x 0.2 = 11.7 g
250 mL solution requires = — = 2.925 ¢
Add 2.925 gram NaCl in a 250 mL volumetric flask. Pour 250 mLwater inside
the flask. That will complete the preparation of 0.2 molar solution.
Alternative Solution
We know, w = am
1000
_ 0.2 x250x58.5 _
Therefore, w = T0000 =: 2-925 g
Now, follow the procedure of adding the solute and solvent to complete the
preparation.
Problem: How much Na,CO, is there in a 2 liter 0.1 molar Na,CO, solution?
Solution: Molecular mass of Na,CO, = 23x2 + 12 + 16x3 = 106
Therefore, the amount of Na2CO3 necessary in a 1 liter 1 molar solution
=106g
the amount of Na,CO, necessary in a 1 liter 0.1 molar solution = 10.6 g
x the amount of Na,CO, necessary in a 2 liter 0.1 molar solution = 10.6 x2g = 21.2 g
S
aq

118 Chemistry
Alternative way
_ SVM
= 1000
0.1 2000 x 106g
Ww = ——
1000
w= 2129
Problem: What is the molarity of the solution when there is 20 g Na,CO, in 250
mL solution?
Solution: Molecular mass of Na,CO3= 23 x 2+ 12+ 16x 3=106
1 molarity in 1 liter solution requires 106 gram
1 molarity in 250mL solution requires a = 26.5 gram
26.5 g Na,CO3 in 250mL makes the molarity 1 molar
1 g Na,CO; in 250mL makes the molarity = molar
20 g Na,CO; in 250mL makes the molarity = = 0.75 molar
Alternative Way
SVM
w=—
1000
29 = 5x250x106
1000

S = 0.75 molar
Problem: What is the volume of the solution in millimeter when 20 g
Na,CO; is dissolved in 0.75 molar Na,CO; solution?
Solution: Given here, S=0.75 molar, w= 20 g,M=23x2+12+16x3
= 106, V=?
We know, w = pum

1000
_ 0.75 x106 BS
20 on 8

Concept of Mole and Chemical Counting 119
_ 1000 x20 __
V=o7sxi06 — CDOmL
Problem: A 250 mL solution has 20g substance dissolved in it and its molarity
is 0.75. What is the molecular mass of the solute in the solution?
Solution: Given here, w = 20 g, V = 250mL, S = 0.7 molar, M=?
We know,
_ sum
Ww = Jo00
20= 0.75 x250 xM
1000
M= 1000 «20 = 106
0.75 x250
Problem: How will you prepare 200mL semimolar Na2CO; solution?
Solution: V =200mL, S = 0.5 molar, M = 23x2 + 12 + 16x3 = 106
We know,
SVM
w =—
1000
0.5 x200 «106
= CO 10.69
Now, take 10.6 g Na,COsin a pot and pour 200mL water in it. Thus we can
prepare the solution.
@) Individual Task
“Task: Find out the molarity of the solution when there is 4 g NaOH in a 100mL\
solution.
Task: Find out the molarity of the solution when there is 4 g HCl in a 100mL
\ solution. J
J
8

120 Chemistry
6.2 The Percentage Composition of Elements in Compounds
The gram measurement of an element present in a 100 gram compound is called
the percentage composition of that element. The molecular formula of a
compound is the source to determine the percentage composition of elements
various in the compound.
Percent composition of an element in a compound
__ atomic mass of element x number of atoms x 100 %
~ molecular mass of compound

Example: The percent composition of H and Cl in HCI is shown below:
Molecular mass of HCl = 1 + 35.5 = 36.5
In 36.5 gram HCl the amount of H = 1 gram
In lgram HCI the amount of H = = gram
In 100 gram HC] the amount of H = == = 2.74 gram
So, the percent composition of H in HCl is 2.74%.
Again,

In 36.5 gram HCl the amount of Cl = 35.5 gram

In 1gram HCI the amount of Cl = = gram

In 100 gram HCI the amount of Cl= =" = 97.26 gram

So, the percent composition of H in HCl is 97.26%.
It can also be calculated the percent composition of Cl is (100-2.74) = 97.26%.
@) Examples
Problem: Find out the percent composition of H and O in H,O.
Solution: The mass of 1 mole H.O =2 + 16=18 gram Se

In 18 gram H,O the amount of H = 2 gram R

Concept of Mole and Chemical Counting 121
In 1gram H,O the amount of H = = gram
In 100 gram H,0O the amount of H = = = 11.11 gram
So, the percent composition of H in HCl is 11.11%.
Again, the percent composition of O is (100-11.11) = 88.89%.
We can determine the same percent composition applying values in the
formula of percentage composition.
Percent composition of an element in a compound
__ atomic mass of element x number of atoms x 100 0%
~ molecular mass of compound °
The molecular mass of H,SO, = (1x2 + 32x1 + 16x4) = 98
Here, atomic mass of H is 1 and number of H atoms is 2
Therefore, the percent composition of H = — % = 2.04%
Atomic mass of S is 32 and number of S atoms is 1
Therefore, the percent composition of S = em = 32.65%
Atomic mass of O is 16 and number of O atoms is 4
Therefore, the percent composition of O = ee = 65.3%
Problem: Find out the percent composition of aluminum, sulfur and
oxygen in Al,(SO,)3
Solution: The molecular mass of Al,(SO,)3 = 27x2 + (32x1 + 16x4) x3 =342
the percent composition of Al = — % = 15.78%
the percent composition of S = ae % = 28.07%
the percent composition of O = — % = 56.14%
©) Do it Yourself
| Task: Find out the percent composition of Na and Cl in NaCl.
Forma -16, Chemistry Class-9-10

122 Chemistry
6.2.1 Percent Composition and Empirical Formula
We are already familiar with the term Molecular Formula as we have learned
what it is and have applied it to determine the number of atoms of elements in a
molecule. The idea of empirical formula has been introduced to express the ratio
of various atoms in a molecule. For example, there are two H atoms and two O
atoms in hydrogen peroxide (H,O,). Therefore, the ratio of the atoms in this
compound is 1:1. That means, the empirical formula of H,O, is HO. The
formula that shows the ratio of the number of atoms of different elements present
in a molecule is called the empirical formula. We can easily determine the
empirical formula of a compound if we know the percent composition of
elements in it and its relative atomic mass.
Determining Empirical Formula from the Percent Composition
The steps required to determine empirical formula from the percent composition
are described below:
Step 1: The percent composition of the elements to be divided by its atomic
number.
Step 2: Use the smallest quotient to divide the other quotients and the multiply
these new quotients with a common nearest number to turn them into integers.
Step 3: Apply these integers to the right of respective symbol of elements. That
forms the empirical formula.
Step 4: Do not write anything if the integer gotten is 1.
Suppose, in a compound, the percent compositions of carbon and hydrogen are
92.31% and 7.69% respectively.
Firstly, let’s divide the percent compositions with their atomic numbers.
92.31

C= a 7.69

H= 72 -7,69
Now divide the quotients with the smallest of quotients:

c= 78 4 x

~~ 7.69 8

Concept of Mole and Chemical Counting 123
H= 769 1
Now write these values alongside the symbols of the elements and that gives you
the empirical formula. Thus, the empirical formula of this compound is C,H, =
CH.
@) Example
Problem: The percent composition of elements in a compound are given as
H=2.04%, S =32.65% and O = 65.30%. Determine the empirical formula of the
compound.
Solution: First, we’ll divide the percent composition of elements by respective
atomic mass: 508
H= a 2.04
32.65
S= = 1.02
65.30
O= = 4.08
Now, we’ll divide the quotients by the small quotient above:
H==%=2
1.02
1.02
S= ion 1
4.08
O= Tor 4
Now, we’ll write the empirical formula of the compound: H,S,0,= H,SO,
Problem: There is hydrogen and oxygen in a compound whose percent compo-
sition are 11.11% and 88.89% respectively. What is its empirical formula?
Solution: First, we’ll divide the percent composition of elements by respective
atomic mass: _— gi = 1704
88.89
em O= ce 7 5.55
3

124 Chemistry
Now, we’ll divide the quotients by the small quotient above:
11.11
H = ess. =2
5.55
O= nee = 1
Now, we’ll write the empirical formula of the compound: H,O, = H,O
@) Do It Yourself
An experiment showed that a compound consists of 3 gram carbon atom.
and 8 gram oxygen atom. Determine the empirical formula of the
\ compound. J
6.2.2: Determining the Molecular Formula of a Compound from Percent
Composition
If we want to determine the molecular formula of a compound from its percent
composition, we need to determine the empirical formula first. If the total mass
of the empirical formula of that compound is equal to its molecular mass then
the very empirical formula is also the molecular formula. But when the
empirical formula and molecular mass of the compound varies from each other,
then we need to find out how many times greater the molecular mass is from the
empirical formula.
If molecular mass is n times greater than the empirical formula, then
Molecular Formula = (Empirical Formula),
_. Molecular Mass of Compound
Here, n = “Mass of Empirical Formula _
Suppose, percent composition of a compound is C = 92.31%, H = 7.69%. The
molecular mass of the compound is 78. Determine its molecular formula.
Let’s divide the percent composition of elements with their respective atomic
number:
92.31
C= Tie 7.69
H= 7 = 7.69 2
8

Concept of Mole and Chemical Counting 125
Now, we’ll divide the quotients by the small quotient above:
c= =1
7.69
H=72 51

7.69
So, the empirical formula of the compound: C,H, =CH
Since the empirical formula is CH, the molecular formula will be (CH), =
C,H,
The mass of empirical formula of the compound stands = 12x1 + 1x1 = 13 and
its molecular mass = 78

_ molecular mass of compound _ 78 _
Therefore n = mass of empirical formula ~ 13 =6
Thus, the molecular formula of the compound is CgH,
Determining Empirical Formula from Molecular Formula
The molecular formula of a compound can be the base to determine its
empirical formula. Suppose, we need to find the empirical formula of glucose
(CH20¢).
A glucose (CsH,20¢) molecule consists of 06 C atoms, 12 H atoms and 06 O
atoms.
The ratio of atoms C:H:O0=6:12:6=1:2:1
Therefore, the empirical formula of glucose is C}H,0,; = CH,O
Sometimes, the empirical formula and molecular formula are similar. For
example, the molecular formula of water is HO, its empirical formula is H,O
too. Both the formulas of sulfuric acid is H,SO,.
Usually, the compounds, all the atoms of which can be divided by a certain
number, they have different molecular and empirical formula. The molecular
formula of benzene is C,H,. Since the number of atoms here are divisible by 6,
therefore, its empirical formula will be C,H, = CH. Similarly, the molecular
formula of ethene is C,H,. Therefore, its empirical formula is C,H, = CH,.

x
&

126 Chemistry
6.3 Chemical Reactions and Chemical Equations
Chemical Reactions
The change which causes a substance to get a new set of properties giving up its
own properties and features is called the chemical change. The process that
brings the change is called chemical reaction. Chemical equation is the short
expression of a chemical process by using symbols, formula and sign.
The substances that are used to begin a chemical reaction are called reactants.
The substance or substances with new properties that are formed at the end of the
reaction are called products.
There are some rules observed to write chemical equations in order to express
chemical reactions. The rules are:
1. In a chemical equation, the reactants are written on the left side and the
products are written on the right side; an equal (=) sign or an arrow (— ) mark is
placed in the middle.
2. The reactants and products are written by means of their symbols and
formulas. If there are more than one reactants and products, they are written with
plus sign.
3. The number of atoms of different elements on the left side and the number of
atoms of the same elements on the right side need be equalized. This is called
balancing of chemical equation.
2Hz + O02 2H,0
2H, + O2 = 2H,0
4.Sometimes reactions are not balanced in the equations. In such cases, the
arrow mark is used instead of the equal sign.
H,+0, ——» HO
5. Sometimes, the physical states of both reactants and products are also
mentioned in an equation. It is written on the right side of the element or
compound in first brackets ( ). If the physical state of the substance is solid, we
write (s), if the state is liquid, we write (1), if gas, we write (g).Whenthe 3%
8

Concept of Mole and Chemical Counting 127
substance is in the form of aqueous solution, we write (aq). In the above
reaction, the reactants are gas and the product is liquid water. So we write:
2H,(g) + 0.(g) ——> 2H,0(])

The main objective of chemical equation is to express which elements have
participated in the reaction to form which product. That is why, it is not always
necessary to balance a chemical equation.
6. However, if an equation is to show how much heat has been produced or
absorbed in a reaction, it has to be balanced and the physical states of reactants
and products are to be written.
Solid substance carbon reacts with oxygen gas and produces carbon dioxide
(CO,) gas. The equation will be as below:

C(s) + 0(g) ———> CO,(g)
Solid calcium carbonate reacts with aqueous solution of hydrochloric acid to
produce calcium chloride, gaseous carbon di oxide and liquid water.

CaCO,(s) + HCl(aqg) M——> CaCl,(aq) + CO, (g) + H,0())
calcium carbonate hydrochloric acid calcium chloride carbon dioxide
water
Some reactions are there that require heat to be applied. The heat is expressed
with a delta (A) sign above the arrow mark. For example, if heat is applied on
solid magnesium nitrate, it produces magnesium oxide, nitrogen dioxide gas and
oxygen gas. hk

2Mg(NO3).(s) M+» 2MgO(s) + 4NO(g) + 0,(g)

6.3.1 Balancing Chemical Equation
Chemical reactions are briefly expressed through chemical equations. Though
reactants and products are different substances, they are composed of the same
elements. That is why conservation of mass rule is followed. When both the left
and right sides of an equation has the same number of atoms of the same
elements, we call that a balanced equation. See the example below:

20

Ss Mg + HCl » MgCl, + H,

128 Chemistry
It is true that we get magnesium chloride and hydrogen when magnesium and
hydrochloric acid is put in a reaction; therefore, the reaction is okay. However,
the equation is not balanced as the number of hydrogen and chlorine atoms on
both sides are not equal.
The Process of Balancing Equation
To make the number of atoms of different elements equal, the formula of
reactants and products are multiplied by suitable numbers (2, 3, 4.......). There
is no specific rule to balance equations, but some strategies are followed in this
regard. They are:
1. Equation is written using the correct formula of reactants and products.
2. If the reactants and products are compound substances, that is, if the atoms of
more than one elements are present in the formula, balance the equation,
multiplying the reactants or products or both with required numbers.
3. First the number of atoms present in the molecules of compound substances
are balanced. Then come the number of atoms of elements.
4. The balance has to be struck between the atoms of various elements on the left
side of the equation with those on the right side.
5. When the number of atoms of each and every element present in the reaction
on both the sides is equal, then the balancing of the equation is done.
Let us examine some examples in this regard.
Example 1

Mg + HCl ————> MgCl, + H;
In the above reaction, the number of Cl atom in the compound HCI on the left is
one while in the compound MgCl, there are two Cl atoms. It is understood that
the number of Cl on both sides is not equal. The same way, on the left, there is
one H atom while on the right, there are two H atoms. H atoms are also not
balanced. Mg atom on both sides are equal as there is only one on each side.
First, let us balance the Cl atom. For this, let us multiply HCl on the left side with ~
2: 3

Concept of Mole and Chemical Counting 129
Mg + 2HCl ———> MgCl, + H,
Now, a brief check will tell us that all atoms of various elements present on both
the sides of the equation are equal. Therefore, the balancing of the equation is
done. When the balancing of the equation is done, it can be written with equal
(=) sign too.
Mg + 2HCl = MgCl, + Hy
Example 2
Na,CO, + HCl ———~ Nacl + H,0 + CO,
This is not balanced equation as the left side has two Na while the right has one.
Therefore, we multiply NaCl with 2:
Na,CO, + HCl ————» 2NaCl + H,0 + CO,
Still it is not balanced. Now the right has two Cl while the left has one Cl.
Multiply HCl on the left with 2:
Na,CO, + 2HCl ————» 2NaCl + H,0 + CO,
Now, number of atoms of every element on both sides is equal.
Na,CO,; + 2HCl = 2NaCl + H,O + CO,
Example 3
Aluminum oxide reacts with hydrochloric acid and produces aluminum chloride
and water.
Al,O; + HCl ———~ Alcl, + H,O
To strike a balance of Al on both sides, let us multiply AICI, with 2
ALO; + HCl ———» 2alcl, + H,O
To balance the number of Cl, multiply HCl on the left with 6:
Al,0, + 6HC1 ———~ 2alcl, + H,O
Forma -17, Chemistry Class-9-10

130 Chemistry
Still balance is lacking as the number of O on the left is 3 while on the right is 1.
There is difference between the numbers of H too. So, let us multiply H20 with
3:
Al,O, + 6HC] ———~ 2Alcl, + 3H,O
Now, there is balance.
Al,O, + 6HCl = 2AICl; + 3H,0
6.3.2 Mole and Chemical Equation
Certain amount of a reactant reacts with a certain amount of another reactant and
produces a certain amount of product or products. The branch of chemistry that
deals with measurements of products from amounts of reactants and
measurements of reactants from amounts of products is called Stoichiometry.
The information that can be gathered regarding mole from a chemical equation
is the Stoichiometry of that reaction.
Analyzing the Stoichiometry, we can tell how many reactants reacted to produce
how many products, how many moles of reactants formed how many moles of
products, how many grams of reactants participated in the reaction to produce
how many grams of products.
2Mg(s) + 0,(g) ———> 2Mg0O(s)
Magnesium Oxygen Magnesium Oxide
According to stoichiometry, we can write
2Mg(s) + 0,(g) ——> _ 2Mg0(s)
2mole Mgatom 1 mole O, molecule 2 mole MgO molecule
2x6.023x102 no of 6.023x102 no of 2x6.023x 10” no of MgO
Mg atom O, molecule molecule
2 x24=48 g 1x 32=32¢ 2 x 40 =80 g
=
Rg

Concept of Mole and Chemical Counting 131
These accounts presented below a balanced equation of a chemical reaction are
called its Stoichiometry. When both reactants and products are gaseous
substances, in the Stoichiometry, under standard condition, 1 mole gaseous
substance has the volume of 22.4 liter.
@) Example:
Problem: How much oxygen is necessary for 5 gram magnesium to react and
produce magnesium oxide?
Solution: Magnesium reacts with oxygen and produces magnesium oxide. The
balanced equation of this reaction along with its Stoichiometry is shown above.
Accordingly with this Stoichiometry:
48 gram magnesium reacts with 32 gram oxygen
‘ 4. 1x32
1 gram magnesium reacts with “Ga Stam oxygen
5 gram magnesium reacts with — = 3.33 gram oxygen
Problem: How many grams of magnesium oxide will be produced if we put
necessary amount of oxygen with 2 gram magnesium metal?
Solution: According to Stoichiometry of the reaction:
48 gram Mg metal produces 80 gram magnesium oxide
1 gram Mg metal produces 7 gram magnesium oxide
2 gram Mg metal produces —_— = 3.33 gram magnesium oxide
Problem: How much oxygen is necessary alongside required amount of
magnesium metal to produce 10 gram magnesium oxide?
Solution: According to Stoichiometry of the reaction:
80 gram magnesium oxide is produced from 32 gram oxygen
S 1 gram magnesium oxide is produced from = gram oxygen
N

132 Chemistry
10 gram magnesium oxide is produced from a = 4 gram oxygen
Problem: How many NH, molecules will be produced from 5 N, molecules?
Solution:
N,(g) + 3 H,(g) —<——_* 2NH,(g)
6.023x10" no of — 3x6.023x10" no 2x6.023x107 no of
of molecules molecules

From the equation:

6.023x10" no of molecules of N, produces 2x6.023x10" no of
molecules of NH;

1 no of molecules of N2 produces oie = 2no of molecules of

2 x 6,023 x10

NH;

So, 5 no of molecules of N2 produces 2 x 5 = 10 no of molecules of NH3
@) Do it Yourself

“Task: How many moles of O, is necessary to produce 6 moles of water? »)
Task: How much NH, in liter will be formed out of 4 liter N, in standard

_ temperature and pressure? Here, both reactants and products are gaseous.
6.4 Limiting Reactant
If there is more than one reactant in a chemical reaction, it is not always possible
to supply all reactants in required amount when supplied after weighing. As a
result, some reactants complete the reaction and nothing of it remains at the end
while another reactant was also there in the reaction but some residue of it
remains at the end. The reactant that finished itself during the reaction is called
the limiting reactant. In a chemical reaction, the limiting reactant is determined ~
by its amount. The amount of a limiting reactant will tell us how much of which $

Concept of Mole and Chemical Counting 133

reactant will react in the reaction, how much residue will be left and how much

of which product will be produced.

@ ©
@ O) @-O 6
©)
© 5) 9 c>
@
@)
Megnesium Oxygen (© Magnesium oxide molecule
atom molecule
Fig 6.02: Here magnesium metal is the limiting reactant

@®) Example

Problem: 4 oxygen molecules is put into 4 atoms of magnesium metal. Which

is the limiting reactant here?

2Mg + 0, > 2MgO

2x6.023x10™ no of atoms 6.023x10™ no of molecules 2x6.023x10™ no of molecules

Solution: The above equation tells us that, 1 O, molecule is necessary to react

with 2 metallic atoms of Mg. So, 2 O, molecules are necessary to complete the

reaction with given 4 Mg atoms. That means, (4-2) = 2 molecules of oxygen will

be left over when all the given magnesium atoms will finish themselves in the

teaction. Here the magnesium atoms do not remain anymore at the end of the

reaction. Therefore, the magnesium is the limiting reactant in this reaction.

What would have happened if 30 molecule oxygen were mixed with 70 atoms of

magnesium metal?

Since one O, molecule reacts with 2 Mg atoms, 70 Mg atoms would require

(70+2)=35 O, molecules to finish themselves in the reaction. But the given
= number of O, is only 30. Therefore, oxygen will finish itself in the reaction and
S itis the limiting reactant here.

134 Chemistry
Problem: 75 g chlorine gas is mixed with 5 g hydrogen gas. Which is the
limiting reactant here? How much of which reactant will be left over at the end
of the reaction?
H, cl, ——> 2Hcl
2 gram 2x35.5g = 71 gram 2 x 36.5g = 73 gram
Solution: The equation of the reaction tells:
2 gram hydrogen gas needs in the reaction 71 gram chlorine
So, 5 gram hydrogen gas needs in the reaction = = 177.5 gram
chlorine
Since only 75 gram chlorine is given for the reaction, so Cl, will finish itself
earlier and it is the limiting reactant.
@)) Do it Yourself
Task: Find out how much H, is left over in the above reaction.
6.5 Calculation of the Percentage of Yield
The reactants used in chemical reactions are not always found as 100% pure.The
purest chemical substances / reactants are called Analar or Analar grade
substance. Analar substances are 99% pure. The impure substances are purified
through crystallization, distillation, fractional distillation, chromatography etc
processes which you will learn about in higher classes.
Many a times, one or more purification processes fail to yield 100% pure
products. When the reactant is not 100% pure, the reaction does not yield the
amount of product that was calculated from the amount of limiting reactant. &
S
N

Concept of Mole and Chemical Counting 135
The amount of product from a chemical reaction in percentage can be
determined following the formula below:
‘ __ Amount of Product Obtained from Reaction x 100
Percentage of yield - Calculated Amount of Product from Reaction
«) Example
Problem: 2 gram metallic magnesium reacts with necessary amount of oxygen
and yields 3.25 gram magnesium oxide. What is the percentage of the yield?
2Mg(s) + 0,(g) ———>  2Mg0(s)
2x 24=48¢ 1x 32=32g 2x 40=80¢g

Solution: According to equation:
48 gram magnesium yields 80 gram MgO
So, 2 gram magnesium yields — = 3.33 gram MgO
The actual yield after the reaction is 3.25 gram magnesium oxide.
Therefore, percentage of the yield = a = 97.6%
@) Do it Yourself

Task: When heat is applied on 80 gram CaCO,, it yields 39 gram CaO.

Determine the percentage of the yield. The atomic mass of Ca, C and O are
_ 40, 12 and 16 respectively.
J
8

136 Chemistry
@ Experiment
Name of Experiment: Preparation of 0.1 molar sodium carbonate
solution in 250mL volumetric flask.
Principle : Sodium carbonate (Na,CO,) is a primary standard substance
because it is found in pure and dry state, it can be directly weighed in
balance, its molar solution is long lasting. To prepare 0.1 molar sodium
carbonate solution in a volumetric flask, the following calculation is
necessary:
Here, V = 250mL, S = 0.1 molar, M = 23x2 + 12 + 16x3 = 106, w=?
<M
W * Jo00
0.1X250x106 gram

we 1000

w= 2.65 gram
If we weigh and put 2.65 gram Na,CO, inside a volumetric flask and fill the
flask with 250mL water, the 0.1 molar sodium carbonate solution will be
prepared. However, this molar solution preparation is very tough as to
weigh 2.65 gram sodium carbonate is really tough. Therefore, the solution
is made at a nearer molarity.
Necessary Instruments: 250mL volumetric flask, funnel, weighing bottle,
chemical balance, wash bottle.
Chemicals: Pure sodium carbonate, water
Procedure:
1. A funnel is inserted in the mouth of a clean 250mL volumetric flask.
2. A dry weighing bottle is weighed on the chemical balance. ) 2

y S

Concept of Mole and Chemical Counting 137
| 3. Now, pour some sodium carbonate in the weighing bottle in a way so that |
the total weight of the bottle is 2.65gram higher than the previous weight.
4. Pour the sodium carbonate from the weighing bottle inside the
volumetric flask through the funnel.
5. Pour the distilled water slowly from the wash bottle inside the volumetric
flask. After pouring half the water, fix a cork on the mouth of volumetric
flask and shake it so that the sodium carbonate is dissolved fully into the
water. Now, add the rest of the water to fill up 250 mL.
Funnel Wash bottle
ee
250 mL o
Volumetric ‘ oO Water
flak = ~~‘
. fo)
2.658 as. —_> ( «x ) >
Na,Co,; \ esate Gis
0.1M Na2COs solution
Fig 6.03: Preparation of 0.1 molar sodium carborate solution
Caution:
1. Take dry and pure sodium carbonate
2. Ensure the weighing bottle is dry
3. Add distilled water only
Task for Learners: According to your data and statistics from the above
| experiment, prepare a 0.1 molar sodium carbonate solution in a 250mL |
volumetric flask.
Forma -18, Chemistry Class-9-10

138 Chemistry
@) Experiment
( Determination of percent composition of lattice water of hydrated \
copper sulphate
Principle: Blue vitriol’s chemical name is pentahydrate copper sulphate. Its
formula is CuSO,.5H,O. Blue vitriol consists of copper sulphate and 5
molecules of water. It is blue color crystal lattice. These are five moles
water in it. If heat is applied, that water vaporizes and its colour turns into
white. These five moles of water are called crystal water.
CuSO, .5H,0 —> CuSO, + 5H,0
Ingredients: Copper sulphate, desiccators, chemical balance, ceramic
bowl, tripod stand, net, Bunsen burner/spirit lamp
Procedure:
1. Weigh the porcelain bowl in the Blue vitriol
balance. Suppose, the weight is a C7 > Porcelain bowl
gram. Now take some copper oe a Net
sulphate in the bowl and weigh it aa
again. Let’s say, the weight now is ‘S Bunsen burner
b gram. Therefore, the mass of |— Tripod stand
copper sulphate is (b-a) gram. |
2. Fix the net on a tripod stand and Q |
put the bowl containing copper ~
sulphate on it. Heat it with Bunsen
burner or spirit lamp. Fig 6.04: Determination of lattice water in
Blue vitriol

Concept of Mole and Chemical Counting 139
3. Keep marking the copper sulphate as heat is applied. The blue colour will
gradually turn white. Since the water in the blue vitriol is vaporizing, it is
transforming its colour.

4. When the transformation of colour is complete, stop the heating.
5. Swiftly take the bowl to desiccators and weigh it again after cooling. If it
isn’t done fast, the copper sulphate will again absorb water and turn blue.
Let’s assume, this new weight is c.
That mean, after the vaporization of water, copper sulphate’s mass is (c-a)
gram. The mass of vaporized water from the blue vitriol is (b-a) — (c-a)
gram. = (b-c) gram
Calculation:
Mass of removed water from (b-a) gram copper sulphate = (b-c) gram
So, mass of removed water from 100 gram copper sulphate = = xX 100 gram
The percent composition of crystallized water in copper sulphate is = x 100%
Caution:
The heating has to be slow and careful so that the heat reaches all spots.
After the removal of water, the weighing has to quick.
Task for Learners: Carry out a task to determine the percent compositing
of water in copper sulphate.
2
R

140 Chemistry
(?) Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. What is the volume of 2 gram hydrogen in standard condition?
a, 2.24 liter b. 11.2 liter
c. 22.4 liter d. 44.8 liter
2. Which of the following is the formula of calcium phosphate?
a. CaPO, b. Ca(PO,),
Answer questions 3 and 4 in the light of the following stem:
5 gram hydrogen gas is passed on to 75 gram chlorine gas.
3. How many chlorine atoms are used in the reaction of the stem?
a. 1.27x10% b. 2.54x10%
c. 6.02x10” d. 6.3610”
4. Which of the following is collected as remains in the reaction?
a. 1.44 mole H, b. 1.44 mole Cl,
c. 2.89 mole H, d. 2,89 mole Cl,
5. What is the volume of 17 gram ammonia gas in standard condition?
a. 24.2 liter b. 22.4 liter
c. 12.2 liter d. 11.4 liter
=<
8

Concept of Mole and Chemical Counting 141
6. How many molecules are there in 10 gram CaCO,?
a. 6.02x10% b. 6.02x107!
c. 6.02x10” d. 2.58x107
loo = :
(© ) Creative Questions
I, = =
a. What is mole?
b. What do you understand by empirical
formula and molecular formula? __. =
c. Determine the composition of the salt that
can be formed by combining the solutions
shown in the stem. }
d. Will the molarity of the shown solutions 100m A99'me
be same? Give mathematical explanation.
2. 4.4 g carbon dioxide and 5g calcium oxide is mixed to prepare 10 g
CaCO,.The expected yield is not met after the reaction is over.
a. What is chemical equation?
b. Explain the molar volume of carbon dioxide.
c. Determine how many moles of carbon dioxide was used in the reaction.
d. Give logical explanation of the lesser yield than expected in the reaction of the
stem.
=
8

Chapter Seven
Chemical Reactions
4 geil er <i ‘ Pa si
gl + he Ay “aa
a N <>. “2
We know, properties, characteristics and changes of substances are the
knowledge discussed in chemistry. The elements in nature are constantly
changing. Transformation to a different state is called physical change while
changing into a new element with new properties is called chemical change.
These changes occur due to certain physical and chemical reactions. This
chapter will discuss elaborately on kinds of reactions, rates of reactions etc.
=
R

Chemical Reactions 143
® By the end of the chapter, we will be able to:

e differentiate between physical changes and chemical reactions

° identify chemical reactions by analyzing the changes in a substance

e classify the chemical reactions- redox/non-redox, reversible/
irreversible, endothermic/exothermic and detect the types of reactions

a explain the amount of products gained through chemical reaction in
terms of Le Chatelier’s principle

é detect the type of redox-nonredox reactions by analyzing the change

a explain many reactions taking place in various fields of real life

é find out ways to prevent or control the harmful reactions in real-life
situation (like, ways of prevention of rusting on iron made materials)

e explain and compare concerned reaction rate

e examine and compare the reaction speed or rate by using various

e materials

° show consciousness in using metal substance in our daily life

° show the differences in the reaction rate through experiments
demonstrate the acid-base neutralization reaction and precipitation
reactions

Ss

144 Chemistry
7.1 Changes of Matter

The substances existing in nature undergo changes due to heat, pressure and
contact with other substances. There are two types of changes: physical change
and chemical change.

7.1.1 Physical Change

All chemical substances consist of one or more elements. Sometimes, changes
occur only in physical conditions of substance leaving their chemical structure
unchanged. This is called physical change. For example, a solid piece of ice, if
kept in the room temperature, absorbs heat from the environment and gradually
melts into liquid water. Again, heating the liquid water up to the level of 100C
will see the water vaporize into air. Here, the molecular formula of all three-
water, ice and vapor is same- H,O. That means each molecule of them has the
same two hydrogen and one oxygen atoms in them. Therefore, all three
substances are same, only their physical states are different- ice is solid while
water is liquid and vapor is gaseous. This kind of change is called physical
change.

7.1.2 Chemical Change

Sometimes, at the change of external temperature or pressure and contact with
some other substance, some substances change completely into newer
substances with newer percent composition of the existing elements. This kind
of change is called chemical change. That means, the kind of change that forms
newer substances with newer set of properties is called chemical change. The
new substance formed through chemical change gets the same molecules that
were there in the original elements. Isolated ions or atoms are formed out of the
dissociation in the bond of the previous element. These isolated ions or atoms
later constitute new bonds among themselves and create new molecule. As a
result, chemical change also implies dissociation of old bonding and formation
of new bonding too. The gas we use for cooking basically consists of methane
(CH,). When methane gas is burnt in oxygen, carbon dioxide, water vapor and 2
heat energy is produced. This is chemical change. N

Chemical Reactions 145

CH,(g) + Og) ————> CO,g) + H,0()
Similarly, calctum carbonate reacts with hydrochloric acid and produces
calcium chloride, carbon dioxide and water. This is also chemical change.
CaCO3(s) + 2HCl (aq) ———~> Cacl, (aq) + CO, (g) + H,0 ()
7.2 Classification of Chemical Reactions
We can classify the chemical reactions on the basis of following way:
7.2.1 Direction of Reaction
According to direction of reaction, chemical reactions are of two kinds:
Irreversible reactions and Reversible reactions.
Irreversible Reactions
In irreversible reactions, only the reactants convert to products. Products cannot
be converted to reactants by reaction if any one of the products from reaction is
removed from the reaction medium. For example, calcium
carbonate, when heated in a container breaks into solid limestone and gaseous
carbon dioxide. If the carbon dioxide gas is removed from the container, then
too, the limestone will not convert back to calcium carbonate. Thus, it is an
irreversible reaction. Irreversible reactions are written in equations with a right
faced arrow (—) mark in the midst of reactants and products.

CaCO; (s) ————® CaO (s) + CO,(g)

Reversible Reactions
In a reversible reaction, the reactants react and convert to products and the
products react again and revert to reactants. In reversible reactions, two
reactions continue simultaneously. In one reaction, the reactants react and
Forma -19, Chemistry Class-9-10

146 Chemistry
produce the product, which is called forward reaction. In the other one, the
products react again and convert to the reactant, which is called backward
reaction. Reversible reactions are written in equation with double headed half
arrow marks in the midst of reactants and products. For example, ethanol and
ethanoic acid react in presence of hydrochloric acid and produce ethyl ethanoate
ester and water. Conversely, ethyl ethanoate ester and water react with each
other and produce ethanol and ethanoic acid. In an equation, it will be shown,
Hcl
C,HOH + CH,COOH CH;COOC,H; + H,0
Similarly, hydrogen and iodine react and produce hydrogen iodide as product
and this product again converts into hydrogen and iodine. This is also reversible
reaction.
H, +1, ~~ 2HI
Indeed, all reactions are reversible reactions, but in some reactions, the
backward reaction is of so slow a rate, that they appear to be irreversible
reactions.
7.2.2 Heat Change and Reactions
You have already learned that heat change is a factor in chemical reaction.
According to absorption of heat and generation of heat, reactions are classified
into two categories: exothermic reaction and endothermic reaction.
Exothermic Reactions
When heat evolves at the time of producing the products from reactants, the
reaction is called exothermic reaction. For example, 1 mole nitrogen and 3 moles
hydrogen in the Heber process produce 2 mole ammonia and 92 kilojoules of
heat. The reaction is:
Fe
Nz (g) + 3H, (g) <«—_ 2NH; (g) + 92kKj
200-250 atm 2
450°C-550°C s

Chemical Reactions 147
Here, ground Fe acts as the catalyst. According to balanced equation, the heat
change during a reaction is called reaction heat. It is denoted by AH. If heat is
evolved during a reaction, its value is negative.
Fe
Np (g) + 3H, (g) <> _ 2NH3(g) + AH=-92\KJ
200-250 atm
450°C-550°C
Endothermic Reactions
When heat is absorbed at the time of producing the products from recreants, the
reaction is called endothermic reaction. 1 mole nitrogen and 1 mole oxygen react
and produce 2 moles nitric oxide. When they do so, they absorb 180 kJ heat. This
is endothermic reaction.
N,(g) + 0.(g) + 180kJ 3 > 2NOg)
Here also, we can use the symbol of heat AH. In endothermic reaction, the value
of absorbed heat is positive.
N,(g) + O.(g) jo = 2N0(g), AH = + 180 J
7.2.3 Electron Transfer
Depending on electron transfer, reactions can be divided into two types: redox
reactions and non redox reactions.
Redox Reactions
Red, the initial part of the term Reduction and the initial part of Oxidation, Ox
are combined into Redox, which means, oxidation-reduction. In redox reaction,
there occurs electron transfer in the reaction. A reactant donates an electron and
the other reactant receives that electron. That means, a redox reaction is divided
in two parts. In one part, the donation of electron takes place which is called
oxidation half reaction. In the other half, the other reactant accepts the donated
electron, which is called reduction half reaction. The reactant which donates
se electron in such a reaction is called reductant and the one which accepts electron
S . 4
\ is called oxidant.

148 Chemistry

Na+<Cl, ——* Natl
Here, Na is donating electron as it is reductant substance and conversely, Cl is
accepting that electron as it is oxidant substance.
The reaction in which electron donation of an atom occurs or positive charge of
that atom increases or negative charge of that decreases is called oxidation
reaction.

Fe’ — Fe?+ + e- [oxidation reaction]

Na° — Na'* + e [oxidation reaction]
The reaction in which an atom accepts electron or the positive charge of an atom
decreases or the negative charge of an atom increases is called reduction
reaction. . .

cl°’+e - Cl [reduction reaction]
Cu**+ e- > Cu [reduction reaction]
Oxidation Number: Atoms in molecules or radicals sometimes tend to donate
electron and sometimes tend to accept electron. The tendency to donate electron
of an atom is denoted by a number added with a plus (+) mark and the tendency
to accept electron of an atom is denoted by a number added with a minus (-)
mark. In any molecule or radical, this number with plus or minus mark is the
oxidation number.
The oxidation number of neutral atoms like Na, Mg, Fe etc. are taken to be zero
(0). Similarly, atoms in molecules that consist of homogenous atoms like H,, O,,,
N,, CL, Br, etc. are regarded to have oxidation number of zero.
The oxidation number of Fe in FeSO, is +2 while the oxidation number of the
same atom in Fe metal is 0.
Determining Oxidation Number: In a compound oxidation number of an
element depends on the oxidation numbers of other elements of the compound.
To determine oxidation number of an element in a compound, standard
oxidation number of other elements is used. =
N

Chemical Reactions 149
Table 7.1: Oxidation Number of Atoms in Different Compounds
as Formula of | Element and
Rule of Oxidation Number Oxidation
Compound =
fumber
Oxidation number of metals is positive and | Nacl Na = +1
oxidation number of nonmetals is negative cl= -1
Oxidation number of a neutral or free element is | Fe, H, Fe =0
zero H=0
Total oxidation number of atoms of a neutral | 420 Hs +
¥ O = -2
compound is zero
P It = 0
Total Oxidation number of atoms of a charged | so,?, NH, | SO,2= -2
ion is equal to their charge NH,’ = +1
Oxidation number of alkali metals is +1 KCl, K,CO,
Oxidation number of alkaline earth metal is +2 CaO, Mgs0O, | Ca = +2
Mg = +2
Oxidation number of halogen in metal halide is -1 | Mgcl,, Lic]
In most compounds, Oxidation number of hydrogen is | NH,, LiAIH, | H = +1
+1 but Oxiiation number of hydrogen in metal 3 ‘ *
hydride is -1 H=-1
In most compounds (oxides), Oxidation number of | K,0, CaO O=-2
oxygen is -2 but Oxidation number of oxygen in K,0>, H,0 O=-1
peroxide is -1 and Oxidation number of oxygen in| ~?~” “7? 1
superoxide is -1/2 (i.e.- 0.5) NaO7 KO, | 0 =-=
1. Let us suppose the oxidation number of the atom in a compound or ion that is
to be determined is x.
2. Oxidation numbers of all elements in the compound or ion are to be
multiplied witheir respective number of atoms and then their total is to be found.
3. In the case of molecules, the total will be zero (0) and in the case with ions, it
will be equal to the its number of charges added with the marks. For example,
we need to determine the oxidation number of central atom Mn in KMn0O,.
Suppose, the oxidation number of Mn is x, oxidation number of K is +1 and O
co is-2. The total in the formula presented above will be equal to the oxidation
S
N

150 Chemistry
number of KMnO,. KMn0, is a charge neutral molecule, therefore, its charge is
0. So,
(+1)x1 + xx1 + (—2)x4 = 0
Oo, X=7
The oxidation number of Mn is +7.
4. Apart from hydroxide, the oxidation number of hydrogen is generally +1.
Apart from the exceptions mentioned in the table 7.01, the oxidation number of
oxygen is -2.
Determining the oxidation number of S in H,SO,
Suppose, the oxidation number of S =x
Therefore, (+1)x2 + x + (-2)x4 =0
Or, x =6
The oxidation number of S in H,SO, is +6
®) Do it Yourself
Find out the oxidation number of the elements written in red colour among
the following compoundsn: CuSO,, HNO,, H,PO,, MnO,, K,Cr,0,, Na,S,O,,
Cul.
Given: Oxidation numbers of Cu = +2, O = -2, H=+1, K=+1, Na=+1,1=
-1.
Oxidation number and valency are not same. Oxidation number is the number of
charge in atom or ion along with its sign. It may be positive or negative, integer
or fraction. The oxidation number of an element may vary in different
compounds. On the other hand, valency is the capacity of an element to bond
with other elements. It is always an integer and is never positive or negative.
Only, in the case of inert gas, the valency is zero. S
N

Chemical Reactions 151
Oxidation-reduction is a simultaneous process: You already know what is
oxidation and what is reduction and what is oxidant and what is reductant.
Oxidation-reduction reaction takes place simultaneously. Let us consider the
reaction below:
Na+>Cl, ——> Nacl
Here in it, the reduction agent Na has donated one electron from its outermost
shell to complete the oxidation half reaction. The oxidant Cl
has accepted that electron and completed the reduction half reaction.
Oxidation half reaction Na° > Na* + e-
Reduction half reaction ¢]°+ e + cl
If we add these two half reactions, we get the oxidation-reduction reaction.
Na’+ Cl? Nat + Cl =Nacl
It is clear here that the reduction agent has donated the electron to the oxidation
agent. If oxidation agent Cl wouldn’t accept the electron, the reduction agent Na
would not have been able to donate electron. So, it can be said, oxidation and
reduction will occur together. They are simultaneous process.
Since reductant donates electron and oxidant accepts that electron, therefore,
oxidation-reduction is actually the transfer of electron.
There are some reactions where oxidation-reduction occurs. They are:
1. Addition Reaction
2. Decomposition Reaction
3. Substitution or Displacement Reaction
4.Combustion Reaction
20
ES

152 Chemistry
1. Addition Reaction: A reaction in which a new compound is formed by
combination of two or more elements or molecules is called addition reaction.
For example, chlorine adds with ferrous chloride and produces ferric chloride:
2FeCl,(aq) + Clg) ————> FeCl,(aq)
Similarly, hydrogen gas combines with nitrogen gas and forms ammonia gas:
N, + 3H, ———~ 2NH,
However, the addition reaction where two or more elements combine together to
form a new compound is called synthesis. According to this definition, the
reaction for ammonia gas is also a synthesis.
2. Decomposition Reaction: The process in which a compound breaks into one
or more elements or molecules is called decomposition reaction. For example,
when heat is applied on phosphorus pentachloride, it decomposes into
phosphorus trichloride and chlorine.
PCI, —_> Pcl, + Cl,
Similarly, one water molecule decomposes to produce two different molecules
on electrolysis. Hydrogen and oxygen are produced in cathode and anode.
electrolysis
2H,0 ———> 2H, + 0,
3. Substitution or Displacement Reaction: The process in which an element or
tadical displaces another element or radical from a compound and takes its place
is called substitution reaction. For example, zinc metal displaces hydrogen from
sulfuric acid to form zinc sulfate and hydrogen gas:
Zn(s) + H,SO,(1) —————» ZnSO,(aq) + H,{(g)
°9
Ss

Chemical Reactions 153
4. Combustion Reaction: The process in which

any compound or element is burnt in presence of

atmospheric oxygen and converts to oxides of its

elements is called combustion reaction. Usually

heat is evolved in combustion reaction. This RAT AP
process also involves electron exchange. For nove ease
example, natural gas or methane reacts with

oxygen of air and produces carbon dioxide and Fig 7.01: combustion of fuel
water.

CH,(g) + 20g) ——— > CO,(g) + 2H,0(g) + Heat
Similarly, S, C, Mg and H, produce their oxides and heat evolves when they are
burnt.

S(s) + 0(g) m—— SO,(g) + Heat

Cig) + 0(g) Mm €0,(g) + Heat

2Mg(s) + 0O.(g) M+» 2Mg0(g) + Heat

2H,(g) + 0(g) ———» 2H,0(g) + Heat
In all combustion reactions, oxygen accepts electron donated by the other
element or compound. Therefore, this kind of reaction belongs to the
oxidation-reduction type.
Non Redox
There are some reactions where electron exchange does not occur. These
reactions are called non-redox reactions. In this kind of reaction, there is no
involvement of increase or decrease of oxidation number of any reactant because
there is no electron exchange. Some of the kind of reactions is discussed below:
Like (1) Neutralization reaction (2) precipitation reaction etc.
1. Neutralization Reaction: An acid and a base react with each other and
neutralize into salt and water in some reactions which are known as
neutralization reaction. They are also known as acid-base reactions. NaOH and
HCI, for example neutralize each other and convert to NaCl salt and water:

HCl(aq) +NaOH(aq) —————> NaCl(aq) + H,0(I)

Forma -20, Chemistry Class-9-10

154 Chemistry
Heat always evolves from neutralization reactions. That is to say, neutralization
reactions are exothermic, When both the acid and base are strong, the evolved
heat amounts to AH = -57.34kJ. In this kind of reaction, acid provides the
hydrogen ion (H*) while the base provides the hydroxide ion (OH). These two
ions react then and produce water. In NaCl solution, sodium ion is Na* and
chlorine ion is Cr.
Ht + Cl + Nat + OH” > Nat +Cl+H,0
In this solution, the two ions Na*, Cl do not participate in the reaction. They are
called spectator ions. The actual equation of a neutralization reaction is:
Ht+OH- ————— > H,0+ 5734kK
Finally, neutralization reaction is the water producing reaction by means of H*
and OH- ions. Whatever the strong of both the acid and the base we take in this
kind of reaction they will provide the same ions and produce water. The amount
of heat that evolves to produce 1 mole water is called neutralization heat.
Calculation tells us that it evolves 57.34 kJ heat.
@) Experiment
: Demonstration of Neutralization Reaction
Take 10 mL NaOH solution in a beaker. Take HCl solution in another
beaker. Dip a blue litmus paper in the solution. Now use your left hand to
pour HCI solution with a dropper in the NaOH solution. Simultaneously
use a glass tube in your right hand to stir mix the solutions. The moment
the blue litmus paper turns red, you will understand HC] has neutralized
NaOH solution.
\ HCI(aq) + NaOH(ag) —————> NaCl(aq) + H,0(1) P
) BS
Rg

Chemical Reactions 155
2. Precipitation Reaction: When two soluble compounds are mixed in a certain
solvent and if any new compound is produced that is insoluble or sparsely
soluble in that solvent, the compound settles at the bottom of the container as
solid. This solid new compound at the bottom is called precipitate. The reaction
in which the produced compound settles at the bottom of the container as
precipitate is called the precipitation reaction. For example, when silver nitrate
(AgNO,) solution is mixed with sodium chloride (NaCl) solution, they react to
produce silver chloride and sodium nitrate. NaNO, is highly soluble in water, so
it remains dissolved in the solution. But since solubility of AgCl is sparse, it
settles at the bottom as precipitate:

NaCl(aq) + AgNO;(aq) © ———> AgCl(s) + NaNO,(aq)

When you add barium chloride (BaCL,) solution with sodium sulfate (Na,SO,)
solution, they produce barium sulfate (BaSO,) and sodium chloride (NaCl).
Barium sulfate is precipitated.

Na,SO,(aq) + BaCl,(aq) _—————> BaSO,(s) + 2NaCl(aq)
However, there are some precipitation reactions in which there occurs electron
exchange. You will know about them in higher classes.

©) Experiment
Demonstration of Precipitation
= Reaction
of NaOH |‘ In a test tube, take 2-3 mL ferrous
sulfate solution and add NaOH solution
Aqueous —_—| | = fishtail that in drops. You will see a green
solution of F(OH), precipitate is forming gradually and
GEFESO), settling at the bottom of the tube.The
two chemical compounds are forming
Fig 7.02: Precipitation Reaction solid Fe(OH), precipitate here:
= FeSO, + NaOH ——— __ Fe(OH), | + Na,SO,
8

156 Chemistry
The precipitate compound is denoted by a bottom-faced arrow mark (|)at its
right.
7.3 Special Types of Chemical Reactions
There are some chemical reactions which do not fall in the redox and non-redox
classifications. Some of them are discussed below:
Hydrolysis Reactions: The chemical reactions, in which water as a reactant
reacts with other compounds and produce some new compounds is called
hydrolysis. Example:
sicl, + H,O ——> Si(OH), + 4HCl
Here, SiCl, and H,O are participating in a reaction so it is a hydrolysis reaction.
This kind of reaction sometimes produces non-transparent soluble compounds.
In that case, the reaction may be considered as a precipitation reaction. The
following reaction can be classified as both hydrolysis reaction and precipitation
reaction:
Alcl,(s) + 3H,o() —————> Al(OH),(s) + 3HCl(aq)
Here, Al(OH); is non-soluble in water.
Hydration Reaction: One or more molecules of water combine with ionic
compounds during formation of crystal lattice. This kind of reaction is called
hydration reaction. Water molecules that combine with ionic compounds is
called lattice water or hydrated water. For example, 5 moles water (SH,O)
combines with copper sulfate (CuSO,) and produce pentahydrate copper sulfate
(CuSO, .5H,O).
CuSO, + 5H,0 ———®» — CuS0,.5H,0
Penta hydrated copper sulfate
There are many such reactions:
8

Chemical Reactions 157

ZnSO, + 7H,0 ———»  280..7H,0

Heptahydrate Zinc Sulfate
FeSO, + 7H,0 —————> _ FeSO,7H,0
Heptahydrate Ferrous Sulfate
CaCl, + 6H,O ———— CaCl,.6H,O
Hexahydrate Calcium Chloride
MgCl, + 7H,O or MgCl,.7H,0
Heptahydrate Magnesium Chloride
Hydration reaction is basically similar to addition reaction. However, in addition
reaction, there is electron exchange while in hydration, it is not.
Isomerization Reaction: Two compounds with similar molecular formula and
with different properties are called isomer to each other. A chemical reaction in
which atoms in a molecule rearrange themselves to form one isomer from
another isomer is called isomerization. For example, H,N,CO molecular
formula denotes two compounds with varied structural formula: NH,CNO
(ammonium cyanate) and urea (H,N-CO-NH,). They are isomers to each other.
When heat is applied on ammonium cyanate, it produces urea.
NH,CNO en H,N-CO-NH,
Polymerization Reaction: A large number of molecules of the same compound
combine together to form a large molecule of heavy atomic mass under the effect
of high temperature and pressure and catalyst. This reaction is called
polymerization. In such case, the large molecule is called polymer and each of
the smaller molecules that combine together is called monomer. Under the effect
of 1200 atm. pressure, 200°C temperature and O, catalyst, numerous smaller
molecules of ethylene combine into large polymer molecule of polythene. This
reaction is polymerization reaction of ethylene. Here, ethylene molecules are
monomers while polythene molecule is polymer. In the equation, n denotes
numerous molecules. 0,
BS n(CH,-CH,) —_—_> (-CH2-CH,")n
8 200°C, 1200 atm

158 Chemistry
7.4 Examples of a Few Real Life Chemical Reactions
7.4.1 Chemical Reactions in Reality
We observe many happenings around us everyday which are caused by chemical
reactions. Examples:
1. Rust on Iron: We use various instruments made of iron everyday like knife,
scissors, machete etc. If we keep them exposed in open air, they undergo rusting.
Here, iron undergoes reaction with oxygen and water vapor and produces ferric
oxide. Since rust is fragile in nature, oxygen and water vapor from air pass
through it and continue to corrode the iron. Thus the whole object of iron is
spoiled.
2Fe + 1.50, + 3H,9 —————> 2Fe(OH);
2Fe(OH), ——————» Fe,0; nH,0
Rust
The number of moles of water in rust is not fixed. That is why, the formula of
tust is Fe,03.nH,O Here, the value of n can be 1, 2, 3, 4..... etc. integers.
2. Prevention of Corrosion of Copper and Aluminum: We also use copper-
aluminum products in our day to day life. When products made of Cu and Al
come in touch of open air, there produce a layer of CuO and ALO,. This layer
acts to prevent the air to come in direct contact with Cu and Al and no more
reaction take place. Thus the decay of Cu and Al is prevented.
3. Relief from the bite of ants and Bee: When ants or bee bite us, we feel pain
in the spot of the wound. We use lime on that spot to get relief from the pain. The
ant in its mouth or the bee in its sting carries an acid which is the cause of our
pain. The lime (base) reacts with that acid and neutralizes that. As a result, we
are relieved of the pain.
sy
Ss

Chemical Reactions 159
4. Energy Produced through Respiration: Respiration occurs in every cell of
our body. In respiration, basically, glucose (C,H,,O,) molecule is oxidized by O,
and in the process CO,, H,O and energy is produced.
C6H}20, + 60. _———— _ 6CO, + 6H,0 +Entergy
The digestion system in human body forms excess HCl in many of us. To
neutralize this acid, many doctors prescribe us to take antacid type medicine.
Antacid is a mixture of Mg(OH), and Al(OH),. These two bases neutralize
excess HCI and the patient feels relieved. The equation of the reaction is:
2HCl + Mg(OH),) —————> MgCl, + 2H,0
3Hcl + AI(OH)3 >» Alcl, +3H,0
5. Natural Gas as Fuel: Natural gas is used as fuel. Maximum percentage of
natural gas is composed of methane. When this methane gas is burnt in oxygen,
it produces CO,, H,O and heat. When we burn CNG, diesel, petrol, kerosene and
octane, they produce the same products.
CH, +20, —M————> CO, + 2H,0 + Entergy
74.2 Ways of Prevention of Some Harmful Reactions
Many products around us are continuously being decayed or eroded due to some
chemical reactions. We can make use of our knowledge of chemistry to prevent
such decaying and save many of them.
(i) To prevent corrosion of rust on iron, one can paint the outside of iron products
so that it does not come in contact with air. A coating of a comparatively less
active metal on iron through electrolysis, which is called electroplating, can also
save iron from rusting. The process which lays a coating of zinc on other metals
is called galvanizing and the process of tin plating lays a tin coating. The process
which lays a coating of a metal on other metals through electrolysis is called
x electroplating. This way we can save metals from corrosion.
Ss
aq

160 Chemistry
(ii) The roof and yard of our houses become slippery during the rainy season.
Then, we spread sand on those slippery spots. The slippery substance is alkaline.
Therefore, it requires some acidic substance to be neutralized. Sand (SiO,) is
acidic. This sand neutralizes the alkaline there.
(iii) Sewing needles are kept in coconut oil. The reason is to prevent it from any
reaction with oxygen and water vapor of air and get corroded.
7.5 Rate of Reaction
We know, in any reaction, reactants convert to products. Some reactions take the
time of less than 1 second while, some take quite a lot of time.

The amount of product produced from reactant per unit time is called

the rate of reaction.

a, . ~s AN

Fig 7.03: Reactions with Different Rates, Rust on iron, combustion of candle, Exploration

of bomb.
For example, when AgNO, is added to NaCl solution, it takes less than 1 second
to create the white precipitate of AgCl. On the other hand, it takes years together
for a bridge to rust. Reactions that take less time have a higher rate of reaction
and reactions that take more time have a lower rate of reaction.
2
8

Chemical Reactions 161
Investigation
Experiment on Rate of Reaction

Take four test tubes and mark them 1, 2, 3, 4. Take an approximate

amount of 0.5 mg sodium carbonate (Na,CO,) or washing soda in each of

them. Then add normal water to tube 1 and 2 and hot water to 3 and 4.

Now add 1 mL lemon juice (citric acid) or vinegar (4-10% acetic acid) to

tube number 2 and 4. Observe the following changes:

1 2 3 4
>
Cold |. Hot =)
water |>.° wala ee
vinega) wie
Fig 7.04: Reaction between sodium carbonate and acetic acid or vinegar

1. Which of the test tubes produces gas bubbles?

2. Which of the test tubes does not produce gas bubbles?

3. Which test tube produces the maximum number of gas bubbles?

4. Which test tube produces the minimum number of gas bubbles?

Think: Why does gas come out in larger amount from one of the tubes of

number 2 and 4?
Forma -21, Chemistry Class-9-10

162 Chemistry
The above experiment tells you all test tubes do not give the same amount of
product at a certain time
7.5.1 Le Chatelier’s Principle
In some reactions products react and turn into reactants again. When the
reactants react and produce new substance that is called forward reaction. When
the products again react and revert back to reactants that are called backward
reaction. At the start of reaction, the forward reaction has a higher rate. It
decreases gradually with the progress of time. Again, at the start, the rate of
backward reaction remains slow but it increases gradually with the progress of
time. At a stage, both the rates become equal. This state is known as equilibrium
of the reversible reaction.

§ Rate of forward reaction
Fi Rate of both reactions is equal
zr) =
3 Rate of backward reaction
time D
* Reactant
g / : equilibrium conectration
3 of both reactant and product
FI are unchange.
g Product
oO time >
Fig 7.05: Chemical equilibrium
Both forward and backward reactions continue in the equilibrium, the amount of
reactants that have already turned into products in forward reaction, is equal to
the reactants that has been produced in backward reaction at this state. Therefore,
it appears that the reaction has stopped but in reality it has not. However, in
equilibrium, if we change factors of reaction such as temperature, pressure and
8

Chemical Reactions 163
concentration etc. the equilibrium also changes. Increase and decrease of
products in equilibrium of reversible reaction is controlled by Le Chatelier’s
principle. The principle is:

At the equilibrium of reversible reaction, if any of the factors (temperature,

pressure and concentration of reactant) is changed, the equilibrium position

will shift in such a way that the effect of factor is neutralized.
Explanation of Le Chatellier’s Principle:
The effect of temperature, pressure and concentration of reactants in equilibrium
can be explained by Le Chatellier’s principle.
Effect of Heat
Let us consider a reversible reaction:

N, + 3H, {> 2NH3+ 92 kJ
The forward part of this reaction is exothermic; when reactants N, and H, react
to produce NH,, they also evolve heat. Conversely in the backward part, when
NH, converts to N, and H,, it absorbs heat. Therefore, heat is required to be
applied. Now we shall see according to Le Chatellier’s principle, what will
happen as we apply heat on this reversible reaction. According to the principle,
if heat is applied, the effect due to that heat has to be neutralized. Application of
heat will increase the forward reaction, increasing production of heat and that
will not neutralize the heat. If the reverse reaction is increased, that will absorb
more heat and neutralize the excess heat. Therefore, according to Le Chatellier’s
principle, we can say that, if heat is increased, the reverse reaction will also
increase. In other words, the effect of application of heat in exothermic reaction
will drive the equilibrium state to the left side, meaning, NH, converts into N,
and H,,.
In the same way, we can say, decrease of temperature in equilibrium will
8 increase the exothermic forward reaction and neutralize the effect of lesser heat.
g

164 Chemistry
The equilibrium will shift from left to right. Reactions that are not affected by
temperature will not have any effect on its equilibrium too.
Let us consider another reaction:
N,+0,+ 180k) ————__.2N0
Application of heat on this reaction will increase the forward endothermic
reaction or the equilibrium will shift left to right, N, and O, will react and
produce NO. In equilibrium, if heat is decreased, the reverse exothermic reaction
will increase reversing the equilibrium right to left; NO will convert into N, and
O,.
Effect of Pressure
In equilibrium of gaseous reaction, equilibrium of the reaction will change with
the change of pressure. In equilibrium, change of the total number of moles of
reactants and of products will create effect of pressure. Example:
N(g) + 3H,(g) <== 2NH; (g)
According to Le Chatellier, if pressure is applied, the effect of increased pressure
has to be neutralized. In the same volume, the gas with greater number of moles
has greater pressure and gas with smaller number of moles has smaller amount
of pressure. In the above reversible reaction, the gaseous product has greater
number of moles (1+3 = 4) whereas the right side has smaller number (2). So, to
neutralize the effect of increased pressure, the gaseous substance has to shift
from larger number to smaller number. The forward reaction will increase and
N, and H, will produce NH,. In other words, the equilibrium will shift from
greater moles to smaller moles. So, if pressure is decreased in equilibrium,
according to the principle, to neutralize the effect of decreased pressure, the
equilibrium state will shift toward greater moles from smaller moles.
We can consider another reversible reaction:
29
N(g) + 0.(g) —__> 2NO(g) S

Chemical Reactions 165
In this reaction, mole number of reactants is (1+1) = 2 and mole number of
product is also 2. Since this reaction has no change in the number of moles, there
is no change in pressure too. The reaction does not evidence any effect of
pressure on its equilibrium.
Effect of Concentration
Equilibrium of all reactions are effected by the concentration of reactants. If in
the equilibrium state of the reaction, the concentration of any reactant is
increased, Le Chatellier says the concentration of the reactantant has to be
decreased in order to neutralize the effect of increased concentration. Similarly,
if the concentration of any product is increased, the amount of product is
neutralized as the reaction reverts and the concentration of reactants is increased.
That means, the equilibrium shifts toward left.
(?) Exercise

Multiple Choice Questions
1. Which of the following acids is present in vinegar?

a. citric acid b. acetic acid

c. tartaric acid d. ascorbic acid
2. Which can be used in the wound of bee stinging?

a. lime b. vinegar

c. table salt d. water
3. What type of reactions occurs when antacid medicine is taken?

a. neutralization b. combustion

c. addition d. substitution/displacement

5

166 Chemistry
4. In the reaction H,SO,+ MgO —————>

i. heat is produced

ii. electron transition occurs

iii. precipitation occurs

Which is correct?

a.i b. ii and iii

c. iand iii d. i, ii and iii
5. The reaction 2FeCl, + Cl, > 2FeCl,

i. Isomerization reaction

ii. redox reaction

iii. addition reaction

Which is correct?

a.i and ii b.i and iii

c. ti and iii d.i, ii and iii
6. What is the oxidation number of Sulfur in H,SO,?

a. +2 b. +4

c. +6 d.+8
Creative Questions
1.Both Opu and Setu use natural gas for cooking. Although there are black
shades at the bottom of pans in Opu’s house, there is none on the pans at
Setu’s house.
a. What is irreversible reaction?
b. What is meant by chemical equilibrium?
c. What type of reactions occur during cooking in their house? Explain.
d. In your opinion, in which of the houses of the stem, gas is wasted during ~
cooking? Give reasons for your opinion. §

Chemical Reactions 167
2. Pb(NO;), + 2K]. ~=———>
The table below is filled up in the light of the above reaction [K= 39,
F 127]:
Container Container|Container|Container| Total
Element 1 2 3 4 | Volume __ [Precipitation
used (mL)
Volume of 0.2
MPb(NO;)(mL) > |? 73 0
Volume of water nL)
Yellow
olume of OSMKI(miJ1_[1_[1_[a [a _|
Total volume of solution
of each container
a.What is exothermic reaction?
b. Why aren’t periodic number and valency same things? Discuss
c. What is the total amount of KI used in the period? Determine.
d. Which container will contain more yellow solution? Explain with reasons.
3.
Na+=Cl, ———> Nacl
Zn + H,SO, —W—» ZnSO, + H,
a. What is isomerization reaction?
b. What do you understand by reversible reaction?
c. Determine the oxidation number of sulfur in product substance of 2nd
reaction.
d. In the first reaction of the stem, redox- occurs simultaneously. Analyze.
20
ES

Chapter Eight
Chemistry and Energy
When wood is burnt, it makes fire, similarly, when petrol, diesel etc are burnt in
the engine of automobile, the car is run, That is to say, these have energy. This
energy is called chemical energy. How does this energy prevail in the
substances? The battery produces electricity which lights up the torch. Burning
mineral oil produces heat which is then converted to electricity. Many countries
are using the atomic energy to produce electricity. Chemistry or chemical
reaction or nuclear reaction is involved with all these. However, these reactions
also have some adverse effects on us too. This chapter will discuss all these
things.
=
8

Chemistry and Energy 169
® By the end of the chapter we will be able to-

* explain the relation of producing energy with chemical changes.

* realize the importance of purity of fuel in energy production; limit the
consumption of these fuel for saving the environment and show
consciousness in selection of appropriate fuels.

¢ find out chemical reaction related problems and prepare investigation
plan, implementation and test its effectiveness keeping the safety
measures in mind.

* take decision responsibly and spontaneously with confidence in
performing chemical reactions and in producing energy.

* explain the idea of direct current using the electronic concept of
oxidation-reduction reactions.

* describe the process of producing electricity by chemical reactions.

* carry out the reactions using electricity.

* present opinion on the product of electrolysis of different substances and
their commercial use.

* construct the electrode of galvanic cell.

¢ differentiate between an electrolytic cell and a galvanic cell.

* explain the application of electrochemical cell.

* give opinion on nuclear electricity production after relative analysis.

* carry out experiments of exothermic and endothermic reactions.

* show consciousness on the worse effect of chemical reactions.

* show interest on using pure fuel.

¢ show the change of heat on dissolving salts during chemical changes
through experiments.

Forma -22, Chemistry Class-9-10

170 Chemistry
8.1 Chemical Energy
8.1.1 Source of Chemical Energy
Matter has molecules and atoms. An atom remains connected to another atom
because of attraction energy (bond). Similarly, a molecule remains bonded with
another molecule due to another kind of attraction (inter molecular attraction),
These energies are called chemical energy.
Bond Energy
In a chemical bond, the energy by which an atom remains joined with anther
atom is called bond energy. In sodium chloride, there is ionic bond between
sodium ion and chloride ion. There is covalent bond between carbon and oxygen
in carbon dioxide. Gain, in iron, one atom is bonded with another due to metallic
bond. The energy that acts here in these cases to maintain the bonds is the bond
energy.
Inter Molecular Energy
In a covalent compound, the energy that keeps the molecules combined with
each other is called the inter molecular energy. For example, water is a covalent
compound. Inter molecular energy combines the molecules of surrounding water
with a molecule of water. On the other hand, in the ionic compound sodium
chloride, 06 chloride ions surround a sodium ion. There is energy active in
between them. Again, each chloride ion is surrounded by 06 sodium ion. They
are also combined due to the energy.
The attraction energy in between ions of an ionic compound is stronger than inter
molecular energy present between covalent molecules. That is why the melting
point and boiling point of ionic compounds is greater than those of covalent
substances.
Due to the same reason, ionic compounds remain as solids in room temperature
whereas covalent compounds usually remain in liquid or gaseous state in room
temperature. However, there are some exceptions like naphthalene that, even
though a covalent compound, remain as solid in room temperature.
The inter molecular energy in a covalent compound consisting of atoms of two
elements (HCl) is greater than inter molecular energy in a covalent compound
consisting of atoms of the same element (H,).
20
S

Chemistry and Energy 171
Transformation of Energy in Chemical Reaction
Each substance contains some energy. Usually in chemical reactions, the energy
of the recreants is necessary to make the reactions happen or some chemical
reactions result in generation of energy. That means, energy is transformed in
chemical reactions. Energy required making a reaction happen or the resultant
energy from a reaction may have different forms like heat energy, light energy,
electricity, sound etc. energies.
Unit of Measurement of Energy
Earlier, calorie or kilocalorie was used as unit to measure energy. The heat
applied to raise the temperature of 1 gram water 1°C is called a calorie (cal in
brief). 1 kilocalorie is 1 thousand calorie. Kilocalorie is expressed by kcal.
Presently, the international standard unit to measure all kinds of energy is Joule.
A joule is work done by a force of one newton acting through one metre
displacement. It is expressed by the abbreviate j. 1 kilojoule (kJ) is equal to 1000
joule.
The relation between calorie and joule is 1 cal = 4.18 J.
8.1.2 Classification of Chemical Reactions According to Change of Heat
Sometimes, heat needs to be applied on recreants to transform them into
products, and sometimes the reactants themselves form products and in the
process, heat is evolved. According to change of heat, reactions are of two kinds:
(i) Exothermic reactions and (ii) Endothermic . In exothermic reactions, the
value of AH is negative and in endothermic reactions, the value is positive.
Any substance has a specific energy in a specific temperature. This energy is
called internal energy. If we express the total internal energy of reactants in a
reaction with E, and the total energy of the products with E,, then the change of
heat energy in that reaction is:

AH = Total internal energy of the products (E,)

- Total internal energy of the reaction (E,)
20
S

172 Chemistry
in exothermic reactions, the total | Heat absorbed
internal energy of reactants (E,) is

greater than the total internal energy of <ai>
products (E,). Therefore, the value of >
AH=(E,-E,) becomes negative.
For example, when in a reaction, the
total internal energy of reactants 50
kJ/mol and the total internal energy of Fig 8.01: Exothermic and Endothermic process
products is 20 kJ/mol, AH = (20-50)
= -30 kJ/mol.

Again, in endothermic reactions, the total internal energy of reactants is lesser
than the total internal energy of products. Therefore, the value of AH= E,-E, in
this case is positive. For example, when in a reaction, the total internal energy of
reactants 70 kJ/mol and the total internal energy of products is 80 kJ/mol,
AH = (80-70) =+10 kJ/mol.
Exothermic Reactions
The chemical reactions in which heat is evolved are called exothermic reactions.
An equation of exothermic reaction can be written with the word Heat at the
right side. If it is written with the expression AH, the value will be negative (-).
You have seen the natural gas burnt while cooking, produces heat. If water is
poured on dry lime, that substance becomes hotter. Methane is the basic
ingredient of cooking gas. When we burn this gas, each 1 mole of it reacts with
oxygen of air and produces carbon dioxide, water and 890 kJ heat.

CH,(g) + 20.(g) ———» CO.(g) + 2H,0(g) + 890 kj/mol
Methane Oxygen Carbon dioxide Water Heat

Or,

CH,(g) + 20,(g) ——» CO(g) + 2H,0(g) AH =-890 kj/mol

oS

Methane Oxygen Carbon dioxide Water Heat 8

Chemistry and Energy 173
Again, dry lime is calcium oxide (CaO). When water is poured in it, calcium
hydroxide Ca (OH), is produced. Alongside, 63.95 kJ/mol heat is produced.
That’s the reason of its being heated.
CaO(s) + 2H,0(l) t——» Ca(OH),(aq) + 63.95 kJ/mol
Calcium Oxide Water Calcium hydroxide heat
Or,
CaO(s) + 2H,0(l) ———> Ca(OH),(aq) AH = -63.95 kJ/mol
Calcium Oxide Water Calcium hydroxide heat

In both the above reactions, the total internal energy of reactants (E,) is greater
than the total internal energy of products (E,). That extra energy has evolved as
heat in the reaction.
Endothermic Reactions
Chemical reactions in which heat is absorbed F
are called endothermic reactions. They are F
also called heat absorbing reactions. In the Catescasiion yates
equation of endothermic reactions, on the /
left side, the head may be recorded. If it is
written with the expression AH, the value
will be positive (+). In villages, the outer cast Bag SSS
of snail or oyster is gathered and burnt to Ie a 1
produce edible lime. Actually, these casts Bee te Se oS |
contain about 98% calcium carbonate. The == =§ “(4
heat from the fire transforms this calcium NR Oia
carbonate into calcium oxide and carbon 8.02: Preparation of lime from
dioxide. The calcium oxide is lime which ial
remains as left over and the carbon dioxide

% mixes in the air.

S

AQ

174 Chemistry

CacO,(s) + 176.8 kJ/mole ————» Ca0(s) + CO,(g)
Calcium carbonate heat calcium oxide carbon dioxide
Or,

CaCO,(s) —— caO(s) + CO,(g) AH =~-176.8 kJ/mole
8.1.3 Calculation of Heat Change in Chemical Reaction Using the Bond
Energy
The value of AH in a chemical reaction is determined in two ways. One we have
just seen in the above discussion. In the other, it is determined using the bond
energy- deduce the total bond energy of products from the total bond energy of
the reactants. The result in both the ways is same.

The energy required to break the bonds of atoms of a compound and separate
them is called the bond energy. Again, the energy required to form the bonds of
atoms of a compound and combine them is called the bond energy.
During chemical reaction, breaking the bonds of reactants and formation of new
bonds of products take place. Energy is needed to break the bonds and energy is
released in bond formation.
In any reaction, if the total bond energy of reactants is B,, and the total bond
energy of products is B,, then the heat change in that reaction is:
AH =The total bond energy of reactants (B,) }
— The total bond energy of products(B,)
= Total energy required for breaking the old bonds (B,)

— Total energy released in the formation of new bonds(B,)

\ f 2
8

Chemistry and Energy 175
In exothermic reactions, the value of B, is lesser than B,, so the value of AH is
negative while in endothermic reactions, the value of B, is greater than B., so the
value of AH is positive.
Table 8.01: Bond and Bond Energy
Bond Energy Bond Energy
Bond Bond
one’ | (kJ/mol) one’ | (kI/mol)
Nast
On | 4
cc 00 | 498
cc | 6s
NEN 946
woot
HH 86
HCl
Ht 9
“co | 0
When the table says, the bond energy of O=O is 498 kJ/mol, we understand, 498
kilojoule heat is required to break an O=O bond. On the other hand, the
formation of an O=O bond evolves 498 kilojoule heat.
@) Example
Problem: Determine the heat change in the reaction CH,+ Cl, >
CH3Cl + Cl,. Given, bond energy of C-H = 414 kJ/mol, bond energy of C-Cl
= 244 kJ/mol and bond energy of H-Cl = 431 kJ/mol.
Solution: in the reaction CH,+ Cl, > CH3Cl+ Cl, 1 mole C-H bond
and 1 mole Cl-Cl bond has been broken among the reactants while 1 mole H-
Cl bond has been formed. Therefore,
S Total bond energy applied on reactants to break bonds = (414 + 244) kJ = 658
S kJ

176 Chemistry
Total bond energy evolved from products to form bonds = (326 + 431) kJ =
757 kJ

The heat change in the reaction AH = (658 — 757)kJ = —99 kJ

Since the value of AH is negative here, so the reaction is exothermic. This
reaction evolves 99 kJ/mol heat.

8.2 Uses of Chemical Energy

8.2 Use of Chemical Energy

We can transform the chemical energy into different energies and put that to our
use.

8.2.1 Transformation of chemical energy into different types of energy
Chemical energy can transform into any types of energy like heat, light,
electricity, sound or mechanical energy. Some examples are discussed below.
Burning of Fuel

We get heat and light energy when we burn coal, natural gas, wood etc. This
energy is obtained basically from the chemical energy present in these
substances. Burning is actually to let a substance react with the oxygen of air.
Methane (CH,) is the main ingredient of natural gas. When methane is burnt, it
produces carbon dioxide, water vapor, heat and light.

Fireworks

The fireworks that you see on the sky during large festivals render light, sound
and mechanical energy. The chemical elements inside the fireworks react with
each other and the chemical energy in them produces light, sound and mechani-
cal energy.

Dry Cell

You are familiar with battery. The batteries used in torch, remotes are dry cells.
The chemical ingredients inside a dry cell react with each other and the o
chemical energy in them transform into electricity. 8

Chemistry and Energy 177
Daniel Cell
The batteries you see on bus, truck etc. are Daniel cells. Zinc metal stick in zinc
sulfate salt solution and copper metal stick in copper sulfate salt solution are
used to make Daniel cells. The following reaction takes place in this cell:

Zn(s) + CuSO,(aq) ————» ZnSO, (aq) + Cu(s)
This reaction turns the chemical energy into electricity.
8.2.2, Chemical Energy and Use of Various Energies Obtained from
Chemical Energy
Chemical energy remains stored in molecules and atoms of elements. When a
substance reacts with another, then we get chemical energy. We turn that energy
into various energies and put to use. Chemical energy is the most used of all
kinds of energies on earth.
When wood or natural gas is burnt for cooking, their chemical energy turns into
heat energy. The heat obtained from burning wood is used for making bricks or
making earthen pots. Iron, steel and ceramic industries require huge amount of
heat. Coal, petroleum, natural gas etc. mineral fuels are used in heat engines.
These fuels are burnt in the burning chamber to produce heat and the heat is then
turned into mechanical energy to run automobiles, ships, planes, trains etc.
The first thing that strikes our mind when we talk about chemical energy is
photo-synthesis. Plants have chlorophyll in their green parts. Chlorophyll helps
them to utilize sunlight and conduct the reaction between water absorbed from
the earth through their roots and carbon dioxide from air. Thus, they produce
glucose (C,H,,0,) and oxygen (O,). This oxygen flies out from the plants. This
reaction is called photo-synthesis. However, the sunlight that participates in the
reaction remains in the plant in the form of chemical energy.
Forma -23, Chemistry Class-9-10

178 Chemistry
6CO, + 12H,0 ———— > C,H,,0, + 60, + 6H,0
Sunlight
Fig 8.03: Photosynthesis
Besides, the body of both plants and animals produce fat and protein. They also
contain chemical energy. Again, humans and other animals consume them as
food. The body of humans and plants can be called chemical engines. Plants get
chemical energy from this carbohydrate, protein and fat. This energy turns into
heat or other energy. Plants and animals use these transformed energies to
conduct different activities. Therefore, it is understood that without chemical
energy, life is impossible.
8.2.3. Appropriate Use of Chemical Energy
Petroleum, coal natural gas etc. are called fossil fuel. These fuels have chemical
energy stored in them. Burning these fuels or letting them to react with oxygen,
heat energy can be obtained. This heat energy is used to cooking, running
automobiles and electricity generation.
Besides providing heat energy, burning these fossil fuels have harmful effects on
nature. They produce carbon dioxide. The amount of that every year is 21.3
billion tons of carbon dioxide. This gas is a greenhouse gas, meaning it contains
heat. As a result, the world is getting warmer day by day. Again, carbon dioxide
reacts with rain water and produces carbonic acid (H,CO,). When it comes down
to earth with rain, we call that acid rain, which is very harmful for nature. These
bad effects of fossil fuels are imposing a threat to life on earth. Therefore, we
need to be meticulous in using fossil fuels. We should not use excess fossil fuel.
Excessive use of fossil fuels will end up their reserve. Meticulous use will ensure
that the reserve remains for our future and they won’t impose any bad effect on =
our lives. S

Chemistry and Energy 179
8.2.4 Importance of Purity of Fuel
We are constantly making use of various kinds of fuels to get chemical energy.
Their purity is an important factor. If we burn them in insufficient air, carbon
monoxide is produced alongside carbon dioxide, which is a harmful gas. It is
dangerous for our health. Natural fuels are of crude form. They have mixture of
compounds of nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorus etc. That is why, these fuels need
refinement before being sent to market. If we burn them without refinement, the
oxides of these elements also go in the air. These oxides mix with rainwater and
form acids which again come down to earth with rain. The acid rain is:
CO, + H,O —-» § H,CO,
Carbon dioxide + Water ————» Carbonic Acid
280, + 0. ——> 280;
Sulfur dioxide + Oxygen ————> Sulfur trioxide
280, +  2H,0 M+  2H,S0,
Sulfur trioxide + Water — Sulfur acid
4NO, + 2H,0 + 0, ——>  4HNO,
Sulfur trioxide + Water + Oxygen ————> Nitric acid
This acid rain causes huge damage to our environment. Plants die, water in water
bodies turn acidic which makes survival of the fishes and other living bodies
tough. Then, the smoke of automobiles consists of carbon monoxide, nitrous
oxide and unused methane. In presence of sunlight, these react to create various
venomous gases. They are known as photochemical smog. Elements of this
smog harm the ozone (O,) layer of our atmosphere. Ozone protects the earth
from the ultraviolet rays of sun. If this ozone layer is harmed, life of humans will
o be troublesome.
S
XN

180 Chemistry
8.2.5 Negative Effect of Use of Chemical Energy
We burn fuels in order to get energy. Mainly, we make use of chemical energy
through the use of fuels. Although, presently we are using solar energy, nuclear
energy, wind energy, hydro energy etc. yet, the major part of our required energy
is provided by fossil fuels. We have already learned that every year, we are
producing 21.3 billion tons of carbon dioxide gas by burning fossil fuels. Trees
take in carbon dioxide in its photo-synthesis process. Besides, some other
natural processes use up half of it. The other half remains on earth. As carbon
dioxide is a heavy gas, it remains below the atmosphere. It does not undergo
reactions with other elements of the atmosphere too. However, it has high heat
absorbing capacity. Due to this, the temperature of the earth is increasing day by
day. This is called global warming. This global warming is melting the ice of the
polar region and thus increasing the sea level. Many countries including
Bangladesh are at risk of being submerged. Besides carbon dioxide, some other
gases are also contributing to the global warming. It is denoted by the term
“Greenhouse effect.” The gases responsible are known as greenhouse gas. You
have already learned about acid rain and photochemical smog. These facts put
carbon dioxide with a major share than greenhouse gases of harming the
atmosphere. The greenhouse gases undergo reactions with ozone layer and harm
its capacity. The ozone layer acts as the filter of sunlight in the atmosphere. The
ultra violet ray of the sun is very harmful to our skin and it may cause cancer
even. The ozone layer prevents this ultra violet ray.
8.2.6 Uses of Ethanol as Fuel
The other name of ethanol is ethyl alcohol the formula of which is CH,-CH,-OH.
Burning of this alcohol also produces heat like the fuels already discussed.
Therefore, it can also be used in engines of all kinds of vehicles and carriers as a
fuel. Many countries including North America are using it as a mix with fossil
fuels. All automobiles in USA use fuel with 10% ethanol mixed in it. Thus
ethanol may be a pliant substitute of fossil fuels relieving the pressure on our
reserve. ES
ES

Chemistry and Energy 181

8.3 Chemical Process by Electricity

8.3.1 Electrochemical Cells

Burning fuels, chemical energy can be turned into heat energy which can again

be transformed into electrical energy. Now we will learn how to convert heat

energy directly into electrical energy and how to put that electrical energy to use

in order to conduct reactions. The mechanism that helps chemical reaction to

convert chemical energy into electrical energy directly or uses electrical energy

to conduct chemical reactions is called electrochemical cell. In an

electrochemical cell, two metal sticks or graphite sticks are submerged in one or

two electrolytic solutions. The sticks are connected directly or through battery

with a metallic wire. The graphite sticks are called electrodes. Electrochemical

cells are of two kinds:

(i) Electrolytic Cells: The cell where electricity is driven from an outer source

to carry out a chemical reaction inside the cell is called electrolytic cell.

(ii) Galvanic Cells: The cell where chemical elements undergo reaction and

produce electrical energy is called Galvanic cell.

Conductor

The materials, through which electricity can pass, are called electrical

conductor. For example, metals, graphite, molten salt, salt solution, acid and

base solutions etc are electrical conductors.

Depending on the mechanism of passing of electricity, conductors are of two

kinds: Electronic Conductor and Electrolyte.

Electronic Conductor

The substances through which electricity is passed to electron mediums are

called electronic conductors. You have seen, metals contain metallic bonds. As a

result, they contain lots of free electrons. Graphite also contains free electrons.

These substances let electricity pass through to electron mediums, and for that,
a they are electronic conductor. For example, iron (Fe), copper (Cu), nickel (Ni)
& etc. are electron conductor.

182 Chemistry
Electrolyte

The substances that let electricity pass in their melted and solution state but do
not let pass in their solid state and simultaneously brings about chemical change
in that substance are called electrolytes. The electrolytes remain ionized during
their melted or solution state. The ion is used by electrolytes to conduct
electricity. Ionic compounds and some polar covalent compounds become
electrolytes in their molten or solution state. For example, sodium chloride
(NaCl), copper sulfate (CuSO,), sulfuric acid (H,SO,), water (HO), ethanoic
acid (CH,COOH) etc. are of this type.

Electrolytes are again of two types:

(i) Strong Electrolyte: The electrolytes that remain completely ionized in
molten or solution state are called strong electrolytes. Sodium chloride (NaCl),
copper sulfate (CuSO,) and sulfuric acid (H,SO,) are strong electrolytes.

(ii) Weak Electrolytes: The electrolytes that remain ionized at a very little
amount in molten or solution state are called weak electrolytes. Water (H,O),
ethanoic acid (CH,COOH) etc. are of this type.

Electrode

Electrode is a metallic or non-metallic electric conductor. They are electronic
conductors sunk in the solution of electrolytes. In the electrochemical cell, an
element or ion donates an electron to an electrode in oxidation reaction. The
positive ion accepts electron from the other electrode in the reduction reaction.
That way, oxidation-reduction occurs in the whole cell. The electrode where
oxidation occurs is called anode electrode and the electrode where reduction
occurs is cathode.

8.3.2 Electrolytic Cell, Electrolysis and the Mechanism of Electrolysis
Electrolytic cell uses electricity to conduct chemical reaction. There occurs a
chemical reaction at the time of electricity passing through molten or solution of
electrolytes, which is known as electrolysis. When electricity passes through
molten sodium chloride, it produces chlorine gas in anode and sodium metal in ~
cathode. This is electrolysis of sodium chloride: s

Chemistry and Energy 183
2Nacl(l) ———— 2Na(s) + Cl,(g)
Mechanism of Electrolysis of Molten
Sodium Chloride
Take molten sodium chloride in a mapde (ve) i Cathode (-ve)
glassware or ceramic ware. The molten
sodium chloride contains sodium ion ||
(Na*) and chloride ion (CI) ion. Both of | |
them are able to migrate. Two metallic @) |
bars or graphite sticks are submerged | |
into the molten sodium chloride. If we ——
connect one of them to the positive part Fig 8.04: Electrolysis of Sodium Chloride
of a battery and another to the negative in Electrolytic Cell
part, the anode connected with positive positive part of battery will attract
positive charged Cl- ion while cathode connected with negative part of battery
will attract negative charged Na’ ion. Cl ion will donate electron at anode and
become chlorine gas. The oxidation at anode:
ct ——> late
On the other side, Na‘ accepts electron from cathode and becomes metallic
sodium. The reduction at cathode:
Na*+e —— Na
The ion that is attracted by cathode is called cation and the ion attracted by anode
is anion.
Identification of Chlorine Gas at Anode with Litmus Paper
If we collect the gas produced during the electrolysis of molten NaCl in a test
tube and hold wet blue litmus on the test tube, the paper will turn red. That will
« prove the presence of chlorine gas.
Ss
N

184 Chemistry
cl + HO — kcl + Hocl
Chlorine + Water > Hydrochloric acid + Hypochlorous acid
Since Chlorine gas and water undergo reaction and produce two acids, the blue
litmus turns red.
Electrolysis of Concentrate Sodium Chloride Solution
In concentrated sodium chloride solution, NaCl becomes ionized and produces
Na‘ and Cl ion.
Nacl ———> Nat + ch
The difference from molten sodium chloride is that the solution contains H* and
OF ions too as water is partially ionized here.
H,O = ——> Ht + OH-
During the electrolysis in this electrolytic cell, Na* and H* will go toward
cathode together. We know, H* ion is more prone to accept electron than Na‘ ion.
So, H* ion accepts one electron at cathode and becomes H atom. Two H atoms
again join together and become H, molecule. The reaction at cathode:
H+ + e~ —H (Reduction reaction)
H+H > H,
Cl and OH: go simultaneously toward anode. We know, OH: ion is more prone
to donate electron than Cl. However, since the molarity of Cl in the solution is
higher than OH: ion, so it donates electron at anode earlier than OH-. One CI ion
donates an electron at anode and becomes Cl atom. Two Cl atoms join together
producing Cl, molecule. The reaction at anode:
cl > cl+e (Oxidation)
cd+cd > ch
og,
S

Chemistry and Energy 185
Na* and OH’ remain as left Cholorine gas Hydrogen gas
over in the container. They f @ S f
undergo reaction and produce acy _ 2 |
NaOH. uti
solution |
This way, if any solution |
consists of multiple cations o ©
: : : NaOH
and anions, which cation of | solution
them will discharge first at --IpP —_—-
cathode or which anion will
% ® Fig 8.05: Electrolysis of Sodium Chloride
receive charge at anode is CG :
oncentrate Solution.
determined by three factors:
(@) The Tendency of Cations and Anions to Table 8.02: Electrochemical
Discharge: series
If there are more than one kind of cations in an
electrolysis, there is a priority list for the cations Lit No;
which specifies which of them will discharge first. K so,
The series is called Reactivity Series of Metals or Na’ ct
Electro Chemical Series. The element at the top
’ doy 3 Mg” Br
between any two elements of this series is more ; ;
reactive and it joins the reaction earlier than the Al I
. 2+ =
other. Again, the one element at the lower order a OH
between any two elements will accept electron Fe*
earlier and discharge or become reduced. For Sn”
example, among Na* and H*, H* is at lower order Pb**
than Na* and so, it will discharge accepting electron H
earlier and be reduced. Again, Fe?* is at a cu"
comparative lower order between Fe** and Zn’*. So, Ag’
Fe** will discharge earlier.
Au*
There is another series specifying the priority of anions to donate electron and
discharge in electrolysis. This series is called Electrochemical Series of Anions.
Forma -24, Chemistry Class-9-10

186 Chemistry
The one that is at the comparative lower order between any two elements in the
series will donate electron earlier and discharge or be oxidized. Between SO,>
and Cl, Cl is situated lower than the other. So, Cl will donate electron earlier
and discharge or be oxidized. OH" is at the lower order between Cl: and OH’. So
OH will discharge, donating electron first and be oxidized.
(ii) Effect of Concentration of Cation and Anion: When there are more than
one cations and anions in solution, the effect of molarity is more important a
factor than tendency to discharge. The molarity of Cl ion in 0.1 molar NaCl
solution in room temperature will be 0.1 molar. On the other hand, deducing
water, the molarity of OH ion will be 10-7 molar. That means the molarity of Cl
ion is 10° times larger than that of OH’ ion. According to the electrochemical
series, OH” is situated lower than Cl and it is supposed to be the first to
discharge. But due to molarity or concentration, Cl ion in this case will be the
first to discharge.
(iii) Nature of Electrode: Sometimes, the kind of electrode causes exception in
the above two factors of discharge in an electrolytic cell. NaCl aqua solution has
two kinds of cations- Na* and H*. When platinum electrode is used, then
according to the factor (i), H* discharges and produces H, gas. But this changes
when mercury is used as cathode and then Na* ion discharges earlier.
Electrolysis of Pure Water
In the electrolysis of pure water, anode and cathode of some inert metal is used
in electrolytic cell. Usually it is platinum. Water exists a little bit ionized:

4H,0 = 1 4H* + 40H
A few drops of sulfuric acid is added to water to increase decomposition of
water. Now, when electricity is passed through, anode attracts hydroxyl (OH)
ion and cathode attracts hydrogen (H”) ion. The following reactions take place in |
the electrodes: S

Chemistry and Energy 187
Cathode: 4H* + 4e~ > 2H, (Reduction)
Anode: 40H~ > 0, + 2H,0+ 4e7 (Oxidation)

Hydrogen is produced in cathode and Oxygen is produced in anode.

You may be thinking why some Oxygen _ -Bydtegen aaa

drops of sulfuric acid or some gas Keres <

lattice of NaCl is required here.

ss = '— Battery

You know, electricity does not CTol}owD

pass until it is a complete KTod [ool

circuit. Electron is the medium Mixture of | [sf]

_.,. Water and Cathode Anode

of the flow of electricity in gciq ~

anode, cathode or battery. Water a

hardly gets ionized. So, pure :

. . Fig 8.06: Electrolysis of Water

water acts like non-conductive

to electricity. To increase the conductivity of water, some drops of sulfuric acid

is necessary.

8.3.3 Use of electrolysis

Presently, mills and industries have sprung up all over the world. The

contribution of electrolysis in the industrial sector beggars description.

Production of important compounds, extraction of metal from ores, purification

of metals, protection from decay, prevention of rust etc. processes require

electrolysis and electrolysis requires electrolytic cells. Some of the usages are

described below:

Extraction of Metal: Alkali metals, alkaline earth metals, aluminum etc. active

metals are extracted through electrolysis. Usually, the cathodes produce these
e metals when electricity is passed through electrodes in the liquids of such
Sy
N

188 Chemistry
metallic compounds or solutions. For example, in the electrolysis of sodium
chloride, we find sodium metal in cathode and chlorine gas in anode.
In the electrolysis of molten pure aluminum oxide or alumina (A1,0,),
aluminum metal is produced at cathode and oxygen gas at anode.

ALO, g=—=——> = 2Al** + 307
Reaction in anode: 307° = 0, + 6e7
Reaction in cathode: 2Al** + 6e° — 2Al
Purification of Metal: After extraction, the metal contains various other
elements mixed in them. Electrolysis is highly effective to purify these metals.
Purification of copper, zinc, lead, aluminum etc. involves electrolysis process.
The same adulterated metal electrode of the adulterated metal is connected to the
positive edge of battery. A pure electrode of the same metal is connected to the
negative edge of the battery. When electricity is passed through, the metallic ion
from impure electrode goes into the solution and from the solution the ion is
transferred to pure electrode. As a result, the pure electrode thickens while the
impure electrode decays.
Electroplating: Adding a coating of a metal on another metal is called
electroplating. The process is used for increasing brightness of metal or to
prevent decadence of metal. Less reactive metals do not react with oxygen of air.
To prevent decadence of a metal, a coating of a comparatively less reactive metal
is given on the outer layer of that metal. Usually, nickel, chromium etc. metals
are used in electroplating. Iron rusts and decays when it comes in contact with
water vapor and air. Nickel, chromium or silver coating is used on iron. They
prevent air and water vapor to come in direct contact with iron. The process is
discussed below: S

Chemistry and Energy 189
To electroplate iron products such as
spoon, a solution of AgNO, is taken \
in a glass container. The product that =

, ¥ Bred Silver |
will receive the coating is connected (Anode) o |
to the negative edge of battery and Y : | 7
thus is dealt as cathode. A silver foil KC Bay hi
is used as anode. When electricity is | Spoon

. : . | (cathode)

passed in the solution, the metallic (48°)
Ag atom from the anode donates an ES fon
electron and goes into the solution as
Ag* ion. This Ag* ion of solution ; : ;

Fig 8.07 : Silver Electroplating on Spoon
accepts an electron from the cathode and sticks itself to the cathode as metallic
silver. Thus the coating of silver is done.

Decomposition of AgNO, in solution: AgNO, —> Ag* + NO;”
Oxidation at anode: Ag — Agt+ e&
Reduction at cathode: Ag* + e*— Ag

Commercial Use of Products with Electrolysis

We can do many things with electrolysis. Various metals such as sodium,

aluminum, zinc, calcium, magnesium etc. are extracted from ores by

electrolysis. Besides, purification of copper, gold, silver etc. involves

electrolysis. The present world has a great demand for these metals.

We know, silver and copper has the least amount of resistance. Since silver is a

precious metal, copper is generally used in producing electric wire. Can you

imagine a place on earth without electric wire? Aluminum is another important

metal as it is necessary to make utensils. Since the metal is light, it is extensively
« used in making airplanes. Zinc and magnesium are required to add coating on
& iron products. Chromium, nickel, gold, silver etc. are electroplating metals on

190 Chemistry
less precious metal to add brightness. This makes the ornaments more lucrative.
Chlorine gas produced from electrolysis of sea water is used as anti-parasite
agent. Sodium hydroxide is used as a raw material in different industries.
8.4 Production of Electricity by Chemical Reaction
Galvanic Cell or Voltaic Cell
Galvanic or Voltaic cells are those electrochemical cells where the elements
within undergo reactions to produce electricity. In a Galvanic cell, usually two
electrodes of different elements are submerged in two different electrolytic
solutions in two different containers. The more reactive metal electrode is used
as anode and the less reactive metal electrode is cathode. The electrolytic
solution has to contain ions of the same metal as the electrode is made of. For
example, if an electrode is made of copper, it has to be kept in CuSO, solution.
Similarly, a zinc electrode is kept in ZnSO, solution. When the two electrodes
are externally connected with metal wire, electron can flow from one to other,
meaning flow of electricity is ensured. A U shaped salt bridge is created between
the two electrolytic solutions. The U shaped glass tube contains KCl salt
solution. To make it more clear to you, the structure of a Daniell cell is described
below.
Daniell Cell
The cell was invented by John Frederick Daniell in 1836. It is named after him.
Two glass or ceramic containers are taken, one partially filled with copper
sulphate (CuSO,) solution and another with zinc sulphate (ZnSO,) solution. A
copper stick is dipped in CuSO, and a zinc stick is dipped in ZnSO,. U-shaped
salt bridge is dipped in the two solutions like the picture to connect them. A
sy
S

Chemistry and Energy 191
metal wire is used to connect the two electrodes. A bulb connected at the middle
of the wire lights up when electricity starts to flow. Here, a zinc atom donates
two electrons to the zinc electrode and turns into zinc ion (Zn**). It leaves the
electrode and goes into the solution. The zinc electrode accepts the two electrons
and become negative charged. Then the electrons flow through the connecting
wire. Since the metallic zinc turns into Zn” in the electrode, so it is an oxidation
reaction at anode:
Oxidation at anode: Zn — Zn** +2 e
Now, the two electrons from zinc anode enter the copper electrode. Through this
electrode, the Cu’* ion from CuSO, solution accepts the electrons and turn into
metallic copper (Cu). Since the process is reduction here, so the copper electrode
is regarded as cathode electrode.
Reduction at cathode: Cu*+ 2e€ — Cu

The total reaction in the cell; Zn + Cu — Zn*+Cu
Since zinc has donated electrons at “@
anode, so that constitutes oxidation. a-o
But donating electron only does not Zine

: » _ (Anode) Copper
complete a reaction. The copper ion - (>) ~~ ta
at cathode electrode has accepted | | | i
those electrons and completed the K ml || ,
reduction reaction. That means half i S) oss |
the reaction has occurred in anode ~
and half in cathode. So, the reaction Fif 8.08: Galvanic (Deniell) cell
at anode is oxidation half reaction and the reaction at cathode is reduction half
reaction. And the total reaction is a redox reaction.
Sy Electrons from anode enter the cathode through the connecting wire. That means
8

192 Chemistry
the flow of electricity occurred here or electricity was produced. That proves, a
Galvanic cell transforms chemical energy into electrical energy.

Table 8.03: Difference between Electrolytic Cell and Galvanic Cell
Electrolytic Cell Galvanic Cell

The cell where electric energy is used | The cell where chemical reaction

to facilitate chemical reaction is | produces electric energy is called

called electrolytic cell. Galvanic cell.

In electrolytic cell, anode is positive | In Galvanic cell, anode is negative

charged and cathode is negative | charged and cathode is positive

charged. charged

Producing substances, electroplating, | Electricity production mechanism

metal purification etc. involve | like battery uses the technology.

electrolytic cell.
Electrode in Galvanic Cell:
There are various kinds of electrodes of Galvanic cell. The easiest to make of
them is metal-metal ion electrode. This kind of electrode can be made by dipping
half or more than half of a stick or foil of a metal in a solution containing ion of
the same metal. The written expression of such electrode can be composed of the
metal name followed by its ion with a vertical line in between. For example, if a
Zn stick is dipped in ZnSO, solution, which makes a zinc metal electrode. It can
be expressed Zn|Zn”*. The reaction that occurs here is:

Zn qo 3 Zn* 4+ 2
Electrodes of more reactive metals such as sodium, potassium, calcium etc.
cannot be produced in this manner.
°9
S

Chemistry and Energy 193
Identification of Anode and Cathode in Galvanic Cell
Determination of anode and
cathode in a Galvanic cell Table 8.04: Electrode and Reaction
electrodes depends on the
element they are made of. Zn(s) =——* Zn*(aq) + 27
Electrodes made of less culcu* eu Cu(ag) + 2e-
reactive elements situated at | ~“" us) < aan? + a8
the lower ranks of Fe(s) > Fe*(aq) + 2e-
electrochemical series
constitute cathode while the | aglAg* Ag(s) === Agi(ag) + &
more reactive elements of the
upper ranks constitute the anode. Of the
electrochemical series, any two elements constituting a apie s.0s:
Galvanic cell, the lower ranked electrode is cathode and the Electrode
higher ranked electrode is anode. For example, if a Galvanic
cell is constituted with a copper electrode and a silver electrode,
the copper metal electrode is anode and the silver metal
electrode is cathode. The series beside shows copper is
comparatively higher ranked than silver. ; sd
n this cell, copper atom donates electron and turns into copper
3+
Oxidation half reaction at anode:
Cu > Cu*+2e
Again, silver ion accepts electron and turns into silver atom. | NIN |
Reduction half reaction at cathode:
2+
2Ag' + 26° > 2Ag
Adding the two half reactions, we get the total reaction of the
cell:
2+
Forma -25, Chemistry Class-9-10

194 Chemistry
Salt Bridge and Its Use
You have seen in the Daniell cell, in anode, metallic zinc donates two electrons
to become zinc ion. This electron is conducted through the connecting wire
toward cathode. As a result, the ion in the anode solution increases.
Oxidation half reaction in anode:
Zn > Zn* +2 e
On the other hand, the Cu?* ion in the CuSO4 solution at cathode accepts the two
electrons and turns into charge neutral Cu atom without changing the
composition of SO,” ion. As a result, the solution becomes negative charged and
the flow of electricity stops within a while. The salt bridge comes into effect at
this stage. A chemical substance named agar-agar mixed with KCl is put inside
a U-shaped tube. It creates a gel like substance which is called the salt bridge.
Both K* and Cl ions in this Lt,
substance have the same velocity. 4 () a
Two cotton buds at the two faces of [= ——
the bridge (like the fig) help connect ,- .
. salt bridge e

the two solutions externally. | ake
Now, the surplus charges in anode ——— ~
are joined by the same number of Cr = || ie -—_}- H
ion from the bridge in the anode | Li —_ | |

F ‘ani ‘ee: a :
solution. Similarly, the reduced : a Le i |
number of positive charges in G@*) @)pP |
cathode solution is joined by K* ions le
from the bridge. Thus, the charge
neutrality of both the solutions is Fig 8.09: Salt bridge in Cell
maintained and the flow of
electricity is continued.

=
BS

Chemistry and Energy 195
Dry cell
Dry cell is a kind of Galvanic cell. Dry cell transforms chemical energy into
electrical energy. We use dry cells in torch lights, TV remotes, toy remotes etc.
Dry cell is also composed of anode and cathode.
A small container made of
zinc is used as anode in a dry
cell. The container is filled +
with a paste of manganese Mctallic cap———
dioxide (MnO,), ammonium ere —— washer and
chloride (NH,CI), zine =—— seal
chloride (ZnCl) and distilled [| Outer jacket
. Carbon rod Zine pot
water. A carbon (graphite) ying, Nucl, | *— Paper
stick is inserted at the center ZnCl.
. and distilled water
of the container to act as
cathode. When two wires J
connect the two edges Metal based“ —
(positive and negative) af a Fig 8.10: Dry cell
bulb or electronic item with
the zinc container and the carbon stick, the following reaction occurs:
Zinc at anode donates two electrons and become Zn**:
Anode reaction,
Zn ———» Zn + 2e€
These two electrons come to the carbon rod through the connector and combine
with ammonium ion (NH,') and manganese dioxide (MnO,) to produce
ammonia gas (NH,), dimanganese tri-oxide. The reaction:
Cathode reaction,
oo 2NH,* + 2Mn0O,+ 2e ———» 2NH; + Mn,0,; + H,0
Ss

196 Chemistry
The total cell reaction stands:
Zn + 2NH,t + 2MnO, ——» Zn” + 2NH, + Mn,0, + H,0
When anode and cathode edges are connected to a bulb or any electronic item,
the flow of electricity begins or electricity is generated. Therefore, wherever
electricity is required, if we connect the dry cell there, the above reaction will
occur and we’ ll get electricity.
Application of Electrochemical Cells
Coating a metal on another metal has
been there in practice from the ancient
age. Now that has increased hugely.
= Electrolysis is used for extraction of
Bs + a metal, production of valuable chemicals,
} a i electricity generation, purification of
€ a — substance etc. Hydrogen fuel cell is used
—" for electricity generation. Hydrogen
“ molecule is oxidized in its anode and
1) J oxygen molecule is reduced in cathode
sl to produce water. As a result, in the cell
Fig 8.11: Machine to test Blood Sugar electron is conducted from anode to
cathode. This electricity can be used to run cars even. All mobile phones,
computers, calculators etc. all over the world use batteries.
Blood sugar in the diabetic patients is tested and determined by a machine that
uses electrolysis mechanism. The figure above demonstrates that. The part on
the left hand has small thin anode and cathode in it. There is a small channel in
between them. When blood is inserted in the channel that forms a complete cell.
Indeed, the source in the machine would supply electricity that oxidizes glucose 3
NX

Chemistry and Energy 197
of blood at anode. On the other hand, the calculating system of the machine
determines the number of glucose cells in blood and shows it on screen
converting that into digits. Interesting is all these processes take less than a
minute.
Effect of Battery on Health and Environment
We use battery for various purposes. In torch lights, we use dry cell, bus and
truck uses lead-storage battery etc. These batteries use various metals and
metallic ions. These are
extremely harmful for our body.
Dry cell contains zinc and
manganese dioxide and
f lead-storage battery contains
f at bs lead (Pb), lead oxide (PbO,),
Se etc. According to chemical
= A ts, properties, these are toxic and
ae ae yy catcinogenic. We trash them
—— anywhere we feel like after use.
" That gives these extreme
Fig 8.12: Battery in Mobile phone hazards to mix with soil and
water and contaminate them.
8.5 Nuclear Reactions and Generation of Electricity
Nuclear Reaction
The reaction where the nucleus of an element undergoes transformation is call
nuclear reaction. The electron exchange in any chemical reaction occurs from
the outermost energy layer of atom or ion. This leaves the nucleus intact. But in
the case with nuclear reaction, electron does not have any role; the nucleus
S undergoes change and nucleus of a new element’s atom is formed. The reaction
g

198 Chemistry
that results in the amalgamation of smaller nucleus into a larger nucleus of an
atom or the larger nucleus breaks into smaller nucleus is nuclear reaction. There
are various kinds of nuclear reactions, Fission and Fusion are the to most
significant of them.
Nuclear Fission Reaction
The nuclear process in which nucleus of —_
a larger and heavy element is broken into x
nucleus of smaller elements is called (on)
fission reaction. When we strike Cm)
a*35Uwith a neutron with low velocity, / \
the nucleus becomes almost equally / | \
divided into two parts and produces
141Bq and 32Kr nucleus, 03 neutrons
(on) and huge amount of energy.It is a Fig 8.13: Nuclear Fission Reaction
nuclear fission reaction.

2350 + in ———» 141Ba+ 32Kr +3 in +Huge amount of energy
Nuclear Fusion Reaction
The nuclear process in which a number of nucleus of smaller and light elements
combine into nucleus of a larger element is called fusion reaction. Below is
given an example of fusion reaction:

2H + 7H ———> 4He + jn + Huge amount of energy

Fusion reaction is the basis of hydrogen bomb.
Nuclear Chain Reaction
Basically, the nuclear fission reactions are nuclear chain reactions. The reactions ~
that do not require application of extra energy to continue once they startare S

Chemistry and Energy 199
called chain reactions. You have seen, when we *O- <~ & Fi
strike a 733U with a neutron it breaks into one Y
141Ba and one 32Kr nucleus, 03 neutrons (jn) ;
and huge amount of energy. If we can control CO Fusion
the pace of these three neutrons, they will strike ff \
other 733U isotopes. That way, more neutrons
will be produced. These newer neutrons will nO & 4He
again do the same thing if they are brought
under control, resulting in more neutrons. This jig 14: Nuclear Fusion Reaction
kind of reaction is chain reaction. The control of nuclear chain reaction is quite
a complex thing and chain reaction is the basis of electricity generation is
nuclear reactors.
Generation of Electricity
Nuclear reactors are used for power generation. The reactor which helps control
the chain reactions that occur during a nuclear fission reaction is called nuclear
reactor. These reactors can produce huge amount of electricity. The smaller
elements that are produced during a fission reaction are highly accelerated.
These smaller elements bombard each other as well as the reactor wall and
produce huge amount of heat
energy. This heat is channeled
through to elevator chamber
where it is used for producing
vapor. The vapor is then |
channeled to run turbine so that |
electricity is produced. In some a ™
versions, the elevator chamber
is situated within the reactor.
Nuclear reactors are used for Fig 8.15: Nuclear reactor

=

8

200 Chemistry
power generation in many countries of the world. The government of
Bangladesh has taken necessary preparation for setting up nuclear power
generation facility at Ruppoor of Pabna district. Bangladesh will become
self-sufficient in electricity once the project is complete. In near future, the
whole Bangladesh will be under coverage of electricity.
© Experiment
{ Make a Galvanic cell to produce electricity. }
Principle:The electrochemical “@
cell where electricity is aL
generated through chemical Zin, © Salt bridge
reaction is called a Galvanic (Anode) Copper
cell. Two rods, one zinc rod of | (¢ »— 4 (Cathode)
partially dipped in zinc | |__| = | |
sulphate (ZnSO,) solution and | s is Pa
one copper rod in copper ; @) €P | |
sulphate (CuSO,) solution, are bz
connected by a copper wire to Fig 8.16: Electricity production
make the Galvanic cell. Here in Galvanic cell
in the cell, the zinc atom donates two electrons and turns into zinc ion (Zn2*).
The electrons reach the copper rod through the connecting wire. Copper ion
(Cu2"*) from copper sulphate solution accepts these two electrons and turn
into metallic copper. The flow of electron through the copper wire generates
electricity. The zinc rod acts as anode and the copper rod as cathode in the
cell.
Zn ———» Zn*+2e (Reaction in anode)
Cu + 2e° ———» Cu (Reaction in cathode)
\ Zn + Cu ———»Zn* + Cu (Reaction in Cell) } %

Chemistry and Energy 201
Necessary Apparatus and Chemicals: Two beakers, zinc sulphate
(ZnSO,,) solution, copper sulphate (CuSO,) solution, zinc rod, copper rod,
an LED bulb, a salt bridge or a long piece of wet paper, copper wire etc.
Procedure: Follow the figure and dip the zinc rod in ZnSO, and the
copper rod in CuSO, solution in the two beakers. Now place the piece of
wet paper following the picture so that the two edges are dipped in the two
solutions. Now connect the copper wire to the zinc and copper rods.
Connect copper connector part of the wire to the positive edge of the LED
and zinc connector part to the negative edge of the LED. The LED will light
up as soon as the connection is settled. At this stage, the zinc rod will
continue to decay as zinc ion continues to go into the solution and the
copper ion from solution transfers to copper rod.

In reality, the above reaction occurs inside the cell. The chemical energy in
the chemical reaction is transformed into electrical energy here.

Caution:

1. The two solutions have to be of equal height.

2: The bridge has to be maintained properly.

ge E . t
C > xperimen'
Observing the change of temperature after dissolving ammonium
chloride (NH,CI) in water
Principle: Ammonium chloride, when dissolved in water, gets ionized in
the following way:
NH,Cl ————» NH, + cl

To break the crystal of ammonium chloride and to get its molecules ionized,
some energy is required. This energy comes from water which results in the
fall of temperature of water. Thus the dissolving of ammonium chloride in
water is an endothermic reaction.

Forma -26, Chemistry Class-9-10

202 Chemistry
( Apparatus and Chemicals: }
Beaker, ammonium chloride Se | |
(NH,C1), distilled water, glassrod I> TP
and thermometer. [ |
| B
Procedure: | | = |
Take 50 gram distilled water in ——
the beaker. Record the
temperature of water with a Fig 8.17: NH,Cl solution in beaker
thermometer. Add 10 grams of
ammonium chloride in the water.
Stir the ammonium chloride with the glass rod so that the substance is fully
dissolved. Record the temperature as soon as it is dissolved.
Result: The data collected will show that the temperature of water fell
down when ammonium chloride was dissolved in it. That proves the
reaction as endothermic.
© Experiment
( The observation of change of temperature adding lime in water )
Principle: Lime or calcium oxide added to water undergoes the following
reaction:
CaO + HO —— >» Ca(OH), + Heat
Calcium oxide Water Calcium hydroxide
This reaction is exothermic reaction. Therefore, the temperature of water
along with calcium hydroxide is increased.
Apparatus and Chemicals: beaker, calcium oxide (lime), distilled water, eS
\_ glass rod and thermometer. } 8

Chemistry and Energy 203
Procedure:
1. Fill the half of the beaker with
cao
distilled water. SNe
2. Record the temperature of water
using the thermometer. _
3. Add lime or calcium oxide to the
water in the beaker. :
4. Stir the solution in the beaker as the ig 9.18: sotution of lime in beaker
reaction starts.
5. Record the temperature of water as soon as possible with the
thermometer. You will see, the temperature is higher than the previous one.
Result: Adding lime to water raises the temperature of water. It is an
exothermic reaction.
(?) Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. How many kinds of conductors are there on the basis of electrical conductivity
mechanism?
a. One b. Two
c. Three d. Four
Answer question 2 and 3 depending on the picture above.
2. The process of the stem does to iron-
a. is increased in amount b. prevents corrosion
has)
s c. increases strength d. increases purity

204 Chemistry
3. In the above picture:

i. Ni is corroded Battery

ii. Fe acts as anode Nickel + = Iron

iii. Exchange of electron occurs
Which is correct?

a.i and ii b. ii and iii
c. i and iii iv. i, ii and iii
sof wie

4. Which of the followings acts as oxidant in dry
cell?

a. Zn rod b. MnO,

c. Carbon rodd. d. NH,*
5. What is the name of the process of giving metallic coating on a different metal
through electrolysis?

a. Volcanizing b. Metal purification

c. Galvanizing d. Electroplating
6. Which of the followings is used for striking nucleus during a nuclear reaction?

a. Proton b. Electron

c. Positron d. Neutron
7. Electrolysis of aqueous solution of NaCl with platinum electrode produces-

i, Hydrogen gas

ii. Chlorine gas

iii. Sodium hydroxide solution
Which is correct?

a.i & ii b. ii & iti

c. i & iii d. i, ii & iii

S

Chemistry and Energy 205
Creative Questions
1. (i) Petroleum +0, ——+» CO, + H,O + Energy
(ii) 38U + ont ——> Ba + 3Kr + 3on' + Energy
(ii) Zn + CuCl, ——» Zncl, + Cu + Energy
a. What is electroplating?
b. Why salt bridge is used in electrochemical cell?
c. In the stem, the second reaction is not a chemical reaction. — Explain.
d. Compare the reactions (i) and (iii) in terms of production of energy.
2. Battery
a. What is metallic conductor? 1 |
b. Why is acidic water called electrolytic conductor? is
Explain KT
c. Explain the reaction that occurs in anode of the ae Molten MgCl,
above cell of the picture.
d. Explain the necessity of electricity supply to the —_
illustrated reaction.
3. i. Electrolytic cell ii. Galvanic cell
a. What is exothermic reaction?
b.Why is some drops of sulfuric acid required in the electrolysis of
water?
c. Describe the formation of number (i) cell.
d. Analyze the possibility of electricity production through cell number
(ii).
5

Chapter Nine
Acid-Base Balance
opis eae cae i
Most of fruits slightly acidic
We use various kinds of compounds in chemical laboratory. Acid, base and salt
are most frequently used of them. As chemistry learners, you also need to learn
about acid, base and salt. In the laboratory, we mostly use diluted acid and base
instead of concentrate acid or base in our laboratories. We take in acid, base and
salt with our food which is important for our body. Salt is formed by neutralizing
acid with base or vice versa. We can determine the acidity and from various
experiments in the laboratory. Litmus test and pH value test are the most
commonly used. These necessary acid, base and salt are also harmful to some
extent to our environment. We will discuss about all these in this chapter.
=
8

Acid- Base Balance 207
® By the end of the chapter, we will be able to-
. explain the characteristics of acid, base and salt
. identify acid, base and salts from the materials of familiar
environment
° differentiate between basic and alkaline substances
. describe the effect of acid and base on common materials
. evaluate the financial effect of acid and alkaline materials on our
household materials
. explain the concept of pH
. explain the importance of measuring pH
. realize the importance of equilibrium of acid-base in the maintenance
of environmental balance
° explain the cause of acid rain, its hazards and the ways of protection
from it
° explain the water cycle
° explain the hardness of water
. identify the advantages of using hard water
° explain the financial losses due to use of hard water
° describe the causes of water pollution and the means of water
purification
* mention the harms of drinking arsenic contaminated water
° determine the nature of household/lab/saline water measuring the pH
° comparing the nature of compounds (acid, base) by determining the
pH value or Litmus test or universal indicator
. show interest in using pollution free water
. show awareness about the terrible side of acid violence and make
others aware of them
. exhibit effects of acid and base on useful materials with experiments
° take appropriate precaution in using acidic and basic materials
o9
S
N

208 Chemistry
9.1 Acid
Acid is highly important among chemicals. Acid is a kind of chemical which,
when dissolved in water decomposes into hydrogen ion or proton (H’‘).
Hydrochloric acid (HCI), sulfuric acid (H,SO,) etc. are concentrated acids, so
they get decomposed in aqueous solution:
Hcl(aq) ———» Hi(aq) + Cl(aq)
H,S0,(aq) ————> 2H*(aq) + S0,?-(aq)
Again, carbolic acid (H,CO,), acetic acid (CH,COOH) etc. are diluted acids.
They decompose in aqueous solution in the following manner:
H,CO,(aq) —— + 2'faq) + CO;*(aq)
CH,COOH(aq) <——* = Hi(aq) + CH,COO-(aq)
In the case with HCl and H,SO,, the decomposition is shown by moonfaced
arrow mark. That means, these acids get 100% decomposed in water. That is why
they are called concentrate acids or strong acids. The decomposition of the later
two acids are shown with dual faced arrows, meaning they are partially
decomposed in water. That is why they are called diluted acids or weak acids.
For instance, at 25°C temperature, out of 1000 CH,COOH molecules, only 4 will
be decomposed in water. The rest 996 molecules remain intact in water. When
the amount of acid in the solution of acid and water is higher than water, the
solution is called concentrate acid. When the amount of water in such
solution is higher, it is known as dilute acid. Acid tastes sour. You have certainly
tasted tamarind which is too sour. Tamarind contains tartaric acid which makes
it sour. Blue litmus turns red when it is put in a acid solution.
Acid undergoes reaction with metallic oxide and produces salt and water:
cao + 2HCcl ——_ Cacl, + H,0
Calcium oxide | Hydrochloric acid Calcium chloride Water x
(Metallice oxide) (Acid) (Salt) ES

Acid- Base Balance 209
Acid undergoes reaction with more reactive metals and produce salt and
hydrogen gas.

2Na +  2HCcl ————— = 2Nacl + H,

Sodium Hydrochloric acid Sodium chloride Hydrogen

(Metal) (Acid) (Salt)
The food items that we take everyday contains various acids. For example, milk
contains lactic acid, soft drinks contain carbonic acid, lemon or orange has citric
acid, tamarind has tartaric acid, vinegar has ethanoic acid, tea contains tannic
acid etc. When we eat or take these foods, the acids go inside our body. They
help digesting our food and prevent diseases. Besides, there are pickles
containing different acids which act as appetizers. Since these acids are weak
they cannot harm our health. Inside the body, the stomach wall generates
hydrochloric acid which is very strong acid. It is used for decomposing food
inside. However, sometimes there is excess secretion of HCl from the stomach
which starts to decompose the cells of stomach wall. Again, if we remain hungry
or keep our stomach empty, the HCl decomposes the cells of stomach and
corrosion is created there for which we feel pain in the stomach. This situation is
called peptic ulcer. Therefore, we need to avoid the foods that inspire excess
secretion of acid and to stay without food for long time as well. The chapter will
let you know many other properties and uses of acid.
9.1.1 Properties of Dilute Acid and their Proof through Experiment
(i) Taste: All dilute acids are sour in taste. We have already seen that the acidic
foods are sour. However, remain careful not to taste any acid in the laboratory. If
your tongue comes in contact with any of these acids, they will instantly corrode
your tongue. You may try the taste of tamarind instead which will tell you
tartaric acid tastes sour.
(ii) Corrosive: Acids are corrosive. If you put a piece of metal in acid, the outer
edge of the metal will be corroded.
(iii) Litmus Test: Acid turns blue litmus into red. Take 2-3 mL hydrochloric
acid ina test tube and add a blue litmus to it. You will see, the blue colour will
Forma -27, Chemistry Class-9-10

210 Chemistry
turn red. You may try the same test with H,SO,, HNO, or any other acid. Even
tamarind or pickles will return you the same result.
(iv) Reaction with Reactive Metals: Acid undergoes reaction with reactive
metals (K, Na, Mg etc.) and produces salt of that metal and hydrogen as well. For
example, Mg undergoes reaction with sulfuric acid and produces MgSO, and H,
gas.
Mg +H,S0, ————> MgSO, + H,
(v) Reaction between Dilute Acid and Metallic Carbonate: Dilute acids
undergo reactions with metallic carbonate to produce salt, water and carbon
dioxide. For example, calcium carbonate and dilute HC] undergo reaction and
produce calcium chloride salt, water and carbon dioxide gas. The gas comes out
in bubbles.
CaCO; + 2HCl ——_ Cacl, + H,O + CO,
Channel this produced carbon dioxide in lime water, the lime water will turn
turbid. The reaction is:
Ca(OH), + CO, —————» CaCO;+ H,0
The lime water looks turbid as insoluble CaCO, is produced at this stage. This
turbid lime water again turns opaque when extra CO, is channeled in. At his
stage CO, and H,O undergoes reaction with CaCO, and produces soluble
calcium bicarbonate [Ca(HCO,),] which makes the water look opaque.
CaCO; + CO, +H,9 ———» Ca(HCO,),
The metallic carbonates undergo the similar kind of reactions with dilute sulfuric
acid or dilute nitric acid and produce sulfate or nitrate salts.
Na,CO,; + H,SO, W—W~—+» Na,SO,+ H,0 + CO,
CaCO, + 2HNO, —» Ca(NO,), + H,O + CO,
20
Ss
ix)

Acid- Base Balance 211
(vi) Reaction between Dilute Acids and Metallic Bicarbonates: Metallic
hydrogen carbonates or metallic bicarbonates also undergo reactions with dilute
acids and produce salts, water and carbon dioxide. For Example:

Ca(HCO;), + 2HCl ——>_ CaCl, + H,O +0,

2NaHCO,; + H,SO, —M————» Na,SO, + 2H,0 + 2C0O,

NaHCO, + HNO, ———» NaNO, + H,0 + CO,
(vii) Reaction between Dilute Acids and Metal’s Hydroxides (Alkali): Dilute
acids undergo reactions with metal’s hydroxides and produce salt and water. It is
neutralizing reaction. For example, if dilute HCl solution is slowly added to
dilute NaOH solution, it produces NaCl (salt) and water.

NaOH + HCl ————> NaCl +H,0
(viii) Reaction between Dilute Acids and Metal’s Oxides: Acids undergo
reaction with metal’s oxides and produce salt and water. The oxides are usually
of alkaline nature. That is why the reactions here are also neutralizing reactions.
CaO + 2HCl_ —— (CaCl, + H,0
In the same way, copper oxide undergoes reaction with dilute sulfuric acid and
forms copper sulfate and water.
H,SO, + CuO ————» CuSO, + H,0
Or, calcium oxide and nitric acid undergo reaction and produce calcium nitrate
and water.
2HNO; + CaQ —————> Ca(NO ), + H,O
9.1.2. The Role of Water in Chemical Properties of Acids
In all the discussions above, we have used the phrase ‘Dilute acid’. Dilute acid
solution means acid has been added to water to make an acidic solution. The
question is whether acid can maintain its properties when added with water or
they undergo changes. Suppose, you have taken some oxalic acid lattice and put
a dry blue litmus paper on them. You will observe no change in the colour of
oo litmus. The reason here is that dehydrated oxalic acid lattice does not contain
S any hydrogen ion. When you dissolve this dehydrated oxalic acid in water, it

212 Chemistry
will decompose and donate H* ion, which will turn the blue litmus into red. That
means, hydrogen ion present in an aqueous solution shows acidic property.

Citric acid partially decomposes in aqueous solution. The same thing happens in
the case with ethanoic acid and carbonic acid too.

Partial decomposition means instead of all molecules added in the solution, some
of them decompose and the rest remain intact.
Citric acid lattice + water —> Citric acid (aq)
Citric acid (aq) > H*(aq) + citrate ion

Hydrogen chloride is completely ionized in aqueous solution and produces
hydrogen ion:

Hydrogen chloride + water > HCl (aq)
HCl (aq) > H* (aq) + Cr (aq)

Pure sulfuric acid and nitric acid are colourless liquids. Both the compounds
remain in molecular state. Since they are not ionized or hydrogen ion is not
present in them, pure sulfuric acid and pure nitric acid neither show acidic
properties nor do they conduct electricity. They produce hydrogen ion only when
they are dissolved in water, showing acidic property and conducting electricity.
So, we can write,

H,SO,(l) + water ————> H,SO,(aq)
H,SO,(aq) ————* 2H" (aq) + SO,’ (aq)

Similarly,

HNO; (I) + water ———» HNO, (aq)
HNO,(aq) ——— Ht (aq) + NO;(aq)

The acids that get partially ionized in aqueous solution are weak acids. Strong
acids ionize completely in aqueous solution. That shows the weak acids have
lesser amount of hydrogen ion. Strong acids have comparatively greater number
of hydrogen ion. e

Ss
N

Acid- Base Balance 213
9.1.3 Concentrated Acid
The acid that contains comparatively lesser amount of water is concentrated
acid. Different concentrated acids like concentrated hydrochloric acid (HCI),
concentrated sulfuric acid (H,SO,), concentrated nitric acid (HNO,) etc. are used
in laboratories at different times. If these acids come in contact with our body
parts, they create injury on those spots. That is why, when using these acids, we
need to put on hand gloves, goggles, mask, apron etc. for caution.
Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid: The solution that is produced when
hydrogen chloride gas is dissolved in water is called hydrochloric acid. In the
solution the amount of water is comparatively lesser than the amount of
hydrogen chloride gas. The moment the cork of the container bottle of concen-
trated HCl is opened, there is a fog created and a highly pungent smell spreads
all over. That is why, before opening the bottle of concentrated HCl, nose and
mouth should be covered in mask and eyes should be protected with goggles.
Hcl(g) + H,o(l) —————» HCl(aq)
Concentrated Nitric Acid: The solution that is produced when nitrogen dioxide
gas is dissolved in water is called nitric acid. Comparatively higher amount of
NO, gas is dissolved in a small amount of water to prepare nitric acid (HNO,).
3NO, +H,OQ ————» 2HNO, +NO

The moment the cork of the container bottle of concentrated HNO, is opened,
there is a fog created and a highly pungent smell spreads all over. The colour of
the container bottle of nitric acid is brown. It is for preventing light for if light
enters the bottle, the HNO, decomposes. The brown colour of the bottle prevents
light to enter the bottle.
Concentrated Sulfuric Acid: The solution that is produced when sulfur dioxide
gas is dissolved in water is called sulfuric acid. Comparatively higher amount of
SO, gas is dissolved in a small amount of water to prepare sulfuric acid (H,SO,).

20 SO; + HQ ————»_H,SO,

S

N

214 Chemistry
9.2 Base and Alkali
Base: Generally, metals or metal like reactive radical oxides and hydroxides that
undergo reaction with acid and produces salt and water are called base.
Examples:
CaO + 2HC] —______» CaCl, + H,0
KOH + H,SO, —————» __ K,SO, + H,0
NH,OH + HCl ——__-» NH,Cl+H,0
Apart from CaO and KOH, examples of base are sodium oxide (Na,O), copper
oxide (CuO), ferrous oxide (FeO), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), calcium
hydroxide [Ca(OH),], ferrous hydroxide [Fe(OH),], ammonium hydroxide
(NH,OF) ete.
Ammonium ion (NH,"), phosphonium ion (PH,"), etc. radicals are reactive like
metals. Metallic ions like Na*, K* etc. combined with non-metallic ions like Cl,
SO,? etc. produce ionic compounds like NaCl, KCl, Na,SO,, K,SO, etc.
Similarly, NH,*, PH,* ion combined with Cl, SO,?> ion produce ionic
compounds NH,Cl, PH,Cl, (NH,),SO,, (PH,),SO, etc. The reaction between
acid and base that produces salt and water is called acid-base neutralizing
reaction. Therefore it is said that acid neutralizes base and base neutralizes acid.
Alkali: Hydroxide compounds of metals or metal like reactive radicals that are
soluble in water are called alkali. A compound can be an alkali if (i) it contains
hydroxide (OH) radical and (ii) it dissolves in water.
NaOH is an alkali for it has OH radical and it dissolves in water. Fe(OH), cannot
be called an alkali for although it has OH radical, it does not dissolve in water.
It is base only. CaO is base but not an alkali for it does not contain OH radical.
So, you realize, the bases containing OH radicals and soluble in water are alkali.
Thus it can be said, all bases are not alkali but all alkalis are bases.
There are many basic compounds in our household. The toilet cleaners in our
houses are base containing sodium hydroxide (NaOH), the glass cleaners con-
taining ammonium hydroxide (NH,OH) are base. S

Acid- Base Balance 215

9.2.1 Properties of Dilute Base

The solution prepared by adding comparative smaller amount of base in larger

amount of water is called dilute base.

Litmus Test: Take a small amount of sodium hydroxide solution in a test tube.

Put a piece of red litmus paper in it. You will see the red litmus will turn blue.

Again, take some NaOH solution in a test tube. Put a blue litmus paper in the

tube. The blue litmus will remain as it is, blue. This proves, basic solution only

turns red litmus into blue.

Feelings: If you touch NaOH solution with your hand, it will feel slippery. Basic

compounds are slippery. Some properties of base are discussed here. However,

contact with base harms our skin.

9.2.2 Dilute Base in Reaction with Metallic Salts

Undergoing reaction with aluminum nitrate [AI(NO,),], ferrous nitrate

[Fe(NO,),], ferric nitrate [Fe(NO,),], zinc nitrate [Zn(NO,),] etc. metallic salts,

dilute base produces the related metallic hydroxide. Mentionable, here we have

used only nitrate salts. Apart from it, metallic chloride, metallic sulfate, metallic

sulfate salts will produce the same result. Look at the following example:

Reaction between dilute NaOH and Al(NO,),

If we take some Al(NO,), solution in a test tube and add some drops of dilute

NaOH solution in it, they produce aluminum hydroxide [Al(OH),] and sodium

nitrate (NaNO,). Al(OH), gathers as white precipitate at the bottom of test tube

while sodium nitrate remains dissolved in the water and it does not add any

colour to water. The reaction:

2Al(NO;); + 6NaOH —————» 2Al(OH);| + 6NaNO,

Reaction between dilute NaOH and Fe(NO,),

If we take some ferrous nitrate Fe(NO,), solution in a test tube and add some

drops of dilute NaOH solution in it, they produce ferrous hydroxide [Fe(OH),]
so and sodium nitrate (NaNO,). Fe(OH), gathers as green precipitate at the bottom
of test tube while sodium nitrate remains dissolved in the water and it does not

216 Chemistry
add any colour to water. The reaction:
Fe(NO;), + 2NaOH ————» Fe(0OH),]| + 2NaNO;
Reaction between dilute NaOH and Fe(NO,),
If we take some ferric nitrate Fe(NO,), solution in a test tube and add some
drops of dilute NaOH solution in it, they produce ferric hydroxide [Fe(OH),]
and sodium nitrate (NaNO,). Fe(OH), gathers as reddish brown precipitate at the
bottom of test tube while sodium nitrate remains dissolved in the water and it
does not add any colour to water. The reaction:
Fe(NO,); + 3NaOH ————_ Fe(OH),| + 3NaNO,
Reaction between dilute NaOH and Cu(NO,),
If we take some copper nitrate [Cu(NO,),] solution in a test tube and add some
drops of dilute NaOH solution in it, they produce copper hydroxide [Cu(OH),]
and sodium nitrate (NaNO,). Cu(OH), gathers as light blue precipitate at the
bottom of test tube while sodium nitrate remains dissolved in the water and it
does not add any colour to water. The reaction:
Cu(NO;), + Z2Na0H —————> Cu(OH),| + 2NaNO,
Reaction between dilute NaOH and Zn(NO,),
If we take some zinc nitrate [Zn(NO,),] solution in a test tube and add some
drops of dilute NaOH solution in it, they produce zinc hydroxide [Zn(OH),] and
sodium nitrate (NaNO,). Fe(OH), gathers as white precipitate at the bottom of
test tube while sodium nitrate remains dissolved in the water and it does not add
any colour to water. The reaction:
Zn(NO;), + 2Na0H —————> Zn(OH),| + 2NaNO,
Reaction between Alkali (dilute NaOH) and Ammonium Salt
If we take some ammonium chloride (NH,Cl) in a container and add some alkali
(NaOH) solution in it, they produce ammonia gas (NH,), sodium chloride
(NaCl) and water (HO). The reaction:
20
NH,Cl + NaOH ————> NH, + NaCl+H,0 3

Acid- Base Balance 217
It is a characteristic reaction between ammonium salt and alkali. Alkali
undergoes reaction with any ammonium salt and produces NH, gas. Examples:
NH,Cl + KOH —————> NH, + KCl+H,0
2NH,Cl + Ca(OH), ————» 2NH, + CaCl, + 2H,0
2NH,Cl + CaO ——__» 2NH; + CaCl, + H,0
9.2.3. Role of Water in the Chemical Properties of Alkali
Both the compounds potassium hydroxide and sodium hydroxide have ion, but
when they are in solid state, the ions are not free. The moment they are dissolved,
they become fully ionized and produce free hydroxide ion. Only hydroxide ion
in the solution carries negative charge.
KOH(s) +Water > K*(aq) + OH (aq)
NaOH(s) + Water-————* Nat(aq) + OH(aq)

Ammonia gas is the summation of ammonia molecules. When ammonia gas is
dissolved in water, their reaction produces ammonium ion and hydroxide ion.
However, ammonia dissolves only partially in water and very small number of
hydroxide ion is produced.
Therefore, ammonia solution contains ammonia molecules, water molecules and
a small number of ammonium and hydroxide ion. The characteristic of an alkali
solution depends on the presence of mobile hydroxide ion. The alkalis that
dissolve partially in aqueous solution are weak alkali. Strong alkali becomes
fully ionized in aqueous solution. That means, the weak alkali solution consists
of lesser number of hydroxide ion than that of the strong alkali.
@) Individual Task
( Complete the following tasks. Describe a change that is observable. Write )

down the ionic equation.

Addition of iron ----- in dilute sulfuric acid solution.

Addition of solid sodium carbonate in dilute hydrochloric acid solution.
\ Addition of ammonia solution to copper sulfate solution. }
Forma -28, Chemistry Class-9-10

218 Chemistry

9.3 Corrosive Properties of Concentrated Acids and Alkali

Concentrated acids and concentrated alkali are highly corrosive. They can

corrode clothes and skin. They spoil eyes if they go into the eyes. Concentrated

acids and concentrated alkali are added slowly to water and turned into dilute

solutions as they dissolve completely.

If by any chance, concentrated acids and concentrated alkali come into contact

with your body, the spot must be cleaned time and again. Then you should

inform your teacher.

@) Individual task

Experiment of Strong and Weak Acid or Strong and Weak Alkali ]
An experiment will tell you which acid is strong and which is weak. Take
50 mL dilute hydrochloric acid in a beaker. Now set two graphite rods in
the beaker in a way so that they do not touch each other. Connect one
graphite rod with an edge of battery by a wire and second graphite with the
other edge of the battery taking the wire through a bulb. The bulb will light
up. Observe the brightness of the light.
Now take some ethanoic acid in another beaker. It is a mild acid. Set two
graphite rods in this beaker also. Connect one graphite rod with an edge of
battery by a wire and second graphite with the other edge of the battery
taking the wire through a bulb. The bulb will light up. Observe the
brightness of the bulb. You will see the brightness of the bulb in the beaker

| containing HCl solution is is better than the one in ethanoic acid.

Strong acids provide more H'* in the aqueous solution than the weak acids. This

excess amount of H' conducts more electricity in the solution. That is why the

bulb in strong acid gives more light. On the other hand, the weak acid supplies %

lesser number of H* in the aqueous solution resulting in lesser amountof &

Acid- Base Balance 219
electricity conduction in the solution. So, the bulb gives less light.
Weak acid — Lesser amount of H* (proton) produced
Strong acid — Greater amount of H* (proton) produced

Similarly, an experiment with strong alkali (NaOH) and mild alkali (NH,OH)

will prove that the bulb in the solution of NaOH will give brighter light and the

bulb in the solution of NH,OH will give dim light. So, it will be proved that

NaOH is strong alkali and NH,OH is weak alkali.

9.4 The Conception of pH

PH is used as a unit to determine the nature of a aqueous solution, a measure of

the acidity, alkalinity or neutrality of the solution. The pH of a solution is the

negative logarithm of concentration of hydrogen ion present in the solution. That

means-

pH = —log[H*]

In written, p is written in small hand letter and H is capitalized.

[H*] expresses the molar concentration of of H* ion; how many moles of H* ion

is there in one liter solution.

The presence of H* in 1 liter distilled water is 107 moles

The pH of distilled water = —log[H*] = —log(10~’)

So, the pH of distilled water = 7

When there is any ion within third bracket in molarity unit, the concentration of

the ion is expressed. If acid is added to distilled water and for this reason, the

number of H* increases 10 times to make it 10° mole per liter, the pH of the

solution will drop down.

pH = —log[10~*] = 6

The more the molarity of H+ ion, the lesser the value of pH will be.

If alkali is added to distilled water, the OH" of alkali will undergo reaction with
26 H’ and lessen the number of H*. For example, due to adding alkali in water, if
S the number of H* drops down to 10-!° mole per liter, then the pH will be:

220 Chemistry
pH = —log[10~*] = 10
That means, the pH value will rise from 7; the pH value of the alkaline solution
is more than 7. The significance of pH value 7 is that the solution is neither alkali
nor acid; it is neutral solution. When the value of pH is less than 7, the solution
is acidic. When the value of pH is more than 7, the solution is alkaline.
5.4.1 Measuring pH
Measurement of pH is done using pH scale.
0 12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
a re ee
Acid Neutral Base
Fig 9.01: pH Scale
pH Scale: Although in mathematical terms, the value of pH may be any number
from negative to positive, in reality, the value is measured on a scale of 0 to 14.
The pH of a neutral solution is 7. You have already seen that the value of acidic
solution is less than 7 and the value of alkaline solution is more than 7.
According to the scale, the strongest acid will have a value of 0 and the strongest
alkali will have the value of 14.
Measuring System: You have already learned how to measure pH of a solution
from the molarity of its hydrogen ion. Now you will learn how to measure it in
experiment. The process involves universal indicator, pH paper, pH meter etc.
Universal Indicator: Universal indicator is the mixture of various acid and
base indicators. Universal indicator turns to different colours for different value
of pH. There is a chart of colours for different values in Universal indicator. This 3

Acid- Base Balance 221
is known as Universal Indicator Colour Chart. To know the value of pH of an
unknown solution, add few drops universal indicator in the solution and then
compare the colour of solution with the standard colour chart and determine the
value of pH.
pH Paper: pH Paper is used for knowing the value of an unknown solution.
Add a small piece of pH paper in the solution and it will change its colour. There
is a standard colour chart for various pH values. Compare the colour of the pH
paper with that standard colour chart and determine the value of of pH.
pH Meter: pH Meter is used for knowing the value pH of an unknown solution.
Inserting the electrode of the pH meter in the unknown solution the value of pH
can be known directly from the digital display of the pH meter.
Litmus Paper: Litmus paper is the easily available cheaper alternative to know
the approximate value of pH. The litmus paper is red when the value of pH is less
than 7 and the colour is blue when the value is more than 7.
F = a)
| memset ee Electrode
Oo | 0?
= colour ee
3 display Gy os
= Fig 9,03: pH Meter Fig 9.04: Red and Blue
Fig 9.02: pH paper and . Litmus Paper
- standard Colour Chart
Ss
NQ

222 Chemistry
9.4.2 Importance of pH
pH has got limitless significance in terms of bio-chemical reactions in animal
body and use of cosmetics. They are stated below:
Agriculture: pH has a great importance in Table 9.01: pH of different
; — parts of human body
agriculture. Plants absorb various ions, water etc. Parivar
from soil from the soil for its own nutrition. The Peas |
best value of pH of soil in this regard is 6.0-8.0.
Again, if the value is less than 3.0 or more than
10.0, the beneficial microbes in the soil die. Urine fs
When the value drops down, measured amount of
CaO is used in the soil. On the other hand, if the
value of pH of soil rises up, measured amount of
ammonium sulfate [(NH,),SO,] or ammonium phosphate [[NH,),PO,] fertilizers
are used to settle the pH of soil.
pH in Different Bio-chemical Reactions of Body: Various bio-chemical
reactions occur in different parts of the animal body. They require different
values of pH in various parts of the body. The chart beside mentions them.
Cosmetics: Human beings use different chemicals to to clean their skin,
beautification of skin, clean the hair and other actions. When the pH of skin is
4.8-5.5, the skin is acidic and that prevents attacks of microbes on the skin.
Therefore, the pH of cosmetics is maintained at 4.8-5.5.
9.5 Neutralization Reaction
We know acid donates H* in aqueous solution while base donates OH.
Therefore, mixture of acid and base facilitates Ht and OH" to produce water. For
example, in water, HC] donates H* and NaOH donates OH. If we mix both, the
H’ and OH will undergo reaction to produce water. The negative CI ion of acid
and the positive Na* ion of base willundergo reaction and produce the salt NaCl.
The reaction where acid and base undergo reaction and produce salt and water is.
called neutralization reaction. In this reaction both acid and base lose their $

Acid- Base Balance 223
respective acidity and basic quality and produce neutral substance salt and water.
HCl(aq) + NaOH(aq) ———— > NaCl(aq) + H,0())
Acid Base Salt Water
Look at the above reaction. One mole hydrochloric acid neutralizes one mole
sodium hydroxide completely. Therefore, two moles of hydrochloric acid will
completely neutralize two moles of sodium hydroxide. Again, the reaction
between sulfuric acid and sodium hydroxide produces sodium sulfate salt and
water.
H,SO,(aq) + 2NaOH(aq) ———— > Na,SO,(aq) + H,0(1)
Acid Base Salt Water
The above reaction shows that one mole sulfuric acid neutralizes two moles
sodium hydroxide completely. It proves, a specific amount of a specific acid will
completely neutralize a specific amount of a specific base.
9.5.1 Importance of Neutralization Reaction in Daily Life
In Digestion: Acid is secreted in the stomach for the need of digestion. If for
some reasons, the amount of acid in the stomach increases, we feel uneasy.
Generally, it is called acidity. If this acidity continues for long time, it creates
infection in the stomach. We take antacid to neutralize this acidity. Antacid
contains Al(OH), and Mg(OH),, which are alkaline in nature. They neutralize
the excess acid inside our stomach.
Al(OH), + 3HCl ————~> Alcl, + 3H,0
Mg(OH), + 2HCl ————> MgCl, + 2H,0
In Dental Care: If you do not clean your mouth after taking some sweets, after
sometime, you will feel a sour taste inside your mouth. Actually, there are
innumerable bacteria in our mouth which forms various organic acids from our
foods. That is why we feel the sour taste. These acids cause decay of the enamel
(calcium compound) of our teeth. Alkali present in toothpastes neutralizes these
20
S acids and save our denture.

224 Chemistry
In Agriculture: When plants absorb different metallic ions like Fe”, Mg”*, Ca”,
K’* etc. from the soil, the soil becomes acidic. It loses fertility. Lime is used to
increase the fertility of soil which is chemically calcium oxide (CaO). This lime
neutralizes the acid in the soil and brings back the fertility.
9.5.2 Salt
You have already learned acid and base undergo reaction and produce salt and
water. The positive ion of salt comes from the base. That is why the positive ion
is known as basic radical. The negative ion comes from acid. That is why the
negative ion of salt is called acid radical. Aqueous solution of salt produced from
the reaction between strong acid and strong base is neutral in nature. For exam-
ple, aqueous solution of NaCl, Na,SO, etc. are neutral. Aqueous solution of salt
produced in the reaction between strong acid and weak base is acidic in nature.
FeCl,, Zn(NO,), etc. are examples of the kind. Aqueous solution of salt produced
in the reaction between strong base and weak acid is basic in nature. Na,CO,,
CH,COONa (Sodium ethanoit) etc. are examples of the kind.
9.6 Acid Rain
Oxides of non-metals undergo reaction with water and produce various acids.
Pure air has a mixture of small amount of carbon dioxide and different oxides of
oxygen. Animals breathe out carbon dioxide in their respiration. The temperature
of the spot where thunder strikes reaches 3000°C. In that temperature, N, and O,
present in air undergo reaction and produce NO. This NO gets oxidized by
oxygen and becomes NO,. These oxides get dissolved in the rain water and
produce some acids which come down to earth with rain water. Rain with these
acids is called acid rain.

CO,(g) + H,0(1) +9———~ H,C0,(aq)

2NO,(g) + H,O(l) —————> HNO,(aq) + HNO;(aq)
That is why the pH value of rain water is 5-6. However, some man-made reasons
like carbon dioxide emitted from vehicles, power plants and industries mix with .
air which undergoes reaction with rain water and produces carbonic acid =

Acid- Base Balance 225
(H,CO,). Besides, the power plants, brick kilns etc. use coal and petroleum rich
with nitrogen and sulfur which again produce oxides of these elements. These
also produce acids which come down with rain water.
That is why, in some places, the amount of acid in rain sometimes goes higher
than expected. As a result the pH of rain water in these spots may drop down to
4 or below 4, which is acid rain. This rain results in a drop down of pH of soil.
This has severe harmful effect on crops and plants. The pH value of water in the
water bodies also goes down and makes the situation uninhabitable for the lives
there. Fish production is hampered. Acid rain also harms the buildings, metallic
structures, marble architectures and sculptures.
9.7 Water
The other name of pure water is life. Water is polluted everyday due to bathing,
washing etc. Water becomes hard for various reasons. We can transform hard
water into mild water following various ways.
9.7.1 Hardness of Water
The source of water is rivers, canals, bils, ponds, sea and tubewell etc. Various
mineral salts are dissolved in this water. It is not easy to get foam of soap if
calcium or magnesium chloride, sulfate, carbonate or bicarbonate etc. salts are
dissolved in the water. This kind of water is called hard water. However, water
can be hard also if it has iron or manganese salts dissolved in it. Why does not
this kind of water produce foam of soap? Soap is a sodium or potassium salt of
higher organic acid. For example, sodium stearate (C,,H,,COONa) is the sodium
salt of stearic acid. It is used in soap. When we use this soap in hard water, so
long calcium or magnesium salt remains in the water, it does not produce any
foam, only the soap is decayed.

2C17HysCOONa + CaCl, —————> (Cy,H3;COO),Ca + 2NaCl
Salts of magnesium and other salts also undergo the same kind of reaction. If
hard water is used in water pipes or boilers of industries, the mineral salts present
in the water gathers on the pipe as thick layer and the water flow is obstructed.
Forma -29, Chemistry Class-9-10

226 Chemistry
In the boiler, there is wastage of heat and the boiler may even burst. The property
of water that causes the soap not to clean the dirts properly is called hardness of
water.
Hardness of water is of two kinds: temporary hardness and permanent hardness.
(i) Temporary hardness: Hardness of water caused by bicarbonate (HCO,)
salts of calcium, magnesium, iron etc. in water is called temporary hardness.
And this kind of water is known as temporary hard water. When heat is applied
to this kind of water, it produces insoluble carbonate salt. It gathers at the bottom
of the container as precipitate. The water can easily be separated by using a filter.
Thus the temporary hardness of water is removed and the water turns into mild
water.

Ca(HCO,), ——“—» caco,(s) + C0,(g) + H,0()
(ii) Permanent hardness: Hardness of water caused by chloride or sulfate salts
of calcium, magnesium, iron etc. in water is called permanent hardness. And this
kind of water is known as permanent hard water. Mere heating does not remove
this kind of hardness. Various measures or reactions are used to remove this
hardness from water. Usually, the water of closed water body is mild water. Rain
water is also mild. It does not contain much amount of salts of magnesium,
calcium etc. metals.
How to remove permanent hardness of water: Addition of sodium carbonate
to permanent hard water reacts with the calcium ion and magnesium ion and
produces precipitates of calcium carbonate and magnesium carbonate. Thus the
calcium ion and magnesium ion is removed from water and it becomes mild.

CaCl, + Na,cO; ————> CaCO; + 2NaCl

9.7.2 Water Pollution and Pollution Control
Water Pollution
Major part of body of animals and plants is water. That is why, all living beings
need a lot of pure water. However, water is polluted in various ways. For ,,
example, all domestic disposals and sewage wash away to the water bodies. S

Acid- Base Balance 227
Trashes disposed from hospitals and other places are also washed away to the
water. Fertilizers and pesticides used in agriculture also get washed to the water
bodies. Industries dump their chemical trashes vehicles trash their fuels which
ultimately reach the water. Thus, water becomes odorous and poisonous. Lead,
cadmium, mercury, chromium etc. heavy metals mix with water from all these
trashes. These heavy metals may cause diseases even like cancer.
Again, the human actions are not only spoiling the surface water, but also
sub-surface water. The tendency to extract excess sub surface water by shallow
pumps and too much excavation results in arsenic contamination in sub-surface
water. Arsenic is a poisonous substance. If a human being drinks too much water
contaminated with arsenic, he/she may die even.
Pollution Control
Waste treatment facilities are available in big cities of our country, although the
number is not sufficient. Bio gas, electricity alongside organic fertilizer can be
gotten from sewage and rotten domestic disposals. Proper initiative in this
regard can reduce the environment and water pollution. Small sized bio gas
plants will utilize all these disposal and sewage and side by side, will be of
benefit for us.
It must be mandatory to establish effluent treatment plant (ETP) in every
industry. In no way, the industrial wastes be disposed directly into the open
water reservoir. Everyone should be conscious about it. We should keep the
directorate of environment with information about this kind of offence. We
should keep n mind that organized public consciousness and public opinion is
the most effective way to prevent water pollution in our country.
9.7.3 Testing the Purity of Water
Colour and Odour Observation: Pure water is colourless, odourless and
transparent liquid. Little amount of mineral salt is dissolved in it. If any mineral
salt is dissolved in it at a large amount, it can be called polluted water. In general
- observation, if any odour or any suspended materials in the water or any residue
S is found after filtration then the water is polluted.

228 Chemistry
Temperature of Water: In summer, the temperature of water is usually 30-35°C
with an occasional rise up to 40°C. If somehow the temperature of water rises by
few degrees then it should be considered heat polluted. If the water used in
power plants to cool the machineries or hot water from boiler is released directly
in open reservoir of water, the heat pollution occurs. We can detect the heat
pollution with just a thermometer.
pH Value of Water:If the pH value of water is less than 4,5 and greater than 9.5,
it will be a threat to living beings. pH can be determined by using pH paper or
pH meter.
BOD: The elaboration of BOD is Biological Oxygen Demand. It means the
demands of bio chemical oxygen. The amount of oxygen needed to decompose
the organic matters in water in presence of air is known as BOD of that water.
Water that has much BOD value is a polluted one.
COD: The elaboration of COD is Chemical Oxygen Demand. COD is used to
express total chemical matter in water. The quality of the water analyzed by
measuring the extent of organic pollutants in water (specially in rivers, canals
etc.). A greater value of COD means that the extent of pollution in that water is
also greater.
BOD and COD, both are used to denote the pollution level of water. The COD
value of any water is greater than BOD value. It happens because the necessary
amount of oxygen to decompose only the organic matters in water is BOD while
COD is the amount of oxygen needed to decompose all organic and inorganic
matters in water.
Purification of Water
Chlorination: The easiest way of sterilization of water is chlorination. If a
certain amount of bleaching powder is added to water, the produced chlorine
oxidizes the germs and kills them. The process is called chlorination of water.
Filtering the water after adding bleaching powder makes it drinkable.
Boiling: Water can be sterilized by boiling for 15 to 20 minutes. Noteworthy that
boiling arsenic contaminated water makes it more harmful. x
S
N

Acid- Base Balance 229
Sedimentation: Adding one spoonful of alum dust [K,SO,.AL(SO,),.24H,O] to
a bucket of water and allowing it to settle for half an hour creates
sedimentation of all impurities of water to settle at the bottom of the bucket.
Then by pouring the upper level water into another container, we get pure water.
This is the way to get rid of all insoluble pollutants from water.
Filtration: Presently filters are available in the market that helps get rid of
germs, arsenic and other pollutants from water. We get pure drinking water using
these filters.
Experiment
{ Determining the acidic or alkaline nature of apple with litmus paper. \
Principle: Food can be acidic, alkaline or neutral. Aqueous solution of
food that are acidic turns the blue litmus paper into red. Aqueous solution
of food that are alkaline turns the red litmus paper into blue. The litmus
paper does not change its colour when the solution is neutral.
Apparatus and Chemicals: mortar, test tube, glass rod, filter paper,
funnel, blue litmus paper, red litmus paper, distilled water, peeled apple.
Procedure:
1. Make paste of peeled apple in the mortar adding some water in it.
2. Take the paste in the beaker.
3. Add 10 mL distilled water in the beaker and mix the paste well using the
glass rod.
4. Now use the filter paper and the funnel to filter the solution to get the
watery portion of it from the beaker into test tube.
5. Observe the change of colour of the litmus papers one by one by
\ dipping them in the test tube. ]
S

230 Chemistry
(Observation and decision \
Probable Change of Colour in the
Apple _| Blue litmus paper turned red but the red /Apple is acidic
litmus paper didn’t change
Apple | Red litmus paper turned blue but the blue | Apple is basic
litmus paper didn’t change
Result: If you did the experiment correctly, you would find apple is acidic.

@) Individual Task
fr . . . ° . —
| Following the procedure stated above, if you carry out experiments with rice

and cucumber, you will see rice is neutral food; it does not change the colour of

red litmus paper into blue or the blue into red. Cucumber is basic food for it
\. tums red litmus into blue. )
@) Individual Task
( ; " \

Preparation of pH paper

Take one of the coloured vegetables (red amaranth, red cabbage, bit etc.) or

coloured flower (china rose, red rose etc.). Cut it in small pieces. Boil in steam

at low temperature. Insert a piece of filter paper in the coloured extract you

obtained. Dry the paper in air and then cut it into several small pieces. That is

the pH paper you made. To know the value of pH, sink it in a solution of a

known pH and make a colour chart of pH range. Make pH paper with all
_ vegetables or flowers available to you. Select the best one to use. }
NY “Ss

xq

Acid- Base Balance 231
(?) Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1, Which of the following compounds will be produced when sulfuric acid is added
on lime stone?
a. CO, b. H,
c. O, d. SO,
2. Which of the followings is base?
a. soft drinks b. lemon juice
c. vinegar d. washing soda
3. For the presence of which of the following aqueous solution of ammonia gas
becomes alkaline?
a. NH,’ ion b. OH ion
c. NH, d. H,O
4. The reaction between nitric acid and an unknown metal produces a colourless
solution. When we add sodium hydroxide to the solution, it produces white
precipitate. However, excess amount of sodium hydroxide dissolves that also. The
metal is:
a. copper b. iron
c. lead d. zinc
5. pH of ethanoic acid is 4. To increase the pH we need to add-
i. ammonia solution
ii. concentrated hydrochloric acid
. iii. solid magnesium carbonate
8

232 Chemistry
Which one is correct?
a. iand ii b. ii and iii
c. i and iii d. i, ii and iii
6. Which of the followings makes the lime water turbid?
a. NO, b. co
c. so, d. co,
Creative Question
1,
a. What is the colour of NO, gas? :
b. Explain whether the pH of lime water NH,Cl
will be greater or less than 7. | 8
ey &0
c. Explain a chemical property of the
aqueous solution of gas X. | ve
d. What will happen if X gas is passed "
through HCl gas? Write the answer
with equation.
2. The effluents produced from textile and dying industries containing paint and
sulfuric acid are dumped in nearby water reservoirs. As a result, those reservoirs
become unfit for aquatic life.
a. Which acid is found in tamarind?
b. Write down your opinion about the pH of the water reservoirs of the stem.
c. Give a logical advice to control acid pollution by effluent treatment plant in
textile and dying industries.
d. Analyze the probability of acid rain in the nearby places of textile and dying
industries along with reaction. 3s

Chapter Ten
Mineral Resources: Metal-Nonmetal
3 —g. 2 “34 ¥ ; . ,
{ uhs " ah /
‘ a . »
¢ j » *
Mineral stone of various colour

We are using different kinds of materials and products everyday that are made
by tin, iron, copper, gold, porcelain. These may be elements, compounds or a
mixture of both. Many of them are obtained from mines. What is mineral
tesource? How do we get metals and nonmetals from the mines? Besides, how
we make various necessary products from these is the focus of this chapter.
Forma -30, Chemistry Class-9-10

234 Chemistry
® By the end of the chapter we will be able to -

. explain mineral resources

. compare among rocks, minerals and ores

. find out the appropriate ways of metal extraction

. explain the cause of making alloys

. describe source of sulfur and reactions of formation of some of its
important compounds, their chemical properties and analyze their
uses in houses, industries and agriculture

. analyze the importance of limitation, appropriate use and
recycling of minerals

. show sincerity in use of minerals and keenness in preserving

S

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 235

10.1 Mineral Resources

We obtain all our necessary metals, nonmetals, metalloids and their compounds

from earth, air or water. The part of air, water or earth from where we get these

is called mine. The found in these mines is called mineral. Minerals may be solid

like iron or copper mineral. They may be liquid like petroleum or mineral oil’s

mineral. They may also be gaseous like natural gas. Our country abounds in

natural gas which is used for cooking, fuel of vehicles, power generation or raw

materials in various industries. Middle eastern countries have petroleum

minerals which they are exporting throughout the world and which meets up the

demand of petroleum products. South Africa has mines of gold and diamond.

Besides, different countries have different minerals which contribute to the

development of that country as well as the whole world. These solid, liquid and

gaseous minerals are called mineral resources.

Magnesium Others
. 2% 2% Sodium
shee S 3m Oxygen
— A
8.4% “~~~. Potassium
Tron Calsium 3%
4%
Fig 10.1: Ingredients of the Earth Crust

10.1.2 Rocks

Different mineral substances mix up to make some hard particles which again

combine together into a substance which is called rock. Basing on the way of
2 their formation, rocks are of three kinds: (i) Igneous rock, (ii) Sedimentary rock
& and (iii) Metamorphic rock.

236 Chemistry

Igneous Rock

The molten mix of different substances that pour out from the volcanoes is called

magma. When magma cools down and solidifies it is called igneous rock.

Granite is an example of this rock. Igneous rock is the source of many minerals.
Fig 10.2: Igneous rock, Sedimentary rock and Metamorphic rocks

Sedimentary Rock

As an effect of weather and climate, rainfall, wind, fog storms etc. clay and sand

from the earth’s crust is washed or flown away which is again gathered in some

places as sediment. Then different particles in that sediment organize themselves

in layers and transform into a rock which is known as sedimentary rock. An

example of the kind is sandy stone.

Metamorphic Rock _

At various pressure and temperature, | Vere

the igneous and sedimentary rocks oe U4 77]

transform into a new kind of rock i YL,

which is called metamorphic rock. Coal 8% 4 “é LS ‘

is this kind of rock. a

Formation of Different Layers of —°30i =e sun

Sub-surface Rocks bis ae ‘|

Rocks are organized in different layers “NW =.

underground. Gravitation force, -

temperature, pressure and natural force Fig 10.03: Layers of Rocks

etc. help form different layers of rocks 3

underground. N

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 237
10.1.3 Minerals and Ores
Minerals: The substances available above and underneath the soil from which
we get necessary metals and nonmetals to make various products are known as
minerals. The places where these minerals are found are called mines.
Ores: The minerals from which metals and nonmetals can be extracted
profitably are called ores. For example, galena (PbS) is the ore of lead as from it,
the metal lead is profitably extracted. Aluminium cannot be profitably extracted
from bauxite and so bauxite is called the mineral of aluminium but not the ore of
aluminium. Therefore, we can say, all ores are minerals but not all minerals are
ores.
Sulfide of iron is called iron pyrites (FeS,). Iron can be extracted from pyrites.
Position of Minerals
Earlier, it was idealized that minerals are available only beneath the surface.
Now, this concept is no more correct. Some minerals are obtained from beneath
the surface but some are also available on the surface. Sulfur minerals are
available beneath the earth’s surface. White clay or keulin mineral is available
on the surface at Bijoypur of Netrokona. The sand of Cox’s bazaar sea beach
contains zircon, the mineral of zirconium and hematite, the iron mineral,
bauxite, the aluminium mineral etc. are available on the surface of various
places. Halogen minerals are available in the sea water.
10.2 Metal Extraction
The process metals are obtained from the ores is called metal extraction.
Different metals have different properties. That is why there is no one process of
extracting all metals from their ores; there is difference in the process of
extracting different metals. Some non-reactive metals like gold, platinum etc. are
sometimes found in their pure state. However, less and more reactive metals are
« usually found in their compound states like oxides, sulfides, nitrates, carbonates
$ etc. That is why, the compounds of reactive metals are extracted by reduction or

238 Chemistry
electrolysis process. There are a number of steps of metal extraction from their
ores, which are: 1. Crushing the ores. 2. Condensation of ores. 3. Conversion of
condensed ore to oxides. 4. Conversion of metallic oxides to free metals. 5.
Purification of metals. However, the steps of metal extraction is decided by the
properties of the ores. All steps are not necessary for all ores.
1. Crushing the Ores:
If the stones of ore that are excavated from the mines are big, they need to be
crushed first. Firstly they are crushed in the Joe crusher to smaller pieces and
then they are turned into powder or small lattices in the Ball crusher.
2. Condensation of Ores: “—>
Usually the ores contain some substances apart + | a
from the metal that is to be extracted from it. This = |
mixture of substances in the ore is called \ = : "
impurities. The crushed powder of ores still . p-
contains the impurities mixed with them. For ’
example, bauxite ore contains sand as impurity f
when it is excavated from the mine. The process ~ J
that is employed to separate these impurities from
the intended metal is called condensation of ores. Fig 10.04: Joe Crusher
Condensation is of various kinds like Hydrolytic
method, Magnetic separation, Froth Floatation, Chemical method etc.
Hydrolytic Method: This method is usually applied for oxide ores. The
particles of oxide are comparatively heavy while the impurities are light. In the
process the ore is poured on a slanted, chambered table and water is flown on the
ore. At this, the heavy ore becomes condensed and goes inside the chamber
while the impurities are washed away with water. This way, the ores are
condensed.
2
&

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 239
Froth Floatation Method: The sulfide ores are condensed in this method. The
ore is first taken inside a large tank and added with water. Later, oil is slowly
added to the mix. When air is blown on the ore, the sulfide ore dissolves in the
oil and floats up as froth. The froth is collected while the impurities remain at the
bottom of the tank.
Experiment of Froth Floatation Method
Ingredients: sand, kerosene, spatula, liquid/powder soap, watch glass, a large
test tube with cork, celcopyrite, galena or hematite powder
Process:
1. Mix equal amount of sand wit one
spatula of washed ore. Take the mixture ye —
inva large test tube and fill half of it-with ii ~ Spatula
water.
2. Shake the test tube closing it with a ;
cork. Have the sand and ore separated?
3. Add some powder/liquid soap and a Fig 10,05: Froth Floatation Process
few drops of kerosene oil.
4. Again shake the corked test tube well.
5. Taking some foam into the watch glass with spatula examine whether there is
any ore.
6. Sands sink to the bottom of the test tube and ores float to the surface of
the test tube.
Magnetic Separation Method
The process is used if either of the ores or gangue has magnetic property.
Crushed ores are passed through a plastic conveyor belt. The outer wheel of the
a Conveyor belt has the magnetic property. It attracts the magnetic ores or gangue
S and they are gathered below and near the wheel. The nonmagnetic portion of the

240 Chemistry
mix gathers separately a little
afar. As a result, the ore is Wheel with
separated from the gangue. megnetic property
The process is applied to — ui eerenmuree:
separate the magnetic ores like 2 4 HOG 05
chromites FeO.Cr,O,, rutile “a
TiO, etc. Non i pa = t Round

. magnetic ——~ Ji. Magnetic moving
Chemical Method: substance substance belt
This method is applied if a
particular substance undergoes
reaction with either of the ores Fig 10.06: Megnetic Seperation.
or gangue. For example, to
obtain aluminium oxide ores from bauxite, chemical method is applied. Bauxite
contains a mix of iron oxide, titanium oxide, sand etc. impurities. Adding
sodium hydroxide solution.
(NaOH) with bauxite (ALO,.2H,O) and heating that up to 1500-2000°C will
produce sodium aluminate (NaAlO,):

Al,03.2H,O+ NaOH W—A > 2NaAlo, + 3H,0
When hot sodium aluminate is let to react with water, it produces aluminium
hydroxide and sodium hydroxide. Sodium hydroxide is dissolved
get the bauxite dissolved while the iron oxide, titanium oxide, sand etc. will not
be dissolved.
NaAlO, + 2H,0 —»  AI(OH),;+ NaOH
Heating the separated aluminium hydroxide at 1100°C will produce pure
aluminium oxide and water.
Bd
R

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 241
2Al(OH), ————— _ Al,0, + 3H,O
Aluminium Hydroxide Aluminium Oxide
This pure aluminium oxide is the output of condensation.
Conversion of Condensed Ore to Oxides: Condensed ore converts into metal
oxide by calcinations or roasting.
Calcinations of Ores: If condensed ore is heated at temperature below the
melting point in absence of air, organic substances and moisture will be removed
from the ore. This process is called calcinations. The calcinations enforce water,
carbonate, bi-carbonate, hydroxide etc. like impurities to be removed in the form
of carbon dioxide or water. If these impurities are not removed at this stage, it
will be tough to remove later.
Fe,03. 3H,0 A _» Fe,0, + 3H,0
ZnCO; __# 5 ZnO + CO,
CaCO; A+ CaO + CO,
Roasting: Generally, roasting is applied for sulfide ores. If sulfide ore is heated
at temperature below the melting point in presence of air, organic substances and
moisture will be removed from the ore as oxides.
2PbS +30, ——*—» 2Pb0 + 250,
2ZnS + 30, _ 4A , 2mo+ 280,
iv. Conversion of Metallic Oxides to Free Metals
The metallic oxides obtained from the calcinations and roasting needs to
undergo reduction reaction to extract the metal. The reduction can be done in
various ways like reduction through electrolysis, carbon reduction method and
self-reduction etc. The position of the metal in the series of metals’ reactivity
determines the method. Below is given a table for your convenience to
understand the methods easily:
Forma -31, Chemistry Class-9-10

242 Chemistry
Table 10.01: Reactivity Serics of Metal

Metal’s Position in Reactivity Series| Metal | Reduction Method

Highly reactive metals at the top ‘ Reduction is done through

rankings Electrolysis

, ,

Medium standard reactive | Reduction is done through

metals at the mid level rankings Carbon Reduction

Less reactive metals at the Reduction is done through

bottom rankings ~ Self Reduction

Non-reactive metals at the fag Found in pure form

end of rankings
Reduction by Electrolysis: The top ranking metals in the in the reactivity series
like K, Na, Ca, Mg and Al undergo reduction by electrolysis. The Aluminium
extraction from Aluminium oxide by electrolysis is described below.
Solid aluminium oxide needs to be melted into liquid first. Aluminium oxide
melts at 2050°C. To raise the temperature so high is very tough. If aluminium
oxide is added with cryolite (Na,AIF,), it melts at 800°C-1000°C. The melted
ALO, cosists of Al** and O* ion.

Al,O; —————>_ 2Al* + 307°

A steel container with graphite carbon layer is necessary in the method. The
mixture of aluminium oxide and cryolite is taken in the container and some
carbon rods are dipped in the mixture in a way so that they do not touch the steel .,
container anyway. The steel container is connected to the negative charge of the &

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 243
battery and the carbon rods are connected to the positive charge. Once the
electric flow starts, the electrolysis starts too. In the electrolysis, O? donates
electron at anode and produces O, gas. Al’* present in the solution accepts the
electron at cathode and turns into Al metal.
60” ——__» 30,+ 12e- (Anode reaction)
2al*+ 6e > 2Al (Cathode reaction)
— wa anode
a
Carbon Cathode ig Mixture of molten
of u BH] Aluminium oxide and
; ~| 5 | Cryolite
Steel container , a i
with graphite layer a J BRI TEE ress
Molten aluminium
Fig10.07: Aluminium Extraction
Carbon Reduction Method
Metal is extracted by heating carbon along with metallic oxide. For example, Zn
from ZnO, Fe from FeO, Pb from PbO, or Cu from CuO are extracted this way.
A
zn0+C ——» Zn+ CO
Fe0+¢ —A + Fe+co
Pbo+¢ —4A—+ pb+co
cuo+c —4—+ cu+co
This method is called carbon reduction. The mid level position holder metals in
the reactivity series are extracted in this method.
8
ES

244 Chemistry
@) Individual Task
/ Assignment for Learners: Extraction of lead from lead oxide. *;
( Ingredients: yellow color lead oxide, a piece of white paper, Bunsen |
burner, match stick
Caution: the vapor of lead or lead oxide is poisonous. Do not touch it
directly with your hands, Do not breath in this vapor.
Procedure:
i. Lower down the flame of the burner.
ii. Burn a match stick in a way as to leave no residue of Gunpowder.
iii. Wet the burnt out part of the match stick and then add a bit of led
oxide to it.
iv. Hold the led oxide part of the stick on the burner and observe whether
a small point of bright gray coloured molten lead is formed.
v. Cool the stick. Put it on the white paper and find out the lead particle.
If necessary, use a lens. If you do not get the lead particle, follow the
procedure ii-iv again.
Comment
i. State the reason of dipping the match stick in water.
ii. Was there any chemical reaction in that action? Show reason for your
answer.
iii. Where did the carbon come from to free the lead?
iv. Write down the equation of the reaction using formula and words.
v. Will you get the same result if you use copper, iron or zinc oxide
| instead of lead? Show reasons. }

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 245
Auto-reduction
In the case with the oxides of metals positioned at the lower part of reactivity
series like Cu, Hg and Ag, only heating instead of any reductant can conduct the
reduction reaction. For example, the ore of mercury can be reduced in the
following way:
HgS +0, +» Hg(l) +50,
2HgS + 30. ————_» 2Hg0(s) + 2S0,(g)
2HgO(s) + HgS(s) MH» 3Hg(l) + SO,(g)

(v) Purification of Metals
The metals obtained from the above reduction methods are not fully pure. They
also contain impurities. Some methods are used to purify them.
The Method of Adding Smelting Agent
Some impurity still remains with the metal extracted after reduction. The
substance that is added to purify it from the impurity is called smelting agent. If
the impurity is alkaline, acidic smelting agent (SiO,) will be added and if they
are acidic, alkaline smelting agent will be added. Smelting agent and impurity
combine together into slag. Since slag is insoluble, it is separated from upper
layer of the solution of molten metal. Even the smelting process does not give
pure metal. The metal is purified by electrolysis.
Purification by Electrolysis
In purification by electrolysis, the impure metal is used as anode a rod of the
same metal in pure form is used as cathode. The salt solution of the metal that is
to be purified is used as electrolytic solution. When electricity is passed in the
cell, the atom of the metal from anode donates electron which enters the solution
as ion. On the other hand, metallic ion accepts the electron and adds to the pure
metal at cathode. The method is used for copper and other metals. The
application of the method in purification of copper is described below.
Purification of Copper by Electrolysis

5 Copper obtained from reduction method is 98% pure. Electrolysis can yield

246 Chemistry
99.9% pure copper. For this, the
aqueous solution of CuSO, is ih
taken in a container. The metallic
rod that needs to be purified 5 m
connected to the positive charge of ar
a battery is put in the container. It Impure copper | | | | C| Pure: copper
acts as anode. A rod of pure copper (note) i { [> aie.
is connected to the negative
charge of the battery and put in the (2) Co)
cell as cathode. Usually, the i
impure copper rod is thick and the ——_ Fig 10,08: Purification of impure copper
pure rod is thin. through electrolysis
Now, as electricity is passed in the cell from battery, the Cu** ion from the impure
rod goes into the solution. From the solution, the Cu’* goes to the cathode and
gathers with the pure rod as Cu. Oxidation reaction occurs in the anode and
reduction reaction occurs in the cathode.
Cu(s) ————» Cu” + 2e° (Cu** goes to the solution from the impure
copper at anode)
Cu?* + 2e° ~—————» Cu(s) (Cu”* joins the pure copper cathode from solution)
Group Assignment
( 1. The melting point of sodium is 801°C. The melting point of the mixture »)
of sodium chloride 40-42% and calcium chloride 58-60% is about 600°C.
Consider the above information and describe a method of sodium
extraction. You will consider the following issues:
e Expenses of smelting
e Ifthe mixture is used, will sodium and calcium be free
simultaneously?
e Environmental pollution by the products of reaction.
2. The melting point of aluminium oxide is 2050°C. The melting pointof | x
\ aluminium oxide and cryolite (Na,AIF,) is 800-1000°C. Consider the yy, 8

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 247

above information and describe a

method of aluminium extraction.

Additionally, you will consider: Iron 7

» Expenses of smelting ences [| WY (\

° If the mixture is used, will [ => — \\

sodium and calcium be free Bee Layer of steel

simultaneously? \\

* Environmental pollution by the [| = \\ ;

products of reaction. I} > | Brick

3. What kind of environmental (( ))

pollution is caused by the ~\ °« &| ;

byproduct gas of copper Hotair \\ [/ Hot air

extraction? How do you prevent aivl Sa =

this kind of harm (acid rain)?How 4) ——— a ‘e Molten

do you think this gas may be used 7 slag

profitably without causing harm to __ a

the environment? Fig 10.09: Iron extraction in blast furnace
‘Metal [Ore | tvanbaetioa| Remarks
Coie)

Calanite a0)
Game)
Compe Romero anes] |
Brine)
Ss
N

248 Chemistry
(4. Look at the picture and answer the questions: \
Write the equations of probable reactions that will occur in the furnace in
language and in formulas. You should consider: Silicon dioxide is present
in the ore as gangue. The product of the reaction may undergo reactions
with the reactants and other products.
5.Write the equation of probable reaction of metal extraction from the ores
presented in the table. Give opinion in favour of your answer in the remarks
_ column. }
10.3 Selected Alloys
Metal alloy is a mixture of metals made by mixing some molten metals and
cooling them. The time between 5000 BC to 3000 BC is called the Copper age in
history. The humans at this time used to make ornaments, weapons and
machineries with copper. However, since copper is a soft metal, things made of
copper did not last long. That is why, people at that period used to mix molten
copper with molten tin. Then they used to cool the mixture and get bronze.
Basically, bronze is an alloy. The solid substance obtained from mixing any
molten metal or nonmetal with another molten metal and cooling the mixture is
called alloy. The invention of alloy by those ancient people was an
epoch- making invention. The 3000 BC to 1000 BC is called the Bronze age. At
this period, people used to make weapons and machineries with bronze. Alloys
are more effective than metals in making different machineries. Iron and carbon
are mixed to make steel which is another alloy. Again, mixing molten carbon,
nickel and chromium, in hot, molten iron, we get stainless steel. The knives and
scissors that doctors use in the hospitals are made of stainless steel. Molten
copper and molten zinc together produce another alloy named brass. Brass is
used in electric switch, utensils etc. Crockery are made of bronze which is an
alloy of copper and tin. A mix of aluminium, magnesium, manganese and iron ~
produces the alloy named duralmin which is used in making the body of planes. $

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 249
Table 8.02: Different alloys and its use
Alloy Ingredients and Use
Composition
Steel Tron 99% Rail and wheels, , engine, ship, vehicles,
Carbon 1% crane, weapons, knives, scissors, watch
spring, magnet, agriculture tools
Rust free steel | Iron 74% Knives, fork, kitchen sink, containers of
(Stainless Chromium 18% | chemical industries, operation tools
Steel) Nickel 8%
Copper 65% Omaments, ball-bearing, _ electric
Zinc 35% switch, door knob, utensils
Bronze Copper 90% Melting machineries, plates, glasses
Tin 10%
Duralumin Aluminium 95% ; .
Copper 4% Body or airplane, bicycle parts
Magnesium,
Manganese and iron
1%
22 carat gold | Gold 87.5% Ornaments
Copper 12.5%
21 carat gold | Gold 61.97% Omaments
Copper 8.33%
Other metals
You have learned that alloys are compositions of various metals. These
compositions do not contain equal amount of the metals to mix. In alloy, one
metal is the representative metal while the other metals are non-representative
metals. For example, in bronze, the representative metal copper has 65% while
there is 35% zinc. The alloy is named after the representative metal. Steel has
99% iron and 1% carbon. Therefore, steel is called the alloy of iron. The same
Forma -32, Chemistry Class-9-10

250 Chemistry
way, brass is 90% copper and 10% tin which makes it an alloy of copper. Again,
in brass, there is 65% copper and 35% zinc. Therefore, brass is also copper’s
alloy.
10.4 Symptoms, Causes and Prevention of Corrosion of
Certain Metals and Alloys
If things made of iron or iron alloy are left in the open for a long time, their
upper part produces a reddish brown substance. This substance is called rust.
Tron decays by producing rust. Similarly, if things made of pure copper, brass or
bronze are exposed to air for long time, a black/brown/green layer is created.
This layer is called copper slag. Copper decays producing copper slag.
Generally, exposure of pure metals and their alloys to open air for long time
creates a different coloured substance which is known as corrosion of metal.
The substance created due to corrosion of iron is hydrated ferric oxide
(Fe,O,.nH,O). Different coloured copper slag has different elements in them
like cuprous oxide (Cu,O), cuprous sulfide or celcoisite (Cu,S) etc. That is why;
copper slag does not have a specific formula. Some metals usuallydonate
electron to turn into positive ion when they are exposed to open air. Here, an
oxidation reaction occurs. Some ingredient of the atmosphere accepts that
electron and turns into negative ion in a reduction reaction. Then, the positive
and negative ion combines into a new compound. The new compound
undergoes reaction with the metal and corrodes the metal.
The rusting reaction on iron occurs very slowly and in steps. In one step,
oxidation occurs and in another reduction occurs. It requires oxygen (O,) and
water (HO) from atmosphere. Water of the atmosphere converts into H* and
OH.
H,O ——» H*+ 0H
20
S

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 251
When iron comes in contact with H* of open air, it donates electron and turns
into Fe**, It is oxidation.
2Fe ————> 2Fe™ + 4e-
The electron donated by Fe is accepted by O, and H* and produces H,O which is
reduction.
0, + 4H*+ 4e° ————» 2H,0
At this stage, Fe’’, H* and O, undergo reaction and produce Fe*' and water.
Fe + Ht + O, ————» Fe* + H,0
Then, Fe** undergoes reaction with OH" and produces Fe(OH),.
Fe + 30H ————->» Fe(OH),
This ferric hydroxide turns into hydrated ferric oxide or rust Fe,O,.3H,O.
2Fe(OH); —————> Fe,0;.3H,0
Investigation
Experiment of the Formation of Rust
¢ Take four test tubes and mark them 1 to 4.
* Take necessary measures to make them like the figure.
* Boil the water of test tube 3 for a minute and add 1 mL cooking oil
or olive oil on the water. The oil will restrict he air to go inside water.
* Preserve the test tubes in this situation for a week and observe.
sy
5

252 Chemistry
Keep testtubes for a week and observe
Air Boil water Air Oxygen
N 8
Oil layer
Tron <a>
nail
‘Boil wate:
i Anhydrous ewe - Cold water
CaClo
Fig 10.10: Experiment of rust on iron (Boil the water to remove dissolve
oxygen from water)
Prevention of Metal Corrosion
Metals and their alloys do not corrode if
they are not in direct contact with air. This
can be done in various ways like painting, thl
electroplating, galvanizing etc. The iron ee,
made doors and windows of our homes are
painted so that they do not come in direct
contact with air. We know the less reactive
metals usually do not undergo reaction with
oxygen but the more reactive metals rapidly Mey [oathae)
undergo reactions with oxygen of air and
water. Therefore, a coating of less reactive
metal is laid on more reactive metals. Thus Fig 10.11: Copper clastrogiating aa
the more reactive metals are saved from key
corrosion. The coating can also be given by
electroplating and galvanizing. ~
=
i~)
N

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 253
Electroplating
Generally speaking, the method of laying a coating of less reactive metal on
more reactive metal by electrolysis is called electroplating. In this method, the
metal that will be the coating is connected to the positive charge of the battery
and the metal that will get the coating is connected to the negative charge. Then
the electroplating is done through electrolysis. For example, to add a coating of
copper on iron, a solution of CuSO, is taken. The copper rod is connected to
positive charge while the iron rod is connected to the negative charge. As
electricity is passed in the cell, Cu donates two electrons which go into the
solution as Cu*. a .
Cu —— (Cu* + 2e [Oxidation reaction]
Now, this Cu?* accepts two electrns from Fe rod to become Cu and attaches to Fe
rod.
Cu** + 2e° +=————> Cu [Reduction reaction]

Galvanizing : The method of laying zinc coating on any metal is called
galvanizing. It does not require electrolysis. Zinc is coated anyway on any
metal.
Recycling of Metals
The amount of every element is definite in the world. After using metallic
products, instead of discarding them, they are sent to the factories of making that
metal. Usable metal is made from that trashed metal. This method is called
Recycling of metal. For example, trashed aluminium utensils are sent to
aluminium factories to recycle new aluminium. Trashed iron is sent to steel mills
for recycling. 21% of the total copper used in America is recycled copper. 60%
of aluminium used in Europe is recycled aluminium.

eS

5

254 Chemistry
10.5 Nonmetal Minerals
The nonmetal that are extracted from mines are called nonmetal minerals. Sulfur
is a nonmetal mineral extracted from mines.
Sulfur
Sulfur is a yellow coloured substance. Sulfur mines are situated deep inside the
earth. The substance is extracted from mine by Frasch method. Three tubes with
a single center is inserted into the depth of sulfur layer which is known as Frasch
pipe. Sulfur melts at 115°C temperature. That is why super heated water is
entered through the pipe to the layer so that the element melts. We know, at 1 atm
pressure, the boiling point of water is 100°C but if pressure is increased the
boiling point rises up. Water at any temperature between 100-374°C temperature
in extra pressure is called super heated water. Hot air is passed at 20-22 atm
pressure through the centre tube. Molten sulfur comes out through the middle
tube due to the effect of the pressure. It is collected in containers.

Use of Sulfur

Sulfur is used in large amount in Air —

different industries.

; . . . =—> Liquid sulfur

i. It is used in the preparation of
sulfuric acid. Ease heated — a

water
ii. It is added to rubber to make =< :
rubber more sustainable. The Rock ——>0, Fem
, a ini ora ose
th II 1 f containing “o", he
method is called vulcanizing o: saifie
rubber.

iii. Sulfanide is used in the Liquid sulfur
preparation of various Fig 10.12: Frasch Method of Sulfur Extraction
medicines. It kills bacteria. It
is produced from sulfur. SI

a

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 255
Sulfur Compounds
Some important sulfur compounds are discussed below.
Sulfur Dioxide
Sulfur undergoes reaction with oxygen from air and produces sulfur dioxide.
S+0, ——> so,
Sulfur dioxide is a highly toxic gas with acute odour which harms our body if it
enters inside through our mouth and nose. It creates burning sensation in the
eyes. If coal and petroleum contains sulfur, burning them produces SO, gas. This
goes into the air. During rain, it undergoes reaction with water and produces
sulfurous acid (H,SO,) which comes back on earth with rain water. This is acid
rain,
Sulfuric Acid
Of all the chemical, sulfuric acid is the highest used and so it is called the king of
chemicals. Sulfuric acid is prepared from solid sulfur in the industries. The
method of its preparation is called the Contact method.
The Contact Method: The method is described in steps below:
Concentrated
Catalyst H,SO,
V,0, |
Sulicetme V0) J seni Nap
a Why 4 S02 + Oz |
a an —— oo >
a aie Olium
Furnace Water —> MeS20
—>Sulfuric acid
H2SOq
~ Fig 10.12: Preparation of Sulfuric Acid in Contact Method
S
aq

256 Chemistry
Step 1: Firstly, sulfur and dehydrated air are supplied in a furnace. Sulfur and
oxygen undergo reaction here to produce sulfur dioxide.
$+0O, —, SO,
Step 2: The SO, gas is channeled with some more oxygen to another furnace.
This furnace has the temperature of 450-500°C and the catalyst vanadium
penta-oxide. SO, gas and O, gas undergo reaction here in that temperature and
produce sulfur tri-oxide.
280, +0, .————» 250,
Step 3: When SO, will come in contact with H,O, they will produce H,SO,,.
However, direct reaction between them will produce gaseous H,SO, which will
create a state of dense fog. That is a hazard for the industries. Besides, getting
liquid H,SO, from this gaseous H,SO, by condensation is a tough task. So, first,
sulfur tri-oxide is absorbed in concentrated H,SO, and that forms fuming
sulfuric acid. (Fuming sulfuric acid is called oilium. The formula is H,S,O,.)
H,SO, +50; —————» H,5,0,
The fuming sulfuric acid is then driven into reaction with H,O which produces
liquid sulfuric acid.
H,S,0, + HQ ——» 2H,S0O,
The Properties of Sulfuric Acid
Acid Property: Dilute or concentrated H,SO, undergoes reaction with any
alkali to produce salt and water. This is called the acid property of sulfuric acid.
For example, sulfuric acid reacts with calcium hydroxide and produces calcium
sulfate salt and water.
H,SO, + Ca(OH), ——» CaSOQ, + 2H,0

Sulfuric acid Calcium hydroxide Calcium sulfate Water
Oxidation Property: If much water is added to H,SO,, the solution is called
dilute sulfuric acid. It does not have oxidation property. But the concentrated
sulfuric acid has oxidation property. It oxidizes copper and produces copper «
sulfate and reduces itself into sulfur dioxide and water. 3

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 257
2H,SO, (Concentrated)+ Cu —————-» CuS0Q, + SO, + 2H,0
Dehydrating Property: The substance that absorbs water from any compound
is called a dehydrating agent. This property in a chemical is its dehydrating
property. Dilute H,SO, does not show any dehydrating property but the
concentrated does. The concentrated H,SO, absorbs water from sugar
(C,,H,,O,,). So, concentrated sulfuric acid is a dehydrating agent.
CyH2201, + HO, ————> 12C + H,S0,.11H,0
@) Individual Task
F ON
{ e Take 2-3 mL lime water in a test Steel \
] : production
tube and add few drops of dilute Dye Metal sult
sulfuric acid to it. Observe the Plastic 7% Fertilizer
change minutely and write the a, Vw
reason. Write the probable cepa \ /f © Chemicals
equation. te

e Take a pinch of potassium iodide
KI in a test tube and add few .

. Pigment 26%
drops of concentrated sulfuric a
minutely and explain the reason.
Write the probable equation.

e Take a spoonful of sugar C,,H,,O,, in a test tube and add few drops of
concentrated sulfuric acid to it. Observe the change minutely and write
the reason. Write the probable equation. You need to be cautious when
doing the experiment.

e What property of sulfuric acid (acid, oxidation and dehydrating
properties) is exhibited in which of the above three experiments? Explain
each of them.

e Follow the pie chart of figure 10.13 containing usage of sulfuric acid and

\ basing on your reading, analyze the economic significance of of sulfuric |
\\_ acid in Bangladesh. rs
Forma -33, Chemistry Class-9-10

258 Chemistry
(?) Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Which of the records in the table exhibits characteristics of a metal?
erate perreel os
“e127 7s |b zis) 183 0.002
“e fa [as fom) fay | oes ise |
Answer the questions 2 and 3 from the following stem:
A group of students were investigating rust. They kept nails in four test tubes
according to the figure below:
, Air ali Air = Oxygen
N 8
4 oil layer
iron >
‘nail
2. Which of the test tubes will exhibit the highest amount of rust?
a. 1* b. 24
c. 3" d. 44
3. The decisions that can be reached from the experiment are:
i. Rusting needs oxygen
ii. Salt is acting as a catalyst
iii. The presence of oxygen only does not confirm rust.
Which is correct? S
N
a. iand ii b. ii and iii
c. iand iii d. i, ii and iii

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 259
4. Which of the following specimens of gold is hardest?
a. 18 karat b. 21 karat
c. 22 karat d. 24 karat
5. Sulfuric acid is added to water in drops during dilution method because
sulfuric acid-
i. has high hydration enthalpy
ii. is a di-alkaline acid
iii. is a corrosive substance
Which is correct?
ai b. i and ii
c. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii
6. By absorbing SO, in 98% sulfuric acid, required amount of water is added for
dilution because sulfuric acid-
i. forms deep mist with water vapor
ii. emits huge amount of temperature on addition of water.
iii. is a dehydrating agent.
Which one is correct?
a. i b. iand ii
c. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii
7. Which of the followings is a gangue?
a. ALO, b. ZnS
cl SiO, d. PbS
8. Cinnabar is an alloy to the metal
a. Mercury b. Copper
c. Zine d. Lead
9. What is the melting point of aluminium?
a. 2050°C b. 2000°C
s c. 100°C d. 950°C

260 Chemistry
10. Which of the following metals is more reactive?
a. Cu b. Zn
c. Fe d. Pb
11. Copper slag consists of
i, CuCO,
ii. CuSO,
iii. Cu(OH),
Which one is correct?
a. iand ii b. iand iii
c. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii
12. What is the composition of tin in bronze?
a. 90% b. 65%
c. 35% d. 10%
Creative Questions
1. Zn metal is extracted by taking the ZnO produced in heat reduction of
calamine in a retort shown in the figure below. Produced metal is purified
by electrolysis.
a)
Mixture of zinc oxide and coke Gator feo Soolen)
a. Write the chemical formula of calamine. to
b. Explain heat reduction. SI
c. Explain the principal reaction occurred in the retort.

Mineral Resources: Metal- Nonmetal 261
a. Write the chemical formula of calamine.
b. Explain heat reduction.
c. Explain the principal reaction occurred in the retort.
d. Evaluate why metal is extracted in three steps, not by electrolysis
only.
2. Some minerals mixed with bauxite and calamine were found in a mine.
A group of scientists under the leadership of Dr. Thomas extracted two
metals in two different ways.
a. What is mineral?
b. Explain, “Not every metal is an ore”.
c. Explain the nature of oxides found in dissociation of second ore.
d. Write with logic the cause of extraction of two metals in two
different ways.
3. If we burn an element belonging to Group 16 of the periodic table in
open air, we get an oxide A. The oxide is a highly toxic gas with acute odor.
Acan produce an acid B in the industrial sector if we apply Le Chatteliere
principle.
a. What is ore?
b. A oxide is acidic- explain.
c. Describe the method of preparation of acid B.
d. The oxidation property of B acid depends on its density- explain
with logic.
4
8

Chapter Eleven
Mineral Resources: Fossils
RRTONNCTNY ES
4 Sx) ERE AY ee, Ss - \
, |) <= re
SETS ae
. 4 yg = % i tes , oR >. . us
METS key St
This Earth is about 4.54 billion years old. Long years ago, the appearance of this
earth was not the same as it looks now. From 500 or 600 million years ago, this
earth was full of dense forests, low marshy lands and seas and oceans. Deceased
animals, plants, lichens and fungus destroyed by natural disasters were amassed
in the low-lying areas, which were later covered with silts. In this way, the
remnants of these plants and animals got covered with thousands of feet of soil
and layers of different kinds of rocks for millions of years. Extreme pressure,
high temperature and different kinds of physical changes for millions of years
resulted in the creation of coals, petroleum or natural gases which are called
fossil fuels. Carbon is the major component of coal while the main element of
petroleum is hydrocarbon, a compound made of carbon and hydrogen.
Hydrocarbon is an organic compound. The organic compounds like Alcohol, s
Aldihyde, Kitone and Carboxylic Acid are mainly created from hydrocarbons.
This chapter will focus on these elements.

Mineral Resources: Fossils 263
® By the end of this chapter we will be able to -

. explain the concept of fossil fuels

. explain petroleum as a mixture of organic compounds

° explain the uses of petroleum

° explain the variety and classification of hydrocarbons

. explain the characteristics and reaction of making saturated and
unsaturated hydrocarbons and to differentiate between them

° describe the chemical reaction of making plastic products and
synthetics and their uses

. mention the bad impacts of misusing plastic products on
environment

° explain the merits, demerits and usage method of natural gas,
petroleum and coal

° explain the method of making alcohol, aldihyde and organic acid
from hydrocarbons

° use alcohol, aldihyde and organic acid

. carry out investigative work about the impacts of plastic products
on environment

. distinguish between organic and inorganic compounds through
experiments

° show awareness about the proper use of fossil fuels

2

264 Chemistry
11.1 Fossil Fuel

The ruins of plants and animals of ancient periods which are found
underground are called fossil fuels. The remains of animals and plant-bodies
corresponding to hundreds of millions of years have been discovered as fossils.
Coals, natural gases and petroleum that we use as fuels are found as fossils under
the ground. That is why, coals, natural gases and petroleum are called fossil
fuels.

Hundreds of millions of years ago, there was a time when this world was full of
forests, low marshy lands and seas where aquatic plants, phytoplankton (a kind
of fungi living in water) and zooplankton (a kind of small creature living in
water) were available. These types of plants and animals went under the soil
because of massive natural disasters from time to time. They went more
underneath the ground with the passage of time and they started going deeper
into the soil gradually. As a result, pressure and temperature on them started to
increase. In absence of air, they underwent decay and chemical changes. Fossil
fuels have been created from all types of tiny and gigantic plants and animals
because of heat, pressure and chemical changes for hundreds of millions of
years. Coals have been created from gigantic plants while petroleum has been
created from phytoplankton, zooplankton and bodies of deceased animals. As
this change goes on, petroleum turns into natural gas. So in some places both
petroleum and natural gases are found together. For instance, petroleum has
been traced along with natural gas in Haripur Gas Field of Bangladesh. As the
main source of this fossil fuel is animal body, the main elements of these fuels
are carbon and carbon compounds.

11.1.1 Natural Gas

The major component of natural gas is Methane (80%). Moreover, Ethane (7%),
Propane (6%), Butane and Isobutene (4%) and Pentane (3%) are also available
in natural gas. But the natural gas so far discovered in Bangladesh contains &
99.99% Methane. *

Mineral Resources: Fossils 265
11.1.2 Constituents of Petroleum and their Separation
Petroleum is generally available 5000 feet or even deeper into the layers of
rocks. Sometimes, petroleum is accompanied by natural gas which puts a
pressure on the upper surface of petroleum. When well is dug, this natural gas
helps petroleum to come out into the upper surface of the earth. The Petroleum
which is obtained directly from the well is called Crude Oil or Petroleum. This
Crude Oil is opaque and sometimes has bad smell because of the presence of
some compounds of Sulphur. This Petroleum is mainly a mixture of different
kinds of hydrocarbon and it is not directly useable. This Crude Oil is separated
through Fractional Distillation process based on the boiling point.
Fractional Distillation is also 20°C
a kind of distillation which Petroleum gas
contains some long columns
for condensation of vapour. non 70°C
Again these columns are co. Gasoline
divided into different parts Timp. [120°C
Naphtha

and the lowest part has the ie
highest temperature. The fiat, ib Kerosene
higher the part is, the lower nes 270°C
the temperature is. As a L Diesel oil
result, if the combination of min .
more than one liquid is === i bricating

et) —— 340°C oil
inserted into the lower | G a a, Fuel oil
portion of Fractional 1
Distillation columns after
vaporisation through Bitumen
heating, the combination 340°C
will go to the upper part of ig 11.01: Fractional Distillation of petroleum.
the columns. As the upper
parts have lower temperature, each component of the combination of the liquid
is separated into different parts of the Fractional Distillation columns according
to the boiling points. Petroleum is a combination of different hydrocarbons and
Forma -34, Chemistry Class-9-10

266 Chemistry
they have different boiling points. As stated earlier, crude oil is opaque but if it
is separated through fractional distillation, this crude oil will be split into
different parts like petrol, gas, petroleum, naphtha, kerosene, diesel, paraffin
wax and pitch etc which can be used for different purposes. Names of different
parts obtained from the fractional distillation columns, boiling points of different
parts, number of carbons available in the hydrocarbons of different parts and
their uses are described below:

(i) Petroleum Gas: The boiling point of this part is 0°C to 20°C. 1 to 4 carbons
are available in the molecule of the hydrocarbons of this part. Petroleum
contains 2% of petroleum gas which is liquefied after putting pressure on it and
then filled in cylinders. This gas named Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) is used
in producing heat for cooking and other purposes.

(ii) Petrol (Gasoline): The boiling point of this part is 21°C to 70°C. 5 to 10
carbons are available in the molecule of the hydrocarbons of this part. Petroleum
contains 5% of petrol which is also called gasoline. Gasoline is used as fuel in
vehicle engines.

(iii) Naphtha: The boiling point of this part is 71°C to 120°C. 7 to 14 carbons
are available in the molecule of the hydrocarbons of this part. Petroleum
contains 10% of naphtha. It is used as fuel and in producing different chemical
substances and other necessary products in petrochemical industries.

(iv) Kerosene: The boiling point of this part is 121°C to 170°C. 11 to 16 carbons
are available in the molecule of the hydrocarbons of this part. Petroleum
contains 13% of Kerosene which is used as fuel of jet engines.

(v) Diesel: The boiling point of this part is 171°C to 270°C. 17 to 20 carbons are
available in the molecule of the hydrocarbons of this part. It is used as vehicle
fuel, lubricant and dissolvent.

(vi) Paraffin Wax: The boiling point of this part is 271°C to 340°C. 20 to 30
carbons are available in the molecule of the hydrocarbons of this part. It is used
in producing toiletries and Vaseline.

(vii) Pitch: The boiling point of this part is above 340°C. More than 30
carbons are available in the molecule of the hydrocarbons of this part. It is used
in road construction. s

g

Mineral Resources: Fossils 267
11.2 Hydrocarbons
Hydrocarbon is a compound containing only carbon and hydrogen. Example:
Methane (CH,), Ethane (C,H,), Cyclohexane (C,H,,), Benzene (C,H,) etc. You
can see that the compounds have no molecule other than carbon and hydrogen.
Hydrocarbons are of mainly two types: (i) Aliphatic Hydrocarbon and
(ii) Aromatic Hydrocarbon
11.2.1 Aliphatic Hydrocarbons
The word ‘Aliphatic’ means something fatty. It is called Aliphatic Hydrocarbon
because this type of hydrocarbon was mainly obtained from animal fat.
Aliphatic Hydrocarbons are of two types — (1) Open Chain Hydrocarbon and (ii)
Closed Chain Hydrocarbon.
(i) Open Chain Hydrocarbon
These hydrocarbons are called Open Chain Hydrocarbons because two terminal
carbons of their carbon chains remain in an open state. Example:
Butane: CH,-CH,-CH,-CH,, Ethane: CH,=CH,
Again these Open Chain Hydrocarbons are of two types - Saturated and
Unsaturated.
(a) Saturated Open Chain Hydrocarbons: The Open Chain Hydrocarbon
which has only carbon-carbon single bond (C-C) is called Saturated Open Chain
Hydrocarbon. Example:
Propane: CH,-CH,- CH,, Pentane: CH,-CH,-CH,- CH,-CH,
(b) Unsaturated Open Chain Hydrocarbons: The Open Chain Hydrocarbon
which has one or more than one carbon-carbon double-bond or carbon-carbon
triple-bond is called Unsaturated Open Chain Hydrocarbon. Example: Ethyne
(CH=CH)

x Unsaturated Open Chain Hydrocarbons may have carbon-carbon single bond

& besides carbon double-bond or triple-bond.

268 Chemistry
Based on double-bond or triple-bond, Unsaturated Open Chain Hydrocarbons
are again divided into two types- Alkene and Alkyne. In this chapter we will
learn about Alkene and Alkyne in details.
Carbon-Carbon double-bond is present in Alkene. Example: Propene (CH,-CH= CH,)
Carbon-Carbon triple-bond is present in Alkyne. Example: Ethyne (CH=CH),
Propyne (H,C-C =CH)
(ii) Closed Chain Hydrocarbons
In this type of Hydrocarbons, the terminal carbons of the carbon chain are
connected together and make a sphere or circle. Chains of different sizes make
circles of different sizes. Like Open Chain Hydrocarbons, they may also be of
two types, namely Saturated and Unsaturated Closed Chain Hydrocarbons.
Saturated Closed Chain Hydrocarbon: WA X anh
C3 Ha Hz—CH>
Cyclopropane Cyclobutane
H—CH2
Unsaturated Closed Chain Hydrocarbon: HCH, H—CH,
Cyclopropene Cyclobutene
Closed Chain Hydrocarbons are sometimes called Alicyclic Hydrocarbons.
11.2.2 Aromatic Hydrocarbons
The word ‘Aromatic’ is taken from the Greek word Aroma which means scent or
fragrance. This was so named because the first aromatic compounds were
sweet-smelling. Benzene (C,H,) or Naphthalene (C,,H,) is the instance of
Aromatic Hydrocarbons.
The aromatic compounds are generally 5, 6 or 7 membered co-planer cyclic
compounds. It has alternative double bond that means there is a carbon-carbon
single bond and a then carbon-carbon double bond. 20
S
N

Mineral Resources: Fossils 269
H H i
|
| “
Beg ol vag ig Sel
|
H Piet H NAN AH
|
I
at H H
Benzene Naphthalene
Fig 11.02: Aromatic compounds Benzene (C,H,) and Naphthalene (C,,H,)
In this chapter our discussion will be limited to mainly aliphatic hydrocarbon.
Homologous Series: The compounds, which have close similarities in their
physical and chemical characteristics because of the same active radical, belong
to the same class. These compounds are called Homologous Series. All
members of the same homologous series can be shown by a common formula.
For instance, all compounds of Alkane homologous series may be presented by
C,H,,,.- Examples of different homologous series are given below:
Table 11.01: Homologous Series
Homologous | General :
Series Formula | Names and formulas of some initial members
Alkane CoHonea Methane (CH,), Ethane (C,H,), Propane
(C,H,), Butane (C,H,,)
Bihene (CH), Propene (CH)
Btiyne (CH), Popyne (CH)
Aldehyde Ethanal (CH,-CHO), Propanal (C,H,CHO)
Carboxylic | GHz COOH | Ethanoic Acid (CH,COOH), Propanoic Acid
=| Acid (C,H;COOH)
N

270 Chemistry
11.3 Saturated Hydrocarbons: Alkanes

The hydrocarbons which have

carbon-carbon single bond in their

carbon chain are called Alkanes. () ®

Common formula of alkanes is C,H,,,, @

(n = 1, 2, 3, 4,..). The name of the first O70 D ELD) fom)
member of this group is Methane. As it (H) (1)

is the first member, its common formula ane molecule — : i
n= | and its formula is CH,. The name © molecule
of the second member (n = 2) is Ethane — Carbon atom

and its formula is C,H,. It is very ®  Hydroven stom

difficult to break this type of bond. That

is why, alkanes are chemically inactive Fig 11.03: Methane and Ethane

to a great extent. For this reason, they

are called Paraffin which means lacking

affinity.

Naming of Alkanes:

Naming of Alkanes in IUPAC system is as follows:

(i) In straight chain Alkanes, one-carbon Alkanes (CH,) are named as Methane,
two-carbon Alkanes (CH,-CH,) as Ethane, three-carbon Alkanes
(CH,-CH,-CH,) as Propane and four-carbon Alkanes (CH,-CH,- CH,-CH,) as
Butane.

(ii) In alkanes, naming is completed by adding (ane) with the ending words
formula identifying the Greek number of their carbon number.

Alkyl Group

The single valance radical formed after removing one hydrogen atom from the
Alkane is called an Alkyl Radical. As the common formula of Alkane is CH,
we can write R-H instead of C,H, ,, if we want to write it by using Alky] Radical
R where R = C,H, ,,. Alkyl Radicals are named by omitting (ane) and adding S

Mineral Resources: Fossils 271
(yl) with last part of the name of Alkane from which a hydrogen atom was
removed for formation of Alkyl Radicals. For instance, we can say Methyl
(CH,-) from Methane (CH,), Ethyl (CH,-CH,-) from Ethane (C,H,), Propyl
(CH,-CH,-CH,-) from Propane, Butyl (CH,-CH,-CH,-CH,-) from Butane,
Pentyl (CH,-CH,-CH,-CH,- CH,-) from Pentane, etc.
Table 11.01: Carbon numbers, names and formula of Alkanes
Carbon
Alkane
of Alkane
ee
oo
S

272 Chemistry
Preparation of Alkane
From carbon-di-oxide: Methane and water are produced when hydrogen is
heated with carbon-di-oxide at 250°C temperature in presence of nickel catalyst.
Ni
CO, + 4H, ———> CH, + 2H,0
Carbon-di-oxide Hydrogen 250°C Methane Water
From Alkene and Alkyne: Ethane is produced when hydrogen is heated with
ethene and ethyne at 180°C- 200°C temperature in presence of nickel catalyst.
Ni
CH=CH, + H, ——— CH;-CH;
Ethene Hydrogen 180° C-200° C Ethane
Ni
CH=CH + 2H, ———_> CH;-CH;
Ethyne Hydrogen 180° C-200° C Ethane
From Decarboxylation Reaction: Methane and sodium carbonate are produced
when sodium ethanoate is heated with sodium hydroxide in presence of calcium
oxide.
CH,COONa + NaOH a chy
n +  Na,CO,
Sodium Sodium Methane Sodium
Ethanoate Hydroxide Carbonate
Properties of Alkane
Physical Properties: Melting point, boiling point and physical condition of
Saturated hydrocarbon or alkane depend on the carbon number of alkane. Its
physical condition changes with the change of carbon number. As the boiling
point of the saturated hydrocarbons with carbon number 1-4 is less than the
room temperature, they remain in gaseous state. Boiling point of saturated
hydrocarbons with carbon number 5-15 is greater than the normal room
temperature. So they remain in liquid state. Boiling point of 5-carbon saturated
hydrocarbon pentane is 36.1°C. Saturated hydrocarbons which have more than «
carbon number 16 are solid. &

Mineral Resources: Fossils 273
Chemical Properties: As stated earlier, Alkanes are chemically inactive to a
great extent. So they do not react with acid, base, oxidant or reductant. However,
they take part in some chemical reactions.
Reaction with Chlorine
Tetrachloro Methane is produced when Chlorine is mixed with Methane in
presence of Ultra Violet (UV) light. This reaction is accomplished in four
phases.
CH, + cd, — W, CH,Cl + Hcl
Methane Chlorine Chloro Methane Hydrogen Chloride
cH,cl + cl Wi , CHCl, + Hcl
Chloro Methane Chlorine Dichloro Methane Hydrogen Chloride
cH,Ccl + cl UW , CHCl, + Hcl
Dichloro Methane Chlorine Trichloro Methane Hydrogen Chloride
cHcl + cL to Wy, ccl, + Hcl
Trichloro Methane Chlorine Tetrachloro Methane Hydrogen
Chloride
Combustion Reaction with Oxygen: Methane reacts with oxygen of air and
thus carbon-di-oxide water vapour and heat are produced. This heat is used in
cooking.
CH, + 20, —_ co, + H,0 + Heat
Methane Oxygen Carbon-di-oxide Water Heat
11.4 Unsaturated Hydrocarbons: Alkenes and Alkynes
Alkenes
The bio-compound which has at least one carbon-carbon double bond in its
carbon chain is called Alkene. General formula of Alkene is C,H, . Alkene is
Forma -35, Chemistry Class-9-10

274 Chemistry
sometimes called Olifin (taken from Greek word Olefiant = oil forming) because
its lower members (Ethene, Porpene etc.) produces oily substance in reaction
with halogen (CL,, Br,).
Naming of alkenes
In IUPAC system alkenes are named by omitting (ane) and adding (ene) with the
names of Alkanes.
Preparation of Alkene
From Ethyl Chloride: Ethene, sodium chloride and water are produced when
water solution of sodium hydroxide is heated with Ethy] chloride.
CH-CH,Cl + NaOH ——> CH=CH, + Nacl + 4H,0
Ethyl Chloride Sodium Hydroxide Ethene Sodium Chlorid Water
From Ethanol: Ethene and water are produced when deep sulphuric acid is
heated with Ethanol.
CH;-CH,-OH 1250; CH=CH, + H,O
Ethanol Ethene Water
Chemical Properties of Alkene
Due to carbon-carbon double bonds in Alkenes, they are chemically very active.
Because one of the bonds is comparatively weak though another one is strong.
During reaction, the weak bond breaks and takes part in addition reaction.
Addition of hydrogen: Ethane is produced when Ethene is heated with
Hydrogen at 180-200°C temperature.
CH,=CH, +H, __Ni__, cu,-cH, .
Ethene Hydrogen 180-200°C Ethane S

Mineral Resources: Fossils 275
Addition of water: At high temperature and high pressure alkene reacts with
water vapour in presence of phosphoric acid and produces alcohol.
high temperature and
CH,=CH, + H,o JhighpressurecH,-CH,OH
Ethene Water phosphoric acid Ethanol
Alcohol is used as an environment-friendly fuel and a solvent in petroleum
industries. So this reaction is very significant.
Addition of bromine: When solution of red coloured bromine is added to
Ethene, Ethene reacts with the solution and produces dibromo ethane. In this
reaction the red colour of bromine disappears. All unsaturated hydrocarbons
show this reaction. This reaction proves that ethene is an unsaturated compound.
CH, =CH, +Br, ——— _ CH,Br-CH,Br
Ethane Bromine Dibromo ethane
Oxidization by Potassium Permanganate (Active or Naseent Oxygen):
Ethylene glycol is produced when pink coloured solution of potassium
permanganate and sodium hydroxide are added to ethane. In this reaction the
pink colour of potassium permanganate disappears. All unsaturated
hydrocarbons show this reaction. This reaction proves that ethene is an
unsaturated compound.
CH,=CH, +H,O + [0] —KMnO,  cy,0H-cH,OH
Ethane Water KOH Ethylene glycol
Polymerization of Ethene: Polythene is produced when ethane is heated at
1000 atmosphere pressure and 200°C temperature in presence of a little amount
of oxygen. This reaction is called polymerization and in this reaction, Ethene is
called monomer.
1000 atmosphere pressure
nCH, = CH, —$—$—___________» (-CH2-CH2-)n
Ethene 200°C temperature, Polythene
20 a little amount of oxygen
S
XN

276 Chemistry
11.4.2 Alkynes

The bio-compound which has at least one carbon-carbon triple bond (-C=C-) in
its carbon chain is called Alkyne. General formula of Alkynes is C,H,,..
Acetylene (CH=CH) is the smallest straight member of the Alkyne group.
Naming of alkynes

Alkynes are named by omitting (ane) and adding (yne) with the names of
Alkanes. For example, the name of CH=CH is Ethyne, CH,-C=CH is Porpyne,
CH,-C=C-CH, is Butyne-2.

Preparation of Alkyne

From Calcium Carbide: Ethyne and calcium hydroxide are produced when
water is added to calcium carbide.

CaC2 + 2H,0 ———— > CH=CH + Ca(OH),

Calcium Carbide Water Ethyne Calcium Hydroxide
Chemical Properties of Alkyne

Alkyne has carbon-carbon triple bonds. One of the bonds is strong while the rest
two bonds are weak. The weak bonds of alkyne break up and take part in
addition reaction.

Addition of Hydrogen: You have already learnt that Ethane is produced when
ethyne is heated with hydrogen at 180°C- 200°C temperature in presence of
nickel catalyst. .

CH=CH + 2H, __ Ni cHyCH,
Ethyne Hydrogen 180-200°C _—_‘ Ethane
Addition of bromine: When solution of red coloured bromine is added to
Ethyn, Ethyn reacts with the solution and produces tetra-bromo ethane. In this
reaction the red colour of bromine disappears. This reaction proves that ethyne
is an unsaturated compound.
CH=CH +2Br, ———> CHBr,-CHBr,
Ethyne Bromine Tetra-bromo ethane. S

Mineral Resources: Fossils 277

Addition of water: Ethanal is produced when 20% sulfuric acid and 2%

mercuric acid are added to Ethyn at 80°C temperature.

CH=CH + H,0 20% sulfuric acid, 2% mercuric acid CH,CHO
Ethyne Water 80°C Ethanal

11.5 Alcohols, Aldehydes and Fatty Acids

11.5.1 Alcohol

The bio-compounds which have hydroxyl radicals (-OH) are called Alcohol.

However, some compounds are not called Alcohol though they have hydroxyl

radicals (-OH). Such as- Phenol (C,H,-OH). General formula of alcohol is

C,H,,,,OH. The first member of this class is Methanol (CH,-OH), second

member is Ethanol (CH,-CH,-OH). Alcohol can be symbolized by R-OH, where

R is the alkyl radical. The initial members of this class are colour-less liquid

substance and mix up with water in all proportions.

Naming: Alcohols are named by omitting ‘e’ and adding (ol) with the names of

Alkanes. Example: Ethanol (CH,CH,OH).

Preparation of Alcohol

From Ethyl Bromide: Ethanol and sodium bromide are produced when liquid

solution of sodium hydroxide is added with bromo ethane and heated.

CH;CH,Br + NaOH —A__» ¢H,CH,OH + NaBr

Bromo Ethane Sodium Hydroxide Ethanol Sodium Bromide

11.5.2 Aldehyde

The bio-compounds which have aldehyde group (-CHO) are called aldehyde.

Naming: Aldehydes are named by omitting ‘e’ and adding (al) with the names
« ofalkanes. For example, propanal (CH,CH,CHO). The name of the first member
S of this class is methanal (H-CHO).

278 Chemistry
Preparation of Aldehyde
Addition of water: Ethanal is produced when solution of 20% sulfuric acid and
2% mercuric sulfate are added to Ethyne at 80°C temperature.
20% sulfuric acid,
CH=CH +H,0 2% mercuric sulfate CH,CHO
Ethyne Water 80°C Ethanal
= &
ae ee ee
Fig 11.04: Different dead bodies of animals preserved in Formalin
Formalin: 40% of the liquid solution of formaldehyde is called formalin.
Formalin contains 40% Methanol and 60% water. Formalin is widely used in
laboratories. It is used for preserving the dead bodies of different animals.
11.5.3 Organic acid or Fatty Acid
The compounds which have carboxylic group (-COOH) are called Organic acid
or Fatty Acid. General formula of fatty acid is C,H, , COOH. It is symbolized by
R-COOH in short.
Naming: Fatty Acids are named by omitting ‘e’ and adding (oic acid) with the
names of Alkanes. Example: Ethanoic acid.
=
Rg

Mineral Resources: Fossils 279)
Preparation of Fatty Acid

From Ethanal: Ethanoic acid is produced when light sulfuric acid and
potassium dichromate are added with ethanal. (At first, potassium dichromate
reacts with sulfuric acid and produce nascent oxygen, which later reacts with
ethanal and produces ethanoic acid.)

K,Cr,07 + H,SO,
CH;CHO + [0] ——_> CH,-COOH

Ethanal Nascent oxygen Ethanoic acid
Chemical Properties of Fatty Acid
Acidic Properties: All fatty acids are weak acids. Fatty acids are slightly
ionized in liquid solution. Liquid solution of fatty acid turns the blue colour
litmus into red colour. Fatty acid produces salt and water in reaction with
base/alkali. For example, ethanoic acid reacts with liquid solution of sodium
hydroxide and produces sodium ethanoate salt and water.

CH;COOH + NaOH —> CH;COONa +  H,0

Ethanoic acid Sodium hydroxide Sodium ethanoate water
Vinegar: 4% to 10% liquid solution of ethanoic acid is called vinegar. Vinegar
is used in making food and as food preservative. As this solution is slightly
acidic, no bacteria or ferment can grow on food when it is used in food. As a
result food does not get rotten.
11.5.4 Preparation of alcohol, aldehyde and organic acid from hydrocarbon
You have learnt about different preparation processes of alcohol, aldehyde and
organic acid. The main constituent of petroleum is hydrocarbon (alkane, alkene
and alkyne) and alcohol, aldehyde and organic acid can also be prepared from
this hydrocarbon.

(i) Saturated hydrocarbon or alkane reacts with halogen and in presence of
sunlight and produces alkyl halide. Alkene reacts with hydrogen bromide in
presence of hydrogen peroxide and produces alky] bromide. In reaction with the

S liquid solution of halide sodium hydroxide, alkyl turns into alcohol. When this

280 Chemistry
alcohol is oxidised by strong oxidant (K,Cr,O, and H,SO,), at first aldehyde/
ketone is produced and later it turns into organic acid.
(ii) Alkene reacts with water vapour (H,O) at 300°C temperature and 60
atmosphere pressure in presence of phosphoric acid and produces alcohol.
Alkyne (ethyne) reacts with water in presence of 2% mercuric sulphate (HgSO,)
and 20% sulphuric acid (H,SO,) and produces aldehyde. However, due to the
toxicity of HgSO,, its use is discouraged in industries. Organic acid is produced
when the alkane gotten from petroleum is oxidized by the oxygen of air at high
temperature and pressure.
11.6 The Uses of Alcohol, Aldehydes and Organic Acids
Alcohol: Methanol is a toxic chemical substance. Methanol is mainly used in the
preparation of other chemical substances. In chemical industries ethanoic acid
and aster of different organic acids are produced. Ethanol is mainly used as
solvent in perfume, cosmetics and pharmaceutical industries. Pharmaceutical
graded ethanol is used in pharmaceutical industries and rectified spirit is used in
homeopathic medicine. 96% liquid solution of ethanol is known as rectified
spirit. Ethanol is widely used in perfume industry. Ethanol is made free from
odour before using in perfume. Except pharmaceuticals and food industries,
rectified spirit before using in other industries is mixed with little amount of
methanol to make it toxic. This is called methylated spirit. It is used to burnish
wood and metallic furniture. Now in Brazil ethanol is used in motor engine as
fuel instead of fossil fuel.
Alcohol can be prepared from starch (rice, wheat, potato and corn) by
fermentation. Besides, ethanol can be obtained in the same way from the
molasses (by-product of sugar).
Keru & Co at Darshona in Bangladesh produces ethanol and meets the demand
of the country. If we use ethanol as fuel, the demand on fossil fuel will be
decreased and on the other hand environment can be kept pollution free.

ES

8

Mineral Resources: Fossils 281
Aldehyde: Different kinds of plastic materials are made from aldehyde by
polymerization reaction. Deralin polymer is produced when liquid solution of
methanol is heated at a very low pressure. Deralin is used to make chair, dining
table, bucket etc.

Condensation polymerization reaction of formaldehyde and urea produces
Urea-formaldehyde resin which is used to prepare household appliances like
plate, drinking water pot, mug etc.

Organic acid: Organic acids are weaker than inorganic acids. Organic acids are
edible constituents. We take organic acids as food with lemon juice (citric acid),
tamarind (tartaric acid), curd (lactic acid). Having the capability of destroying
bacteria, organic acids are used as food preservative. 6% to 10% liquid solution
of ethanoic acid is known as vinegar. Vinegar is used to preserve sauce and
pickles.

11.7 Polymer

The reaction in which innumerable tiny molecules of any substances are
attached with each other and form a large molecule is called polymerization
reaction. Each of the tiny molecules which take part in the polymerization
reaction is called a monomer and the large molecule formed because of the
reaction is called a polymer molecule. When two monomers join each other, it is
called a dimer, when three monomers join one another, it is called a trimer. In
this way when many monomers join one another, then polymer is formed. The
main element of our food is protein, which is also a polymer of amino acid.
Polymers can be classified in many ways. However, according to their structure,
polymers are of two kinds, such as Addition Polymer and Condensation
Polymer.

11.7.1 Addition Polymer

The polymerization reaction in which the monomer molecules are directly
connected to one another and form a long-chained polymer is called an addition
polymerization reaction. The polymer which is formed in addition
polymerization reaction is called an addition polymer.

Forma -36, Chemistry Class-9-10

282 Chemistry
Addition Polymerization Reaction: Polythene is produced when ethene is
heated in presence of a little amount of oxygen at 1000 atmosphere pressure and
200°C temperature. This reaction is called Addition Polymerization Reaction. In
this reaction, ethene is called monomer.

1000 atm pressure

nCH,=CH, gs (-CH,-CH,-),
Ethene 200°C temperature, Polythene

little amount of oxygen
Polypropene: Polypropene is produced when propene is heated in presence of
titanium chloride at 140atm pressure and 120°C temperature.

140 atm pressure

nCH,=CH(CH;) ——_— >. [-CH,-CH(CH;)-],
Propene 120°C, titanium Polypropene
chloride
Polypropene is stronger and thicker than polythene. Rope, pipe, carpet etc. can
be made of Polypropene.
Polyvinyl Chloride or PVC: Polyvinyl Chloride or PVC is produced when
vinyl chloride is heated at high pressure and high temperature in presence of
organic peroxide. ‘ith PRESETS
nCH, = CHCl entemperire (GH, CHET,
Vinyl! chloride Organic peroxide Polyvinyl Chloride
11.7.2 Condensation Polymer
The polymerization reaction in which the monomer molecules release small
molecules such as H,O, CO, etc during their joining one another is called
condensation polymerization reaction. Nylon 6:6 polymer is produced in the
condensation polymerization reaction.
Production of Nylon 6:6: Nylon 6:6 is produced when adipic acid is heated
with hexamethelene di-amene in presence of titanium oxide.
nHOOC-(CH,)-COOH + nNH,-(CH,)-NH, ——H0Q2 _,

Hexamethelene di-amene Adipic acid A

(-OC-(CH2),-CONH-(CH,)¢-NH-), + nH,0 2%

Nylon 6:6 Water BS

Mineral Resources: Fossils 283
Based on the sources, Polymer can be further divided into two: Natural Polymer
and Synthetic Polymer or Plastic.
Natural Polymer
Many polymers are produced naturally, such as cellulose and starch in plants.
Both of them are natural polymers which are formed from many glucose
molecules.
Protein is a polymer of amino acid. Astringent juice of rubber trees is a natural
polymer. Rubber is cultivated in the Hill tracks, Cox’s bazaar, Hobigonj, Sylhet
and Tangail districts in our country. In industries plastic is being synthesized
several times more than natural rubber.
Table 11.03: Different Polimers, Properties and Uses
polymer of monomer polymer
Polyethylene | CH,=CH, Cannot be cut | Plastic bag,
Resins [ES [Spas [pion
Polypropene | CH,=CH-CH, Cannot be cut | Plastic rope,
povpees [ES |Sirawte (pete
Polyvinyl CH,=CHC1 Hard , solid and less | Water pipe,
a
polyethylene : insulator
8 flexible cloths, rope,
H,N-(CH,),-NH, tooth brush
Synthetic polymer or plastic
Plastic is available in hard, light, cheap and in any choice-able colour. Plastic
can be melted and can be given any shape by molding. The word plastic has
come from the Greek word ‘Plastikos’ which means possible to melt. Many of
us make various materials by melting the rejected plastic parts. It is dangerous
because burning or melting of plastic products by heating produces many toxic
gases. Plastic is widely used to produce various products like pots for keeping
« foods, packets, ballpens, chairs, tables, motor parts, water tanks, bowls, buckets,
S mugs etc.

284 Chemistry
11.7.3 Advantages and disadvantages of using plastic

In the present world, synthetic polymers like plastic are widely used. The use of
this type of products has many advantages. On the other hand, plastic products
are a threat to our environment. This type of products has become a part and
parcel in our daily life. That is why cannot keep away from these products. We
can overcome these disadvantages to some extent if we can use them a proper
way.

Advantages: Our daily necessary materials like utensils, different kinds of pipe,
containers, and bags are made from plastic materials. Earlier, metal, natural
fibers like cotton, jute, wood were used to make these products. Plastic is thicker
than these. We can make materials of different sizes by shaping plastic as we
wish and we can make them attractive by using colour on them.
Disadvantages: The greatest disadvantage of using plastic is that it is harmful
for environment. The things which we dump on soil or water decompose by
reacting with bacteria or oxygen of the atmosphere or other substances in water
or soil and they maintain the balance of environment. But plastic products are
neither decomposed by bacteria nor react with other substances. That is why
they remain the same when they are dump on soil or water. As a result they
pollute soil or water and spoil the balance of environment.

Our responsibilities: We should not dump plastic products indiscriminately;
rather we should preserve them for reuse by recycling. On the other hand, we
should increase the use of wood, metal, natural fibre. Scientists are trying to
invent decomposable plastic products and they have already become successful
in many cases. So it is hoped that decomposable plastic products will be
available in the markets instead of existing plastic products in near future.
11.7.4 Differences between organic compounds and inorganic
compounds

The compounds which you have studied in this chapter are all organic
compounds. Organic compounds are generally formed by covalent bonding and
inorganic compounds are formed by ionic bonding. S

Mineral Resources: Fossils 285
Organic compounds Inorganic compounds
1. Generally, organic compounds| 1. Except some exceptions, generally
must have carbon. Example:| inorganic compounds have no carbon.
Methane (CH,) Example: Hydrogen Sulphide (H,S)
2. Usually, organic compounds take) 2. Usually, inorganic compounds take
along time for reaction. ) aless time for reaction.
3. Organic compounds are generally} 3. Inorganic compounds are usually
formed by covalent bonding. formed by ionic or covalent bonding.
@) Do by yourself
| Activity: Define organic compounds. Taking some organic and inorganic
compounds determine their melting points and show the differences.
Think: How to differentiate between organic and inorganic compounds on
| the basis of deference of ionic and covalent compounds.
x
&

286 Chemistry
(?) Exercise
Multiple choice Questions
1. What is the percentage of ethane in natural gas?
a. 3% b. 4%
c. 6% d. 7%
2. Which of the following compound can cause disappearance of red solution of
bromine?
a. C,H, b. C,H,O
c. C,H,O d. C,H,
Reaction: CH;-C=CH Br, x Br, Y
Answer the questions 3 and 4 from the above reaction:
3. What is the name of compound Y?
a. 1,1-di bromopropane b. 2,2-di bromopropane
c. 1,1,2,2-tetrabromopropane _ d. 1,2-dibromoprapene.
4. In the stem X compound -
i) gives addition reaction
ii) is used to produce plastic
iii) is less reactive than Y
Which one of the followings is correct?
a. i and ii b. ii and iiii %
c. iand iii d. i,ii and iii 8

Mineral Resources: Fossils 287
Creative Question
1. In the months of March—June huge amount of potato gets rotten in Bangladesh
due to lack of preservation. Ethanol can be prepared from the potato by the
following reaction.
Enzyme (diastage and maltoze) e age
Starch Enzyme (Gases enema Glucose VME MABE) nol
Water
a. What is the main constituent of petroleum?
b. Why are alkenes more reactive than alkanes? Explain.
c. Give a description of the preparation of methane from potato.
d. Analysis of the possibilities of using excess potato as an alternate to fossil
fuel.
2. A gas is converted to different products by the reactions i to iii successively.
(i) 2CH, ———————————_ HCECH + Hz
(ii) HC=CH + Hcl ——_______, CH,=CHCl
we Polymerization
(iii) nCH,=cHcl ———————>. -(CH,CHC])-,
a. What is hydrocarbon?
b. Why is benzene an aromatic hydrocarbon?
c. What type of reaction is number ii ? Explain
d. Analysis the possibilities of diversification of uses of the first reactant gas
in the stem.
3,
Xx + NaOH ———_CH;COONa + H,0
Sodium hydroxide Sodium ethanoate water
a. What is aromatic hydrocarbon?
b. How is ethyne prepared from calcium carbide? Write with reaction
c. Complete the reaction in the stem.
§ d. Is the X compound acid? Analysis.

Chapter Twelve
Chemistry in Our Lives
x * _ i ‘2 ;
Some good looking soaps decorated with natural fruits

We use different kinds of fertilizer on soil to boost its fertility. This fertile is

mainly made of chemical substances. We add baking soda with flour to inflate

bread, use vinegar or other food preservatives to preserve foods for a long time

at home and all these are chemical substances. Again, industrial discharges

which pollute the environment are also chemical substances. Chemical

substances play roles in every phase of our life. This chapter will focus on the

preparation process of these chemical substances, their properties, uses etc.
2
§

Chemistry in Our Lives 289
® By the end of this chapter we will be able to -

. explain the importance of collection, properties and uses of some
household food materials.

. describe the importance of pH in determining suitability of
cosmetic materials at home.

° explain the preparation of household cleaning substances and
mechanism of cleaning.

. control the pH value of soil in agriculture using appropriate
compounds.

. explain the ways of processing agricultural products.

. explain the means of preserving agricultural commodities.

. explain the harmful effect of chemical waste by knowing it.

° manufacture soap by using chemical substances.

. exhibit the de-colorization process of bleaching powder.

° give opinion spontaneously with confidence about the appropriate
use of chemical substances to prevent the pollution of soil, water
and air.

. show interest about using health conscious commodities.

. show interest about using hygienic foods.

° show the role of baking powder in food products by experiment.

Forma -37, Chemistry Class-9-10

290 Chemistry
12.1 Domestic Chemistry/ House hold Chemistry
We use different kinds of chemical kinds of chemical substances such as table
salt, baking powder, vinegar, soft drinks in our houses.
Table Salt or Edible salt
Huge amounts of table salt or sodium chloride (NaCl) along with a little quantity
of some other salts including NaCl, MgCl, are dissolved in sea water. Again
sufficient sodium chloride is found in underground as minerals. In our country
table salt is extracted from sea water. Salt cultivators in the coastal areas of our
country make dams around square or rectangular land of different sizes and keep
a small empty space there. When tide water enters through this space, the water
is reserved inside by closing the entry point. When this water emaciates in
sunlight, salts become visible there. This method is called salt harvesting. The
salt collected through harvesting process is processed into edible salt through
different process in factories.
The salt collected through
harvesting process contains
sand. When this salt is mixed
2S Se ae with water in a pot, the salt is
= —_— ——"4 % dissolved in water but the sand
a rm 8 » == remains at the bottom of the pot.
ee oe ee = Then the salt-water solution is
a ee Lae eS separated through filtration.
ee oe & 4 Again when this solution is
Fig 12.01: Salt harvesting in the coastal area heated, the water vaporizes but
the salt remains at the bottom of the pot. In this way, the processed salt is packed
and sent to different places for sales. We need different types of ions like Na*, K*
etc for smooth running of all activities in our body. If there is lack of Na* in our
body due to any reason, this deficiency is filled up by taking NaCl with water.
Uses of NaCl: NaCl is used for different purposes, such as- S
AQ

Chemistry in Our Lives 291
(i) We take curry with rice. The curry does not taste good if we dont use NaCl in
it.
(ii) NaCl is used in industries to prepare NaOH compound
Gii) NaCl is used in drug industries to manufacture salines for diarrhoea or
dehydration.
Baking Powder
Chemical name of baking soda or table soda is sodium hydrogen carbonate
(NaHCO,). Baking powder is produced when tartaric acid (C,H,O,) is mixed
with baking soda (NaHCO,). Baking powder is usually used in making cakes.
Preparation of Baking Soda
Baking Soda can be prepared from ammonia gas, salt, water and carbon-di-
oxide. At first saturated solution of NaCl is prepared by dissolving NaCl in
water. Again this solution is saturated by blowing NH, gas into the saturated
solution. Then carbon-di-oxide gas is blown into NaCl solution saturated by
NH,. In this stage, at first CO,, NH,, H,O together produce Ammonium
Hydrogen Carbonate (NH,HCO,). Then the ammonium hydrogen carbonate
reacts with sodium chloride and produces sodium hydrogen carbonate or baking
soda. CO, +NH,;+H,0 ————> NH,HCO,
NH,HCO, + NaCl _—————> NaHCO, + NH,Cl

Baking soda is separated from the reaction pot and then tartaric acid is mixed
with it. This mixture is called baking powder.
Uses of Baking Soda
During making cakes, baking powder is mixed with the flour of cake and heated.
Baking soda reacts with tartaric acid (C,H,O,) in the mixture and produces
sodium tartaret (C,H, Na,O,), CO, gas and H,O. Cakes rise up because of this
CO, gas.

~ 2NaHCO, + CyH,0g ————> CyH,Na,0, + 2CO, + 2H,O

S

x)

292 Chemistry
One type of fungus named ‘Yeast’ is also used in home or bakery to inflate bread.
To do this initially yeast is added to a_ solution of sugar. If dough is made with
this mixture and kept in a warm place, carbon-di-oxide is produced because of
aerobic respiration of the yeast. This carbon-di-oxide helps the cakes to swell up.
When bread is baked in oven after sufficient blow-up, the yeast dies in heat and
blow-up process of bread stops.
(©) Individual Task
( Mix baking powder and yeast with flour separately and keep it for some )

time and make cakes with it. Compare the two cakes. If there is difference

between the cakes, explain the cause of it.
Vinegar
4% to 10% liquid solution of ethanoic acid is called Vinegar. Vinegar is a liquid
substance. Vinegar is generally used in making pickles.
Preparation of Vinegar
Vinegar or acetic acid or ethanoic acid (CH,COOH) is prepared by blowing the
bubble of oxygen gas into ethanol and acitobactor kept in a steel pot at 25°C to
35°C temperature.

Acitobactor
CH,CH,OH + 0, ————— 2CH,;COOH + H,0

Roles of vinegar in preserving food
Pickles putrefy or get rotten when bacteria attack them. Bacteria cannot attack
pickles if vinegar is applied on them. The main element of vinegar is ethanoic
acid. When vinegar is applied on pickles, the protein released by ethanoic acid
damages H* bacteria and as a result, the foods remain safe from the attack of
bacteria. In this way food is preserved by using vinegar.
Soft Drinks
Soft drinks are prepared when carbon dioxide gas is dissolved in water at cold
state and high temperature. Carbon dioxide and water react in soft drink and ,,
produce H,CO,. People take soft drink for digestion of food. 3

Chemistry in Our Lives 293

12.2 Chemistry for Cleanliness

A sound mind in a sound body is called health. We keep our body neat and clean

in order to maintain a sound health. Our mind remains sound if our body is neat

and clean. We use cosmetic soap to keep our body neat and clean. We use

washing soda, bleaching powder etc to keep our attire or clothes clean. We use

glass cleaner to clean the window glass or other glass materials in our houses.

We use toilet cleaner to keep our toilet clean. The techniques of preparing these

toiletries and ways of cleaning are discussed below:

Washing Soda

Sodium Carbonate (Na,CO,) is called soda ash. When 10 molecules of water are

chemically added to 1 molecule of soda ash, it is called washing soda. Chemical

name of washing soda is sodium carbonate deca hydrate (Na,CO,.10H,O).

Preparation of Washing Soda

When a large amount of CO, is passed into NaOH solution, it produces sodium

carbonate which is dissolved in water.

2NaOH + CO, ————> Na,CO;+H,0
There are Na,CO, and water in the reaction pot. Sodium carbonate joins with 10
molecules of water and produces washing soda (Na,CO,.10H,O).
Na,CO, + 10H,0 > Na,CO,.10H,O

Uses of Washing Soda

Washing Soda is used to wash clothes.

Toilet Cleaner

Main ingredient of toilet Cleaner is sodium hydroxide (NaOH). In toilet cleaner,

Sodium Hypochlorite (NaOCl) remains mixed up with Sodium Hydroxide.

Toilet cleaner is used to clean basin, commode, etc. There are oily materials,
« Protein materials, organic and inorganic materials of different colours and germs
S and bacteria in toilets, basins, commode etc. When toilet cleaner is applied on

294 Chemistry
toilets, basins, commode etc. sodium hydroxide reacts with oily and protein
materials and sodium hypochlorite reacts with substances and germs of different
colours and damages the efficiency of these germs and other substances.
Mechanism of cleaning toilet with toilet cleaner
When toilet cleaner is poured on the toilet, different constituents of toilet cleaner
react in different ways. Toilets become clean because of the alkaline property of
NaOH, the main element of toilet cleaner.
Sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl) of toilet cleaner reacts with water and turns into
Hypochlorous acid (HOCI) which breaks up and produces nascent oxygen. This
nascent oxygen transforms colourful substances into colourless ones and kills
germs.
NaOcl + HO ———> NaOH + HOCI
Hocl ———— _ HCl + [0]
Colourful Materials + [O] —————> _ colourless Materials
Germs + [0] ———~ ___ Dead Germs
Thus toilet cleaner transforms colourful substances into colourless ones and kills
germs. (Oxygen atom in third brackets refers to nascent oxygen. Nascent
Oxygen = [O])
Soap
Generally soap is the sodium salt (R-COONa) of higher fatty acid or Potassium
salt (R-COOK) of higher fatty acid. Here R is called alkyl radical. General
formula of R is C,H,,,, and the value of n is 12 to 18. Example: Formula of
Sodium Stearate soap is C,,H,,COONa and the formula of Potassium Stearate
Soap is C,,H,,COOK. Sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide reacts with oil
or fat and produces soap and glycerine. The procedure of making soap and
glycerine is called saponification. If NaCl is added to the mixture of soap and
glycerine obtained from saponification process, glycerine stays at the bottom of
the pot and the molecules of soap gather around NaCl and floats up in the form
of cakes. It is called soap cake. The soap cake is filtered by strainer and then ,,
poured into moulds to make soap of different sizes. $

Chemistry in Our Lives 295
Soap is a detergent which is produced from oil or fat and alkali. Based on use,
soap is mainly divided into two types- Toilet Soap and Laundry Soap.
Toilet Soap: The soap which is used for cleaning our skin is called Toilet Soap.
Laundry Soap: The soap which is used for washing our clothes is called
Laundry Soap.
While preparing soap, glycerine is also produced with soap. Oil, fat or alkali
may remain with the mixture of soap and glycerine. Soap is separated from
these. If there is excessive oil or fat in the soap during this separation, there
remains an oily situation in the soap. When this type of soap is used, it will not
make much scum. If there is excessive amount of alkali in the soap, its use is
harmful to our body. For this reason, while making in soap industries oil or fat
and alkali should be used proportionately so that oil or fat and alkali may react
completely. When carboxylic group is connected to a very big carbon chain, that
compound is called higher fatty acid. Fatty acid reacts with alcohol or glycerine
and produces aster. If the tri-aster of higher fatty acid and glycerine is in liquid
state it is called oil and if in solid state, it is called fat.
Stearic Acid is a saturated fatty acid obtained from the fat in animal bodies.
There is carbon-carbon single bond is saturated fatty acid and there is no double
or triple bond. The oil obtained from olive is called olive oil. Olic acid is
obtained from olive oil. Olic acid is an unsaturated fatty acid. There is
carbon-carbon double or triple bond in unsaturated fatty acids. The quantity of
alkali or other bad stuff is more in laundry soap and no scent or antibacterial
material is added to it. On the other hand, the quantity of alkali or other bad stuff
is less in toilet soap and scent or antibacterial material is added to it.
Detergent
Detergent is also a cleaning material like soap. Detergent usually looks like
powder and is also available in liquid form. Sulphuric acid (H,SO,) reacts with
lauryl alcohol (C,,H,,O) and produces lauryl hydrogen sulphate (C,,H,,SO,) and
water. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) reacts with this lauryl hydrogen sulphate
(C,,H,,SO,) and produces sodium lauryl sulphate (C,,H,,SO,Na) and water
S (H,O). Sodium lauryl sulphate (C,,H,,SO,Na) is known as detergent.

296 Chemistry
CyHyg0 + H,SO, ——H CyHS0, + H,0
Cy2H 6504 +Na0H ——— Cy2H25SO,Na + H,0
Different types of materials are added to detergent in order to make it useable.
Sodium Sulphate (Na,SO,) is added to detergent to give it the shape of powder.
Cleaning mechanism of soap and detergent
The main work of detergent or soap is to remove oil and dusts from clothes
through washing with water. Oily substances come out from our body and stick to
our clothes. Then dusts come in contact with the oily substances and make dirt.
Soap (R-COONa) or
detergent (C,,H,.SO,Na) is -
a molecule of long chained Dit Soap
carbon. In solution state, they =o oil
dissociate into negatively Cla
charged soap (R-COO)) or Hydrophilic es
detergent ion (C,,H,.SO,) polar comp | eet Hydrophobic
and positively charged cena
sodium ion (Na‘). There is
negative charge in one end of e “| ~ Water
soap or detergent ion. As this
negatively charged end is a
attracted by water, this
negative end is known as pig 12.02: Cleaning Mechanism with Soap or
hydrophilic. The other end of Detergent
soap or detergent ion dissolves in oil or grease and this end is known as
hydrophobic.
When soap or detergent gets contact with oily or greasy dirt of clothes in
presence of water, the hydrophobic part is attracted by the oil or grease and
dissolves in it. On the other hand hydrophilic part extends to the water layer. At
this condition if clothes are rubbed or twisted, the particles of oily or greasy dirt %
are completely covered by the negatively charged ion of soap or detergent anda S

Chemistry in Our Lives 297
ring of negative charge ion is formed around the particles of oily or greasy dirt.
Then they want to stay at possible maximum distance and form a mixture of oil,
soap and water. This mixture is known as scum. When more water is added to
this scum, oil and dusts are washed away with the scum. Thus soap washes away
dirt.

Differences between soap and detergent
1. Soap is sodium or potassium salt | 1. Detergent is sodium salt of long

as well.

3. Soap has less cleaning capacity | 3. Detergent has less cleaning capacity
Bad effects of using excess soap or detergent
There are alkali, glycerine, oil, fat etc. in the soap. If soap is used excessively, its
alkali affects hands. If clothes are washed at banks of ponds, pools or rivers, soap
scum reacts with the oxygen dissolved in water and reduces the quantity of the
dissolved oxygen. If the quantity of dissolved oxygen in water is reduced,
aquatic plants and fish living in water die. Thus excess uses of soap pollute
water.
Detergent contains trisodium phosphate (Na,PO,). This trisodium phosphate
works as a good fertilizer for plants to live. As a result, the quantity of plants in
the pond increases. As the plants use the dissolved oxygen in water, fishes die
out because of the lack of oxygen. Thus excess uses of detergent pollute water.
Use of Toiletries: People use toiletries (soap, cream, shampoo) to clean skin,
retain beauty of skin, clean hair and other purposes. As you have learnt earlier,
the pH of skin is between 4.8 and 5.5. That means skin has acidic nature, which
prevents attack or origins of germs on skin. Again, if the pH value of toiletries is
more than 4.8 to 5.5, its use reduces acidity of skin which results in damage of
skin beauty and increase of germ attack. So there should be relevance in the pH
values of toiletries and skin.
Forma -38, Chemistry Class-9-10

298 Chemistry
@) Individual Task
( Preparation of soap \
Hypothesis: Soap is produced by reaction of _ porcelain
oil or fat with alkali. pH value of the produced bowl Sy
soap will be more than 7. SS
Materials: Coconut oil, Caustic soda, |
Saturated solution of NaCl, Soap from ————a
market, Kerosene oil =
Apparatus: Bunsen burner/spirit lamp/ Le
kerosene cooker, 2 beakers of 400 mL, 2 test
tubes, one big porcelain bowl, one stirrer, one | | | |
spatula, one measuring cylinder (10 mL), one
funnel, one filter paper. Vy
Safety measures: In high temperature
sodium hydroxide is very corrosive substance. Fig 12-03: Preparation of Soap
So handle it with care so that no accident
occurs by splitting.
Do not use the produced soap on hand or body.
Procedure:
a. Prepare a steam bath in a beaker filled with water and put a porcelain
bow! in it as in the figure.
b. Take SmL coconut oil or 5g fat and 30mL Sodium hydroxide solution in
\__ the porcelain bowl. ]
5

Chemistry in Our Lives 299
( c. Boil the mixture in steam bath for 30 minutes and stir it time to time with )
stirrer. Add water to maintain the deficit of water due to evaporation. At
this time a sticky substance will be formed by removal of oily or fatty
materials.
d. Then stop heating and let the mixture be cooled.
e. Add 50ml saturation solution of NaCl in the cold mixture and let it stay
overnight.
f. Next day filter the solution with filter paper and through away the filtrate
and let the soap be dried.
Test of the produced soap
1. Take a test tube with one third of water and a piece of a specimen soap of
yours in it. Shake it well by closing the mouth of the test tube. Observe,
is there any foam formed or not?
2. Add 2/3 drops of kerosene in the test tube and shake it well and observe.
Explain the result by considering the kerosene as grease.
3. Determine the pH value of your soap.
4. Repeat the above three steps of the experiment with soaps from the
\\_ market and compare with your soap. F J}
Bleaching Powder
Chemical name of bleaching powder is Ca(OCl)Cl. Bleaching powders is used
to remove or make colourless the ink of ball-pen of any other colour which
cannot be removed from clothes by detergent or soap. Besides, bleaching
powder is also used for killing germs on floor, commode, basin etc. Bleaching
powder is produced when Chlorine gas is passed through the Calcium
Hydroxide at 40°C temperature.
Ca(OH), + Cl, ———» ca(ocl)cl + H,0
Technique of removing colourful spot on clothes:
Bleaching powder makes the colourful spots of clothes colourless. This is why
x bleaching powder is called an anti-pigment. Spot of clothes and bleaching
S powder both are chemical substances. When water is added to bleaching powder

300 Chemistry
after putting it on the dirt spot of clothes, bleaching powder reacts with water and
produces calcium chloride (CaCl,) and hypochloras acid (HOCI).

ca(ocl)cl + HO ————— Cacl, + HOC
HOCI breaks up and produces HCl and nascent oxygen [O]

Hocl ———__ Hcl + [0]

Nascent oxygen [O] reacts with colourful material and makes the colourful
materials colourless.
Colourful material + [O] |. ————+ colourless material
Technique of killing germs by bleaching powder
Bleaching powder is used to kill germs on house floor, commode, basin etc.
When water is added to bleaching powder after putting the powder on floor,
commode, basin etc, bleaching powder reacts with water and turns into calcium
chloride (CaCl,) and hypochloras acid (HOCI).

Ca(ocl)cl + HO t———» CaCl, + HOCI
Hypochloras acid breaks up and produces nascent oxygen [O] which kills germs.

Hocl ————> Hcl + [0]
Germs + [0] ————» dead germs

Glass Cleaner
The detergent which is used for cleaning glass is called glass cleaner. When
there is oil, fat or grease on glass, they attract dust and makes dirt on glass. To
clean glass, such a kind of cleaning material is used which reacts with oil, fat or
grease but does not react with sodium silicate or calcium silicate, an element of
glass. Glass cleaner is usually prepared by mixing isopropyl alcohol,
CH,CH(OH)CH, with ammonium hydroxide (NH,OH) which is prepared by
dissolving ammonia gas in water. Ammonium Hydroxide is also mentioned as
ammonia solution.
Technique of cleaning glass with glass cleaner
When glass cleaner is applied on glass, NH,OH reacts with oil, fat or grease on x
the glass and removes them from the glass. If there is any organic substance on &

Chemistry in Our Lives 301
the glass, isopropyl alcohol dissolves organic substance and removes it from the
glass. Mask is to be used on mouth and nose while cleaning glass with glass
cleaner because the ammonium hydroxide of the glass cleaner may enter our
nose and mouth.
Laboratory Production of Ammonia
gas
Ammonia gas is generally prepared in
the laboratory in two ways. i)
Ammonia is produced in the laboratory
by mixing and heating ammonium
chloride (NH,Cl) and calcium oxide
(CaO) in a test-tube. Figl2.04: Preparation of ammonia gas in
the laboratory
2NH,Cl + CaQ —————» 2NH, + CaCl, + H,0
Or, Ammonia gas, calcium chloride and water are produced when ammonia
chloride and slaked lime Ca(OH), are mixed and heated in a test-tube.
2NH,Cl(s) + Ca(OH), ——S-» 2NH, + CaCl, + 2H,0
Industrial Production of Ammonia Gas
Ammonia gas is produced by Heber process in industries. Ammonia gas (NH,)
is produced in Heber process by mixing N, and H, gases at the ratio of 1:3 and
heating the mixture at 450-550°C temperature after adding Fe catalyst. (In 1:3
ratio, N, and H, refer to taking 3 times more H, than N,). Some heat is also
produced while producing ammonia gas. This is an exothermic reaction. In one
side, N, and H, react and produce NH,. On the other side, some NH, gases break
up and turn into N, and H, gases. Two reversible arrows are used in this reaction.
Fe
N.(g) + 3H.(g) qos. 2NH, + 92K
200-250 atm
450°C-550°C
2
8

302 Chemistry
12.3 Chemistry in Agriculture and Industries
The fertility of soil is enhanced by applying different kinds of chemical
substances produced in industries. Lime stone (CaCO,) is valuable mineral
resource. In our country huge quantities of lime stone is found Sunamgonj
district and Saint Martin Island. Various materials are made from lime stone. For
example, lime stone is used as the main element of producing cement. If the soil
becomes acidic that is the quantity of H* increases in the soil due to any reason,
lime stone is applied on that soil in order to reduce the acidity. Lime stone reacts
with H* and produces calcium ion (Ca”*), carbon dioxide and water. As a result
the acidity of the soil is reduced.

CaCO,+ 2Ht ————> Ca™ + CO, + H,0
Urea
Urea is a valuable material. At first, ammonium carbamate (NH,COONH,) is
produced when the mixture of carbon-di-oxide and ammonia gas is heated at a
high pressure and 130°C-150°C temperature. Later, the ammonium carbamate
is broken and Urea (NH,-CO-NH,) is produced.

CO, + 2NH, ——4--» NH,COONH,

NH,COONH, —————> NH,-CO-NH, + H,0
Urea is widely used in industries and agriculture. Melamine polymer is prepared
from Urea in industries. Urea is used as fertilizer in agriculture. Urea is applied
on soil so that plants can get enough Nitrogen nutrients from Urea fertilizer.
Plants don not directly receive N,. In presence of Ureaz Enzyme in soil, Urea
reacts with water and produces NH,*, OH and CO.,, Plants absorb this NH,".

NH,-CO-NH, + 3H,0 USaz Enzyme onn+ + 20H + CO,

Ammonium Sulphate
Ammonia reacts with sulphuric acid and produces ammonium sulphate
[(NH,),SO,] and water.

2NH; + H,SO, —————» (NH,),SO, + H,0 =

8

Chemistry in Our Lives 303
Ammonium sulphate is widely used in agriculture. Ammonium sulphate can
react with alkali or base. So when the amount of alkali increases in soil,
Ammonium sulphate is used on soil to decrease the amount of alkali. It is a very
important nutrient for plants. Plants receive nitrogen and sulphur from it.
Chemicals in Processing Agricultural Commodities
Fruits, vegetables, fishes etc. are called agricultural commodities. The process
through which agricultural commodities are kept fresh for a long time or san be
saved from decay by using any chemical substance is called processing of
agricultural commodities. Use of chemical substances has both merits and
demerits. Mangoes get spots when the traders transport them from one place to
another by buses, trucks or trains. People do not want buy these spotted
mangoes. For this reason unscrupulous traders buy green mangoes and transport
them from one place to another. As a result, the mangoes don get spots. Then the
unscrupulous traders apply liquid solution of calcium carbide on the mangoes to
ripen them. Again, acetylene is prepared by adding water to the liquid solution
of calcium carbide (CaC,).
CaC, + 2H,0 ———» (C,H, + Ca(OH),

Besides, mangoes are ripened by this ethylene gas. Ethylene also has negative
impact on our body. Ripening mangoes by carbide means the process of ripening
mangoes by acetylene.
Chemicals in Preserving Agricultural Commodities
Agricultural commodities are preserved by ice, table salt, vinegar etc. so that the
agricultural commodities do not become odorous or so that they do not decay.
Fishes are preserved by ice. Vinegar is used to preserve tomatoes, green
mangoes, etc. in containers. Vinegar enters our body with food but it does not
harm us. Foods are not preserved by formalin because it is harmful material for
man and animals. We may even die if formalin enters our body. Hence, we
formalin should not be used to preserve foods.

= Some Recommended Food Preservatives

S The chemical substances which protect food items from bacteria, bad smell, and

304 Chemistry
decay are called food preservatives. Recommended food preservatives are those
preservatives which do not harm our body and which are approved as food
preservatives by the World Health Organization. The preservatives which harm
our body are called unauthorized food preservatives. Sodium Benzoate, benzoic
acid, vinegar and solutions of salt and sugar etc are recommended food
preservatives. Ethylene, acetylene etc. are unauthorized food preservatives.
Industrial Disposal and Environment Pollution
Industrial disposals pollute the environment. In Bangladesh tannery, paint and
pesticide industries dispose different kinds of heavy metal such as chromium
(Cr), lead (Pb), mercury (Hg), and cadmium (Cd) as industrial effluent. These
heavy metals or effluents enter soi] and water. They also enter the plants that
grow on this soil. When we eat fruits from these plants, the heavy metals also
enter our body and hard our kidney and liver. Even they can cause our death too.
Again a huge quantity of caustic soda (NaOH) emit from soap and detergent
factories into soil and water. If NaOH goes into water, the level of alkaline in
water increases. As a result, aquatic animals and plants cannot live in water
properly.
?) Exercise
Coit choice questions
1. What is the ratio of hydrogen and nitrogen in ammonia gas production?
a. 1:2 b. 1:3
e271 d. 3:1

2. NH, + H,SO, reaction —

(i) is a neutralization reaction

(ii) product is an important nutrient of plants

(iii) pH value of the liquid solution of the product is greater than 7
Which one of the followings is true?

(a) iandii (b) ii and iii #8,

(c) iand iii (d) i, ii and iii Ss

Chemistry in Our Lives 305
3. Which one makes the colourful materials colourless?
(a) Na(OH), (b) Ca(OCNCl
(c) HCl (d) CH,COOH
4. By which ion is the application of Urea on soil absorbed?
(a) OH (b) NH,*
(c) H* (d) Urea
Creative Questions
1. Shawn, a student of class ten, after washing clothes in tube-well water saw
that the clothes were not so clear and there was not much foam in the water.
When he informed his friend Riyad of the matter, Riyad suggested him to use
detergent.
(a) What is soap?
(b) What is glass cleaner?
(c) Describe the cleaning mechanism of the first material that Shawn first used
to clean his clothes.
(d) Explain with logic why the cleaning material suggested by Riyad was
effective.
2. Dr. Chandra’s maid servant is taking rest due to her indigestion. Suddenly the
fridge being out of order Dr. Chandra becomes worried with uncooked fish,
meat, salt, baking powder and vinegar which she bought from market. In the
meantime the maid servant feels better by taking baking powder secretly.
Knowing this matter, Dr. Chandra forbade her to take it in future.
a. What is the main constituent of glass cleaner?
b. What is the role of air in ammonia industry in our country?
c. by using which one of the stem did Dr. Chandra ask her maid to preserve
fish, meat to take immediate action? Explain.
d. Explain the chemistry with reaction about the cure of indigestion of the maid
servant in the stem.
Forma -39, Chemistry Class-9-10

SSSR SSRIS SR SSeS eeaee
(gt ED i ay Gat eh Ga (em he ay ee im ay eas i mt a A nw ae ieee Ow
BSS SASS SSCS SPS eaes eae ey
BHUSEERESAMTE SHEE SRERSDAEEL ERGY
(i
SHREKCHEKEGEK EE SKEHERRHER ER ER BS
BRE EREREAERERRHSRERLERER ER ER Bi
SRESESSHS PE EH SEES SHS EHEE SE Be
(a a
RHGKERED ER EK RHRARHRERTER RHE ES
A ee A A A
SHEERS SK SHSHRESRR HRS SS
PPD E PT
LE ee ee ee ee
BREREREREHRRERSREREC ER SHER EH ee
BRSECRSGHASHSKPHRSSSRSRVRSRESAE RH
a
SEBKREREH PHP ASHRE SKE RHR Ee Oe ee
SERRE ERE ERAEREL SNH RHEE BH
ReEKSRPK SHER EKPARESHE RARER BREE SE
Peano
SHOP ERREE HEE CRRA REREPHRER ERE OH
BERRA ULTEKRKEKTERKREL EK ELERSRER
PSSSCHSG SAGA SHAS SHER RHRKESER SS
(2 Cl
SHER GREK CHEK RH TETHERED EKER ER DH
EHEREREREKERERECRRERERERERER ER
PHESECASHSSEE KG SESKSREHASESSR SE
PROD
RHEE EHK SHEKEL RED ABHEE RHE KR ERC Ew
SHER ERERAR ACHE SHEN ee ee Se
PHEKSHSGHK RRR SH TSSEERRHHS STS Hoe
or eh
SHEKTCRSK CATERER EES DEERE EH
BRRRELRREL CREA ERET ERA ER AH
BRSSSSSRSASHPH SSSR H SREP Se Se
(A a
BHRGKRERPKR EA SKR CHAR EH EE RHR EK ER BG
CS ee ee ee ee
SRESSRESES SOR SRERERES SE EE ES EB SD

SERRE ERE RRR
GERRRE ERR S CSREES ee
SERRE RRR RRR
SREARD SAAS ESCH OSSARESR Eee
SERAGSERERSSESESRSERSSSRRE SRE
RESO SSA SSREOSSSS SRS Kea ee
SERRE RRR RRR
SESASISASARHSRSHEAERR SSR BEA ee
SERRE ERE RRR
SE RSPERA GERARD
BERRA RARER RRR
te
SER RRR RRR eee
Ed
SRR RRR RRR
SRPSSCSTSCRSSSC SSSR RSCSSSCREBeE
SERRE
SESSA S SSCS SSPE Sa SSR SSRe
SERRE
BERR ESAR ERS
SERASESEHE PAGERS RR ESR E we
BSS Sa SSRSS SES ASeSReS Sea saese
SERRHESACRSK REAR SEER CRSA SEA
SSS SS SSER SSS SASSER Ssase
GRSAGETACARRRRHAGESAKRERHAG EER
BES SRS See SSReaeS eee sese
SERRE RRR
SES SS SSSR SS SS SSSR SReS SSeS Sseae
GSEPSSSCHE SATS ECSRAT ERS RSE
SERRE R ESAS SRSA eee
SRR RRR Ree
SSS SSSR aR SSS SSeS SSS Sease
LET TT
SSRSeSS SASS SASS SSeS ease
SRR RRR RRR
SERZSSSS RSS SSSR TSSSRESSaEe
TTT a
PSS SSS SSeS SRSA ee
SERRE RRR
ene nc

q ae "3
Academic Year
9-10 Chemistry
Bq ALIS AGT AAS ENOS CAN AT”
-9 FF er BIT PTT
— wale aateraet ore SIA
lat 8 fre Fetters eat Moet efor 9 efScarces Ser UT BST OTST
sos Fea (Crt BF, 28 Sot ae) cer ar
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Government of the
People's Republic of Bangladesh

