Christian Religion and
Moral Education"
Classes Nine-Ten
CG NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a Textbook for Class Nine-Ten from the Academic Year-2013
e @ e e e
Christian Religion and Moral Education
Class Nine-Ten
Written by
Fr. Elias Palma, CSC
Sister Shikha L. Gomes, CSC
Sister Pushpa Teresa Gomes, CSC
Fr. Anal Terence D'Costa, CSC
Fr. Ashim T. Gonsalves, CSC
Edited by
Fr. Adam S. Pereira, CSC
Translated by
Fr. Joseph Peixotto. CSC
Fr. Adam S. Pereira, CSC
Fr. Elias Palma, CSC
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka
[All rights reserved by the publisher]
First Publication : January, 2013
Revised Edition : November, 2014
Reprint :September, 2016
Revised Edition : November, 2017
Coordinators
Fatema Nasima Akhter
Cover and Graphics by
Sudarshan Bachar
Sujaul Abedeen
Illustrated by
Mashiur Rahman Anirban
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
Computer Compose
Barnans Color Scan
For free distribution from scsdemic year 2010 by the Government of
The People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Printed by :

Preface
Education is the pre-requisite for the holistic development in our national life. To cope with the
challenges of the fast changing world and to lead Bangladesh to the doorstep of development and
prosperity, a well educated and skilled population is needed. In order to build up a nation imbued
with the spirit of the Language Movement and our Liberation War, the secondary education aims at
flourishing the talents and prospects inherent in the learners. Besides, the other aims also include
expansion and consolidation of the basic knowledge and skills of the learners acquired at the
primary level in order to make them fit for entry into higher education.
The aims of secondary education further emphasise on developing these learners as skilled
and competent citizens of the country through the process of acquiring knowledge at the
backdrop of socio-economic, cultural and environmental settings.
Keeping the aims and objectives of National Education Policy 2010 ahead, the curriculum at the
secondary level has been revised. In the revised curriculum the national aims, objectives and
contemporary needs have been reflected. Along with these expected learning outcomes have been
determined based on the learner's age, merit and level of acquisition. Besides, efforts have been
made to raise, starting from the level of moral and humanistic values down to awareness on history
and tradition, the spirit of the Liberation War, passion for art-culture and literature, patriotism,
feelings for nature and equal dignity to all irrespective of religions, caste, creed and sex. Efforts
have also been made to apply science in all spheres of our life in order to build a nation advanced
in science. Attempts are also there to make the learner capable of implementing the goals
envisioned in Digital Bangladesh-2021.
In the light of the present curriculum almost all the textbooks at the secondary level have
been introduced. While introducing the textbooks, the capacity, aptitude and prior knowledge
of the learners have been taken into utmost consideration. While selecting the contexts and
their presentation special attention has been given on the expansion of the learner's creative
faculty. Adding learning outcomes at the beginning of each chapter, hints about the
achievable knowledge of the learners have been given. By adding variety of activities,
creative and other questions evaluation has also been made creative.
Following the modified curriculum "Christian Religion and Moral Education" textbook was
written and it includes the call of life in the Bible and of loyalty and life-sketch of people
called by God, in the background of students' expectations and attitudes of the changing
realities at the dawn of the 21st century. The intent of this textbook was also to make students
know the life of the savior Jesus and his works so that by believing in his salvation, they are
inspired by His teachings of morality, spirituality, tolerance, generosity, non-communalism,
and harmony.
Considering the challenges and commitments of 21st century and following the revised
curriculum the textbook has been written. Recently, the rational evaluation and tryout
program has been completed to make correction and revision of the textbook. I hope the
outcomes of the program will be reflected in this revised edition. Any constructive suggestion
for the improvement of the textbook will be welcomed and incorporated in future editions.
We appreciate the endeavours of those who assisted very sincerely with their merit and hard
work in the process of writing, editing, translating, revision, illustration and printing of the
book. We hope the book will ensure joyful reading and achievement of expected skills from
the learners.
Prof. Narayan Chandara Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh.

CONTENTS
es co

Chapter One
CALL TO FREEDOM

God's creation of human beings is an expression of His infinite love. He made
them the greatest of all beings. The greatest gift that He has given His greatest
creation is Freedom. Because of their sins they lost their freedom. Yet all human
beings want to be free. God again offered them freedom. God wanted that all
humans be faithful to Him and believe in His only son. By doing so, they would
again become free .
At the end of this chapter we will be able to:

e describe the notions and characteristics of freedom

e describe the ways to be a free person

e describe the responsibilities and Behavior of Christians by analising

Christ's teaching about freedom

e explain the true freedom of a true Christian

e be inspired to live a free life
Notions and characteristics of freedom
Human instinct is to be free. We learn from history that our country was not free,
for many years it was a province under foreign domination of the British and the
Pakistanis. But our people fought against them and won freedom. March 26 is
our Independence Day. We celebrate this day with enthusiasm and joy as our
national holiday. We know from the Holy Bible that for many years the people
of Israel were living as captives in Egypt. God liberated them and brought them
into the Promised Land under the leadership of Moses. The people had not been
free because they were under the control of another people or nation, but that
changed completely. In order to be free, they had to break the control of their
own situation and destiny. But freedom does not mean only to live without force
or control from outside political or other domination. Freedom has a much
broader, deeper and more important meaning. It includes one's outward,
spiritual and earthly freedom.
We came to know from our childhood catechism that our first parents, Adam
and Eve, lost their freedom because of their disobedience, they had become
victims of the bondage of their sin. And we, being their children and
descendents, we could not inherit freedom from them since they were no longer
Forma-1, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

2 Christian Religion and Moral Education
free. But that was not the condition that God wanted. From that time on He
promised that we would again become free. God promised that He would save
us from the bondage of sin by sending a Savior, Jesus, His own Son. Jesus, was
born on earth as a man, He was one of us. As a result of the sins and hatred of
evil people He was sentenced to a terrible death on the cross. But He was raised
on the third day; He overcame the effects, the bonds of that sin. In this act He
brought salvation or freedom from death, and from the bonds of the spiritual
death of sin. He told us: "You will know the truth, and the truth will make you
free" (John 8:32).
Many people think that freedom means to do whatever they like and wish to do.
But true freedom does not mean that at all. Freedom means to have control over
ourselves in our effort to seek what we consider to be good or important for us,
to be able to pursue what is needed to fulfill our lives. Persons who are free have
self-control; they develop the ability to control their thoughts and actions in their
effort to seek their goals. The opposite of this is being attracted, tempted or
forced to do things that are bad, evil or things that that they should not do or that
they do not want to do. Such persons are not free; they are slaves of their
emotions, of their misguided ideas, or of force or compulsion.
These prevent a person from being free. These attractions can be internal, such
as (a) ignorance, (b) uncontrolled passion or feelings. Or these can be external,
such as (a) physical barriers or force, or (b) social forces of the community.
Internal Obstacles
(a) Ignorance: Ignorance means to have inadequate or incorrect knowledge of
anything. We all lack knowledge of so many things, we cannot know everything,
and most things are not important for us to know, and do not affect our freedom.
On the other hand, there are things that we must know in order to live our lives
properly. Ignorance of such knowledge becomes an obstacle to our freedom.
(b) Uncontrolled passion or feelings: Fear, bad habits, anger, hatred, and other
such feelings must be kept under control. Otherwise they lead us to think or do
things which are harmful or against our goals, and in doing this these restrict our
freedom.

=

&

Call to Freedom 3

External Obstacles

(a) Physical obstacles: Here we mean bodily defects of various types which

restrict our activity or thought. Some people inherit them by birth; such things as

being crippled, blind, deaf, disfigured, having low intelligence, etc. Or these can
be gotten later in life though accidents, abuse, etc.

(b) Restrictions from the Society: Our freedom to act can be influenced by

social, economic or political realities, such as poverty, rules and regulations of

the particular society, cultural traditions, etc.

Freedom to be Children of God

God created us all and considers us all to be His children. But he gives us

freedom to accept or reject this extraordinary gift. We who accept this gift are

free to utilize all our God-given talents and thus to truly become children of

God.

Freedom of the Children of God : We became children of God through

baptism, became human being by giving up the slavery of sin.

a. Freedom is always related with something. This does not mean that
one can do whatever one wishes to do. One should act so that others are not
wounded by one.

b. Freedom calls us to fully be human beings. We are created in the
image of God. God calls us to be a person that reveals His image.

c. Freedom calls us to be perfect persons as God.

d. Freedom leads us to God so that we can be saved.

e. Freedom is a process. We have to follow this process in our daily life.

f. Freedom always focuses on values. Its main aim us to do good to others.

g. Freedom overcomes obstacles. By freely choosing God, He leads us
to our goals.

h. Freedom is a gift of the Holy Spirit. We cannot be free only by our own
will. The Holy Spirit works in us if we freely accept Him. He makes it

2% possible for us to become free.
S
N

4 Christian Religion and Moral Education
i. Freedom is universal; it is for all. No one can keep it only for
himself or herself. Freedom is the fundamental right of every person,
society and nation. It overcomes all kinds of selfishness and meanness.
Task: 1. Individual : Describe the characteristics of a free person.
Task: 2. Group : Discuss in group and present the ways of becoming a free
person.
Ways to be a Free Person
In the beginning God created human beings, making them free. He Himself
offered them freedom as a loving gift. But they became disobedient and
committed sins against Him. As a result, they became inferior to what they were
before, because they became slaves of sin. Yet people want to be free, and try to
be free individuals. We shall discuss now how we can be truly free people.
1. Know thyself
Self-knowledge means knowledge of one's own self. Every human being is a
distinctive individual. Everyone is completely different from others. No one is
exactly like any other person - not only in physical appearance, but differences
are visible in behavior and personality too. There are good and evil in every
human beings. Whenever we realize this we begin to become free persons.
When we reduce the evils and foster the good in us we become what we are
called to be. Only then do we become free people
The Greek philosopher Socrates said: "Know thyself." Once we truly know
ourselves we remove the thing which clouds our vision, then we can see our true
‘self’, can accept the truth about who and what we really are, about our real quali-
ties and faults. Thus, we can become free persons. Jesus said: "The truth will
make you free" (John 8:31 ).
2. To be Fearless
Fear is the main obstacle to freedom. People tell lies or hide their true self
because of fear. They hide it from themselves and try to hide it from others. Thus
they cannot be free; rather be slaves to sin. Fear is born in lies and sin. Adam and
Eve in Eden Garden were filled with fear when they saw God. They had lost
their freedom by being obedient to Satan. We must be courageous and holy to be
free persons; we become fearful people because of our sins. God said many
times in the Holy Bible: "Do not be afraid." God sent His Son to make us fully
free. We become free from fear through Jesus Christ and with the help of the S
Holy Spirit. x

Call to Freedom 5
3. Faith and Trust in God
God Himself offered us freedom. This is a gift of the Holy Spirit. Many times we
try from our own efforts and schemes to get free, to break away from anything
that restricts our freedom, but we fail. We alone do not have the power to free
ourselves. Only God has that power and right, and He freely gives us that gift of
freedom. We must keep our faith and trust in Him. The more we become aware
of His presence in us, the more we can become free. The Holy Spirit leads us to
freedom.
4. Respect for Human Beings and all Other Creatures
Humans are the highest creation of God. Besides them, in the rest of creation,
God created wonderful things for human beings. We can see the diversity of His
creation. When we love human beings and all of God's creation, this frees us. For
when we freely love people, we cannot do anything bad to them. We can see the
beauty of God's creation when we love other creatures. When we do something
good to human beings and other creatures, these are free acts. Rabindranath
Tagore said in a poem: "Unite me with others and make me free from
bondage."We become free beings by being united with others.
5. Responsibility and Maturity
Responsible and mature behavior make people free. We are responsible for our
every action. We are responsible for our 'yes"no' to any action. We become free
persons by trying to make right decisions and by proper behavior. Mature and
responsible persons can easily accept their limitations and weaknesses and
consider them as part of their life. Mistakes are also part of our freedom. We
become free beings by acting with confidence and without fear,even when we
realize that we might make mistakes. But when we realize our mistakes we make
every effort to amend them. In this way we become free.
6. Self-confidence
Freedom comes from self-confidence. Self-confident persons know how they
are living. They are aware of their thoughts and actions. Their self-confidence
leads them to the right path. They always seek the truth and speak truthfully.
This truth makes them free.
7. Discretion to Judge Good and Evil . ;
Human conscience chooses boldly between good and evil. A holy person is
a guided by a right conscience, a conscience that is formed by the Holy Spirit. A
s truly free person is guided by the Holy Spirit.

6 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Task: 1. Find the ways that you can be a free person and share them
with others in the group.
Task: 2. 'God wants man's freedom’- Justify this statement.
True Freedom of a True Christian
¢ Jesus Christ and Freedom
God was disappointed that man turned against Him and sinned, and that the
world became full of sin. He chose to change that situation and restore man to
the pure —_ condition in which He first created them. He promised them to send
a Savior to again set them free. The Savior would offer them complete freedom
and a joyful life. Therefore He sent His own Son into the world as our
freedom-giver or Savior. The life of Jesus among us is an example in human
history of a truly free person. He lived for twenty three years. We come to know
though His speech His work and also though many incidents that He lived as a
free man.
¢ Jesus in Words and Actions
Jesus taught the meaning of freedom and salvation in His words and deeds. He
released many persons from the bondage of evil spirits, from the bondage of
sickness, and even of death. He scolded the Scribes and Pharisees when they
tried to burden simple people with useless rules and regulations that were made
by them and not by God. He cured sick people on the Sabbath day, even when
the Pharisees and the Scribes objected that this action broke the law of the
Sabbath. He exposed their hypocrisy when he explained to all that they
themselves take care of their own necessary work on the Sabbath, but they tried
to force others to strictly obey their man-made rules.
¢ The Judgment and the Death of Jesus
Jesus came into the world to give witness to the truth. But the hypocritical
religious leaders of His time sought power by neglecting to accept this order, and
by making changes according to their own selfish goals. Jesus often challenged
those leaders and accused them of hypocrisy, of preaching one thing but not
living according to their own teaching. They tried to find fault with Jesus so that
they could accuse and punish Him. They falsely blamed Jesus as a blasphemer,
brought false witnesses to accuse Him, and got Him convicted as being a ,
criminal who deserved the death penalty. He remained steadfast in his $

Call to Freedom 7

accusation of those hypocritical leaders and continued to reveal what was true.

This gave them the opportunity to get Him condemned.

But He rose from the dead. His glorious resurrection was the ultimate proof that

all that He proclaimed and represented was true. That is what we mean when we

say that "The truth had set Him free".

¢ Life-giving Sacrifice, and Resurrection

He accepted death for the sake of remaining steadfast in proclaiming the truth.

He freely accepted His death penalty, even though the charges against Him were

totally false; this led to Hion the cross. The greatest sign of Jesus' freedom is His

free choice of His death on the Cross. He Himself said: "There is no greater love

for a person that to lay down one's life for his or her friend" (John 15:13).

But God raised Jesus from the dead. He could not remain under punishment of

death dead because He had no guilt, He had freely accepted the will of God the

Father. He gave the greatest witness to freedom by rising from death. He went

beyond all barriers by conquering death. St. Paul wrote that this exalted Him

above all other creatures.

¢ Jesus is Universal

Jesus came into the world for every human person. He loved every one, people

of every creed, culture, color, men and women, rich and poor, saint and sinner,

young and old, children and aged. Though He was a Jew He associated with

everyone freely. He went beyond traditional customs and boundaries. This is a

clear sign of freedom in His life.

¢ Introducing New Rules of Love and Service

According to Jesus' teaching, love and service are the best ways to gain human

freedom. He set this example for us at the last Supper by washing the feet of His

disciples. Imagine, Jesus, the Master, washed the feet of His disciples. But He

did not feel restricted by customs or prejudice, He was truly free. He exercised

His freedom in loving and serving others, and He commanded us to do the same.

¢ Jesus the First Child of God born with Freedom

Though He is God, Jesus became a human being. Nobody can force God do
e anything. But Jesus freely chose what we cannot even imagine. He became man,
S did so freely, and took on all our suffering and problems. This is His greatest

8 Christian Religion and Moral Education
freedom. He, who is the God-Child, realized the Father's love, became man, and
taught us to call God our Father. No one except Jesus can be free to do this. He
is known in human history as the Savior of the whole world. A savior is someone
who rescues us when we are lost, suffering or dieing. We were spiritually dead
because of sin. But He rescued us, saved us. We become free men and women by
accepting Jesus in our life. Jesus is our model and our GURU.
Task: Share with your friends several preaching, teaching and actions of
Jesus that make you a free person.
Christians and Freedom: (Inspiration to live a life of Freedom) Jesus came
into this world for our sake, to make it possible for us to have life and have it to
the fullest. But we must be free to accept that gift, to be released from the
obstacles that prevent us from accepting this. The first call to be a Christian is to
obtain freedom to accept His salvation. We cannot do this by ourselves. Jesus
offers us the gift, and also offers the means to accept this gift. Only He can do
this. So we must have confidence in Him, and understand that He acts on our
behalf because He loves us. This confidence in Him we call faith. Therefore, we
need to understand clearly the meaning of freedom and salvation. The first thing
that freedom and salvation demands from us is to believe in Jesus and accept
Him as the Savoir. How do we know that we believe? The certain sign that we
do accept Him is when we live according to His teaching. So it is by our belief
in Jesus and walking in His path that we become Christians and receivers of
salvation. We receive full freedom by believing in Him fully. We read the
following words in St. Luke's Gospel account of the beginning of Jesus' public
life:
“The spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because He has chosen me to bring
good news to the poor.
He has sent me to proclaim liberty to the captives
and recovery of sight to the blind;
to set free the oppressed
and announce that the time has come
when the Lord will save His people" (Luke 4:18-19). 20
Ss
NX

Call to Freedom 9

We see a clear sign that from the beginning Jesus considered the full importance

of freedom or liberation. His goal was to free people from all sorts of evil so that

they can believe in Him and be saved. Various aspects of Christian freedom are

discussed below:

1. Physical Freedom or Healing

Jesus came into this world to give us life and to make us free from all kinds of
physical illness and pain. He revealed the Father's love to all people. He cured
sick persons by His words: He cured the crippled, gave sight to the blind; gave
speech to the dumb and hearing to the deaf. He offered physical freedom by
curing people from all sorts of illness. He gave new and sound life to the
abandoned and neglected lepers by curing them from their leprosy. After they
were healed from their disease, they received full freedom and confidence in His
love for them and became Christian disciples.

2. Freedom from Inhibiting Emotions

So many people who were captivated by conflict, fear, hatred, jealousy and

selfishness went to Jesus, and He to offered them life completely from all these

evils. He wanted to give them new hearts which were free from all stain of sin.

All who believe in Him will receive freedom and happiness of life.

3. Mental or Intellectual Freedom

Jesus was a free-thinking person who was open to all truth. He freely expressed

His thoughts and ideas. His refusal to say anything untrue caused shame to those

whose sins He exposed, and due to this they hated Him and even killed Him.

Also Socrates, the Greek philosopher, was persecuted for his free thinking, but

did not give up his declaring the truth. He died because of people who cruelly

opposed to his steadfast loyalty to the truth. Jesus desires that we become open

minded people of free-thought, that the 'true person' in us may remain always

guided by and proclaim the truth. To protect our land and language, many

intellectuals chose even the risk of losing their lives then to give up their free

thinking.

4. Spiritual Freedom

The human heart is the vessel of freedom. People experience deepest peace

when they have spiritual freedom. Jesus calls us to receive this peace and

freedom from Him. That is why He calls us saying: "Come to me, those are tired

and overburdened; I will give you rest" (Matt 11 :28-30).

Forma-2, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

10 Christian Religion and Moral Education
5. Social Freedom
Everyone desire to be freely accepted by all as full and equal members in the
society. Jesus came to exalt those who were excluded or outcast, the
downtrodden, oppressed and marginalized people. He came among us to stand
for deprived, persecuted, exploited, and abandoned people; to fight against all
evils, prejudices and divisions, and to establish peace and justice in our society.
A Christian can obtain freedom and salvation through social justice.
6. Economic Freedom
Jesus came into the world to preach the Good News first of all to the poor. He
continued His ministries by standing beside them. He severely criticized those
rich people who are greedy and not sensitive to the poor. He spoke of true
freedom by telling the story of the rich man and the beggar Lazarus. Today many
Christians participate with Jesus to bring economic salvation; they dedicate their
lives to put an end to poverty and to bring salvation from poverty for many
people.
Christians know that total human salvation is the best way to wholeheartedly
accept God. They want to inherit eternal life and the Kingdom of God. One day
a young man asked Jesus: "Lord, what must I do to inherit eternal life?" Jesus
answered him: "Go, and sell whatever you have; give the money to the poor and
then come, and follow me." Jesus compared the Kingdom of God with a
precious pearl. He spoke of a rich man who had a true sense of real value, in
order to buy the land where the precious pearl remained hiding. Christian
freedom means to acknowledge God as the most precious pearl, and to live
simple and controlled lives in order to gain that "pearl". This truth will make us
free. Once Christians gain this freedom, then they agree to give up everything
and serve others. Truly free persons become happy in life by offering their lives
for others. Only then do their lives become complete.
Task: How do you want to be a free as a Christian? In what aspects? Please write
how this freedom is possible in your life, then share it with others in your
group

Call to Freedom ll
Exercise

Multiple Choice Questions
1. How many interior barriers are there?

a. Two b. Three

c. Four d. Five
2. Why did Jesus come into this world?

a. to give us food. b. to give us life.

c. to give us security d. to serve us.
Read the following Paragraph and answer the questions nos. 3 and 4.
One day some miscreants entered the Church during the prayer. They told
all the faithful to refuse Christ. Many did so in fear of the danger of life. But
little Probal cried out: “I love Jesus.”
3. What kind of Christian freedom do we see in Probal?

a. Physical b. Emotional

c.. Mental d. Spiritual
4. Expressing one’s opinion like Probal one can become-

a. Free person b. historical person

c. powerful person d. Lovable person
Which one is correct?

a.i bi

c. iii d. iv
Creative Questions
1. Hriday is an established person. To develop his village he has been working at
night school, repairing roads and giving service to the villagers. He makes
friends with everyone irrespective of creed, caste, color ,rich or poor, male or
female, good or bad. Everybody likes him too.

a. What is the greatest creation of God?

b. What does freedom or liberty mean?

c. What kind of Freedom described by Jesus do you see in Hriday?

Explain.
d. Is that one aspect of freedom enough for Hriday to be a free person?
Give your opinion.

12 Christian Religion and Moral Education
2. Oshan is a rich young man. One day he was driving his car whimsically.
Suman's rickshaw suddenly came in front of his car and it fell on the ground
upside down. Oshan got angry; he came out of his came and said to Suman:"
Stupid fellow! You hit my car with your nasty rickshaw." Then he gave some
good slap on Suman's both cheeks. Oshan's girl-friend, Julie, told him: "Why do
you hit him? It is your mistake. Admit your own mistake too. Be sincere like
Jesus."

a. How many external barriers are there?

b. What does it mean to judge good and bad?

c. What kind of freedom does Julie advice to Oshan? Explain.

d. ‘Julie's advice can make Oshan completely a free person’ - explain this

statement.

Short Answer Questions
1. What is freedom? Explain.
2. Write down the four aspects of Freedom.
3. Write in brief the ways to be a free person.
4. Write in brief about any two aspects of freedom in the life of a Christian.

Chapter Two

FREEDOM AND ME
Each of the creations of the world is magnificent with unique beauty. Each of
them is distributing its own beauty freely. Thus they themselves are being
blessed by God and at the same time serving the whole world. Man is the most
unique of them all. There are billions of human beings in the world. Yet none of
them is like another. They are very different from each other. This is man's
unique characteristic that gives him glory and dignity. When man is able to grow
up with his unique characteristic then he becomes free. Man, because of his
unique characteristics and freedom, wants to discover himself and wants to
know himself deeper. Through knowing himself he comes to know his strengths
are limited and thus he becomes aware of his own actions and reactions. This
makes him able to live his life meaningfully and keep a good relationship with
others. Thus man can offer his own life for others and make his life effective and
significant.
At the end of this chapter we will be able to:
e describe the ways and means of knowing the self.
e explain with parables reasons for each person’s uniqueness.
e explain the importance of offering our life for the service of others.
e —_ explain the meaning of Christ’s offering his life for us.
e become enkindled with the service of society.
Knowing the Self
Self-knowledge is the best knowledge of the world. The very intelligent
philosopher Socrates said: "Know thyself’. Jesus said: "What will one gain by
winning the whole world if he destroys himself? There is nothing he can give to
recover his own self (Mt 16:26). Knowing the self is very important. All the
intellectuals and wise persons of the world were very conscious of their own
selves. This means that intelligent people are eager to know themselves. We
have already learned that one human being brings knowledge of the self each of
them is unique. Each human being has his own thinking, beliefs, attitude, view-
point, expressions, manners and values. He behaves or reacts to the actions of
others according to his own way. He has his own set of qualities, virtues, talents,
efficiencies, and strengths, and on the other hand his own limitations.

14 Christian Religion and Moral Education
How do we react to the actions of others in various ways in various
circumstances? To have knowledge of this is also a part of self-knowledge.
Knowing the self is a process. It is a life-long process. This process of knowing
the self ends with our death. There are many different ways and means of
knowing ourselves. Here below we are going to discuss them.
Ways and means of knowing the self
1. Self-Consciousness: The very first step of knowing the self is being conscious
of the self. Consciousness of one's own behaviour, words, virtues and vices,
strengths and limitations brings knowledge of the self. Besides, becoming
conscious of one's own actions and reactions in different circumstances and
environments also brings self-knowledge.
2. Prayer and Meditation: Psychologists Joseph and Harry have compared the
self with a window that has four parts. It is called the Joe-Harry Window. The four
different parts of that window are the source from which we can easily understand
that we need the help of God in order to know ourselves. We can obtain God's
help in this regard through prayer. God knows me the best. Psalm 139: 1 says: "O
Lord, you know me: you have scrutinized me."
1. Some of the characteristics of myself} 2. Some of my characteristics are
are known only to me, which are not} known to others except me. God
known to anybody else except God. knows them all.
3. Some of my characteristics are | 4. There is a dark part which is neither
known both to me and others, and of | known to me nor to others. These are
course known to God. known to God.
3. Constructive criticism: Constructive cnticism is very helpful for
selfknowledge. Through this we can know of our own strong and weak
characteristics. We can know ourselves when others show us our own faults,
though very often we find it very difficult to accept their comments. It is true
that our critics watch us and find out our weaknesses. If they can do it
positively then it is much better. On the other hand, if we accept their
comments constructively then also we can know ourselves.

Freedom and me 15
3. Constructive criticism: Constructive cnticism is very helpful for
selfknowledge. Through this we can know of our own strong and weak
characteristics. We can know ourselves when others show us our own faults,
though very often we find it very difficult to accept their comments. It is true that
our critics watch us and find out our weaknesses. If they can do it positively
then it is much better. On the other hand, if we accept their comments
constructively then also we can know ourselves.

4. Evaluation: We can have a clear conception of everything if we evaluate
after everything we do, everything that we hear from others or we tell others,
after our actions and reactions, etc. This process gives us a clearer conception of
ourselves. People caught Mary Magdelene and brought her to Jesus with the plan
of killing her by throwing stones at her. Jesus told them that the one who has not
committed any sin, let him throw the first stone . At this, one by one, all the
people left her alone. In this way Jesus gave them a chance to evaluate
themselves.

5. Psychological tests: Many people take the help of psychological tests
to know themselves. Through various tests people can know their character or
personality. These tests are very helpful.

6. Events and incidents: Various events and incidents of our day to day life
are also helpful to know ourselves. We can judge ourselves in the light of
those events and incidents. For example, through the steps that we take in
different challenging and risky circumstances we can know ourselves. Besides,
we know about ourselves from the steps that we take during different mental
pressures. One story can be helpful in this regard. A mother had three children.
She used to help her children in various ways. Often they used to complain to
their mother during their many mental pressures. One day the mother took her
children to the kitchen. On three burners she put water in three pots. The water
was boiling. In one of the pots she put an egg, in the second a carrot and in the
third she put coffee. After a while they found the egg became hard, the carrot
became soft and the coffee became mixed with water and started smelling
wonderful, which made it very tasty and drinkable. The mother explained
to the children that the same amount of temperature transformed three
different things in three different way. She told them that thus mental pres-
sures also transform us into something different. She also told them that it is
not appropriate to be only hardened like the egg or only soft like the carrot.
Rather we have to adjust to the situation and learn how to live our life in our
day to day circumstances.

16 Christian Religion and Moral Education
7. Education: Education changes man's attitude and behaviour. Our
selfknowledge increases through education. Therefore, there is no
alternative for education. True education is life's mirror. We become
self-conscious through education. Consciousness is the first step of knowing
ourselves. However, only theoretical knowledge is not true education, rather
life-centered education is helpful to self-knowledge.
8. Formation: Only formal education is not enough for self-knowledge; we
need other programs that form us as better human beings. Nowadays there are
various seminars, workshops and programs through which one can gradually be
formed as a better human being. Through those programs we can know our-
selves deeper. The deeper we know ourselves, the better we will know
ourselves and the more mature we will be.
9. Review of life: By review of life we understand interpreting the meaning of
life in the light of values. It means realizing the good and bad of each of the
events and incidents of our life and after that taking a decision for the rest of our
future life.
10. Writing a diary or journal: Many people have the good habit of writing
a diary or journal. At the end of each day or at a convenient time they write
down their life's good thoughts or words. It is a helpful means through
which we can read our words and experiences of the past and thus we can
know who we were and who we have become. This is also a helpful way of
knowing the self.
11. Making a list of one's own strengths and weaknesses: Through
reflection and by asking others’ opinions we can find out our own strengths
and weaknesses. Then we can make lists of them. From this also we can know
ourselves deeper.

talents and on the other side write down your weaknesses. Now share

with the friend sitting beside you. Ask your friend’s comments on

your lists.

Freedom and me 17
Individual Difference

By individual differences we mean person-to-person differences. All human
beings are born with the same kind of body structure. Yet each person's
personality is different from the personalities of all others. This difference is
reflected through his appearance, structure, behaviour, thinking, ideas,
virtues, talents, intelligence, ways of expression, likes and dislikes, etc. Man
to man these differences are called, in short, individual differences. Because
of individual differences man becomes unique. Because of his unique
characteristics man became the best of all creations of God. Without individual
differences men would have become like commodities produced in factories.
Our individual differences prove that we are unique creations of God. We
will discuss this topic a little bit more elaborately.

Characteristics of Individual Differences

Difference of physical appearance: One amazing fact of the world is that
here there is nobody like anybody else. Children who are born from the same
mother's womb, even if they are twins, are different from each other. They may
look almost the same, still they are different from each other. The first
characteristic of individual differences is the difference of their physical
structure and appearance.

Identity: Every individual has his own identity. He has his own name,
address, career, parents, relatives and race. His individual difference is revealed
through these. Two students in the same class may have the same name, but
they are made different by different roll numbers. Through his identity he
expresses his individual differences.

Different personality: Man's fundamental difference is seen even from the
viewpoint of his personality. Psychologists classify personality types based
on some fundamental characteristics. Yet there are as many personality types
in this world as the number of individuals. His personality is formed by his
environment, background and life experience. There can be similarity between
two person's characters, yet they are different individuals.

Own qualities: Every human being has his own set of human qualities,
intelligence, talents and efficiencies. Some people may have the same type of
talents, yet their human qualities are different from each other. For example,
in one classroom there may be five girls who know how to sing, ten boys who
know how to play cricket, yet their human qualities are different from each
other.

Forma-3, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

18 Christian Religion and Moral Education
It may be seen that among those five girls one is kindhearted and one of them has
the power of understanding. Of the ten boys one is honest, one is generous, one is
sympathetic and the like. In short, there will always be differences. Man
becomes unique for his own qualities.
Personal likes, dislikes and tastes: There are differences owing to one's regard
to one's likes, dislikes and tastes. Because of this also individuals are different from
each other. This difference is recognizable in various ways. For example, they are
different in selection of their dress, food, life-mate, friend, environment, color, etc.
Difference of values: Value differences of human beings cause a great
difference in individual Person characteristics. Every human beings has his own set
of values or beliefs, which influence his behaviour. An individual's free personal-
ity is built on the basis of this. Mahatma Gandhi, Mother Teresa, Archbishop
Ganguly-in short, all great people of the world became unique because of their
own set of values.
Personal Freedom: Immediately after being born from his mother's womb every
human beings becomes a free man because of his existence. Being separated from
his mother he becomes a unique person. From that very moment he has an attitude
of freedom. The reason is that God has given every human beings a wonderful
gift, freedom. This freedom makes man unique. By using freedom man takes his
own decisions and engages himself either in good or in bad activities.
Own contribution: Every man is born on the earth to make special
contributions. This is his unique contribution. No one can replace another.
Man can make his own contribution only, not anybody else's. A human
beings, either great or small, can make his own contribution only. St. Teresa,
the Little Flower of Jesus, through her very small works made many
contributions and thus became a great saint. On the other hand Mother
Teresa has given service to the whole world and thus she also became a great
saint. Rabindranath Tagore will be remembered always for his creative
literary works. We are also called to make special contributions. Through this
we will become unique persons. From an ordinary condition we will become
extraordinary.

=

&

Freedom and me 19
Own contribution: Every man is born on the earth to make special
contributions. This is his unique contribution. No one can replace another.
Man can make his own contribution only, not anybody else's. A human
beings, either great or small, can make his own contribution only. St. Teresa,
the Little Flower of Jesus, through her very small works made many
contributions and thus became a great saint. On the other hand Mother
Teresa has given service to the whole world and thus she also became a great
saint. Rabindranath Tagore will be remembered always for his creative
literary works. We are also called to make special contributions. Through this
we will become unique persons. From an ordinary condition we will become
extraordinary.
Selection of Career: In order to live our life and for earning some income we
all must choose a profession. By choosing a profession and living the life of
that profession we manifest our individual differences. Laborer, farmer, driver,
doctor, nurse, artist, actor, leader, director, teacher-all, through living their
professional life become different and unique persons.
Religious faith: Because of our own religious faith also we become persons
of unique personality. In every religion there are great personalities who,
because of their faith, established their own individual differences. We,
being men of different faiths, are called to follow the examples of these great
men and thus manifest our own individual differences. We can emphatically
say this that there is so much of beauty and variety because of individual
differences. If there were no differences from person to person or in other
words if we all became the same kind of persons, then what would the world be
like? Our differences and variety cause us to be attractive to each other.
Result of Individual Iliff erences Individual differences have given man
variety in their lives and in the same way it is our challenge too. Individual
differences have two kinds of results: constructive and destructive.

=

&

0 Christian Religion and Moral Education

e Variety has come into this world | ¢ At times it becomes very difficult to
because of differences. The accept differences.

b f is al ifested . .
rear ta vidual. di ferenoes este |e Variety and differences cause
, conflict and opposition.

e Because of varieties and Diff Lani
differences man can fulfill each | ° fan dn Cause SMEUERST
other’professional differences S 8-
we are able to serve each other. © When we do not acknowledge each

© We realize that we can fulfill each other’ differences we expect others

> to become like ourselves and expect
other’or example, I cannot or h from them. This i
have no ability to do everything. frus ODT HeTy RAMUS UNCTEASES Ur
Variety helps us to fulfill a role SeranOn:
as mutual helpers. e If all the differences are not

e Unity comes from variety and Sie then the result will be
then we become rich. Then we BER arehOns
can coordinate between all |e Failure to diagnose the individual
people. differences will make us devalue an

individual.

Man's individual differences can be explained very well through the example of
the rainbow. There is no similarity between the seven colors of the rainbow. But
the rainbow needs those seven colors. A rainbow is never made with one color
only. Only then our society will be mobile, progressive and effective when there
will be people with a variety of natures. The present world is not only giving this
basic difference recognition but also giving priority to different nations, races,
religions and colors. The world now strongly believes that in variety there is
unity. For this reason we will accept these differences of individuals. We will see
this difference as strength and not as weakness. If we can do this then we will
have a beautiful world like a garden full of colorful, fragrant, and various kinds
of flowers.

Task: In which areas do you consider yourself different from others? Why? | ,

Discuss this in your group. s

Freedom and me 21
Relationship with the people of the society Though unique, we do not live
alone; rather we live in a family, a society. We live together with many
people. With people we exchange our thoughts and feelings; we share with
them our feelings of joy and sorrow. Thus we build a relationship with them. At
times we have celebrations of our joys. We stand beside each other during
crises. We see this eagerness and desire of building friendship with others from
the very beginning of the world. Actually this idea of having friendship with
others came from God. In our faith life we see the presence of the Holy Trinity.
There is one God, but three persons-Father, Son and the Spirit. These three
persons are related to each other. Our relationship with other people is
built up based on this Trinity. Besides, the Church is the gathering of the
faithful. A special characteristic is manifested in this social bond.
The need of relationship
a. Keeping relationship with the people is a basic need. The reason is that we
cannot live alone. Our life is dependent on one another. Alone, I am
never complete. My completeness needs the help of other people of the
society. On the other hand I help others to be complete.
b. The center of our life is the society. We share our joys and sorrow with the
people of the society. It is the people of the society that stand beside us during
our moments of crisis.
c. It is the society where social institutions like hospitals, banks, educational
institutions, bazaar, etc. are built. We receive service out of these
institutions. These institutions become effective when there is a fruitful
relationship between them. With the help of them we can live happily in the
society. These institutions fulfill our day to day needs.
d. We can fully develop our life, excellence, talents and personality in the
society. With our virtues, education, efficiencies, in short with everything that
we earn, we serve the people of the society. For this reason social relationship
is important.
e. We can fully express our personality through the society. Our achieved
education and efficiencies can be fully expressed through our relationship

x and living together with others in the society.

Ss

N

22 Christian Religion and Moral Education
f. In our Christian life the Church is our society and Christ is present there.
He is the head of the Church. We must remain united with the Church. To
remain united with the society means to remain united with Christ. Through
this we remain alive and are fruitful.
Reasons of bad relationship
We all want to build relationships and keep them alive. Yet sometimes because
of various reasons our relationship deteriorates and becomes broken.
Relationship can be broken for the following reasons:
a. Misunderstanding;
b. Social pressure and injustice;
c. Factionalism and quarrel;
d. Deterioration of values;
e. Misuse of power;
f. Exploitation and oppression;
g. Man to man and man and woman discrimination;
h. Using the society for personal interests:
i. Lack of patience and forgiveness;
j. Lack of cooperation and sharing.
Means to maintain good relationship
a. Seeing the society as a reflection of Christ and feeling the presence of
Christ there.
b. Keep in mind that Christ himself makes us united with others; let God
work in our life.
c. Respect for the people of the society and accept them with their
individual differences; consider man and woman, rich and poor equally.
d. Always cooperate with the people constructively and have an attitude
of compassion.
e. Not to consider the society or its institutions as the means of fulfilling
one’s own interest; rather give priority to the society’s interest.
f. Have mutual patience. co
g. If needed, have an attitude of sacrifice. s

Freedom and me 23

h. Reconcile and rebuild the relationship without delay when it is broken for
any reason.

i. Justice is a must in order to maintain good relationship; maintain social
equality and establish justice.

j. Accept your own and others’ freedom.

k. Consider relationship as a great value of life.

Our birth and growing up - both are in the society. Life without society cannot

be imagined. Being born in the world Christ himself became part of our society.

He was born in a Jewish society, grew up there and also died in that society.

He obeyed the social rules and later brought changes in them. He served people

of that society. He is our guru in building relationship. He mixed with people of

all classes and respected them duly. He chose twelve disciples and built up a

good relationship with them. Thus he taught us how to build relationship with

the people. He forgave his enemies and thus showed us the way how through

forgiveness we can keep up our relationship with others.

Task: What do you do in order to maintain relationship with others? What
efficiencies are needed to maintain relationship? Share your thoughts
with others in the small group.

Our way of offering ourselves for the service of others
We have only one life. We have received this as a gift from God. He wants that
what we have received without price we also give away without price. He also
wants that our life becomes offered in the work of love and service. We have to
remember the following points in order to offer our life:
1. Humbly always keep in mind that our life is a gift of God; freely I will
decide to sacrifice this for the service of others.
2. Recognize and admit the qualities, talents and strengths that you have and
then find out ways and means to offer them for the service of others.
3. Wherever and in whatever condition you stay, there and in that way look
for ways to serve others.
4. Discern the call of your life and respond accordingly.
= 5. Find out what God wants from you. Live your life according to the
» plan of God.

24 Christian Religion and Moral Education

6. Work always not looking for your self interest and material benefit.

7. Keep your life of service always bright.

8. Service is my human, social, moral and religious duty, in short, my
Christian responsibility. I am indebted to serve. I serve God through
serving the people.

Bright Examples of Service

From the history of the world we can very easily find out some persons who

sacrificed their whole life for the service of others. Some names can be

mentioned here: Jesus Christ, Mother Teresa, Florence Nightingale, Mahatma

Gandhi, Nelson Mandela, Bangabundhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and so on.

They were engaged in various kinds of service work.

Possible Fields of Service Family:

Our life begins in family and our first place of service is the family. For

this reason it is essential that we begin to exercise our quality of service in

the family. We become inspired in the work of service by seeing examples
of our parents, brothers and sisters and others in the family. In the family we
learn to serve others.

Society: Family is a part of the society. We start to serve in the family, in the

heart of the society. Thus we learn to serve others in the broader sphere of the

society. We apply in the society what we learn in the family.

Social and religious institutions: Gradually we extend our life of service

in the institutions which are situated in the society. For example, we become

members of welfare institutions, youth club, and so on.

Hospitals and charitable health service centers: We can serve people as

doctors, nurses or health workers. We can also go to see patients or elderly

persons in hospitals or houses, we can spend some time with them and console
them; we can also talk to the depressed people to and bring back hope in their
minds.

Educational institutions: Education is a great work, because through education

we can enlighten people. Then people can guide themselves.

Sewing and handicrafts: By teaching people sewing and handicrafts we can

contribute in eradicating poverty. This is also a great work of service. Because ,

through this people can make their own earning and do not depend on others $

any more.

Freedom and me 25
Own job: We have our own field of work. Perhaps I am an officer, a banker, a
housewife, a farmer, a day laborer or a student. If we remain sincere and
faithful in our own jobs, then this becomes a very important way of serving
people.
Church: The best way of giving service can be making contribution in Church
work. It is noticeable that many people offer their lives for church work.
Through priestly and religious life many have sacrificed their life for the
service of God and his people. Because of their love of God they sacrifice
their life and serve people. They preach the gospel and engage themselves in
many kinds of works of service. Through their life of service the Church
becomes living.
In the modem time man has become more selfish than before. Personal gain
or loss is much more important to him than any other thing. For this reason he
thinks of himself and wants to live only for himself. Sacrificing life or doing
charitable work for others is diminishing gradually. This attitude is a big
challenge for those who want to sacrifice their life for the service of others.
We cannot let it go this way. We must keep up the Christian values and at the
same time keep our moral and human responsibility alive. Therefore, we must
think very seriously how we can sacrifice our life for the service of others and
offer our precious life to God and his people.
Task: 1. What service centers do you see in your society? Make a list of them.
What are the people doing there? How are they serving people
through those centers? Discuss this in your group and then prepare a
poster.
Task: 2. Group Work : Visit any social organization and write a report on it to
present in the class.
Christ’s Self-sacrifice
Christ came to this world so that man can receive light in full. He served
numerous people. He freed them from diseases, took the side of the poor and the
powerless. He loved people selflessly and told them about the unlimited love of
God. He taught man to call God Father. In order to save man from the curse of
sin he sacrificed his life on the cross. Thus he gave all men the right to become
children of God.
Forma-4, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

26 Christian Religion and Moral Education

Some dimensions of Jesus’ Self-Sacrifice

1. The child Jesus was offered in the temple: According to the Jewish
tradition a child after forty days of birth was offered in the temple.
Therefore, accordingly, Mary and Joseph offered the child Jesus in the
temple. Thus Jesus was offered from the very beginning of his life.

2. The child Jesus engaged in his Father's work: Mary and Joseph went to
the temple of Jerusalem to take part in the Passover Fe ast. They took
twelve-year old Jesus along. At that age Jesus already knew that he will have
to be busy in his Father's duty. That is why he remained in the temple while
his parents left for their village. His parents began to look for him and after
three days they found him in the temple, busy in talking to the scribes and
elders. At last the parents found him and he went back to Nazareth to stay
with the parents.

3. Being tempted by Satan: Before beginning his public preaching Jesus
went to the desert and there he prayed, meditated and fasted for forty
days. At that time Satan tempted him in various ways. Jesus did not stop
praying. He continued to pray even during his temptation. At the same
time he offered himself to the Father. By the strength of the Father he
overcame all the temptations. He accepted the will of the Father fully
because he offered himself to the Father totally. Thus he prepared
himself for the service of God's people.

4. Public work of Jesus: After reaching acertain time Jesus began his
public work. He loved the people wholeheartedly. He served the people
with his whole strength. He healed people from their illnesses and
diseases. He freed them from the hand of Satan. He served the poor and
powerless people and took their side and gave hope to the hopeless
people.

5. Giving total self through bread and wine: Before he died for us Jesus
had his Last Supper with his disciples. During the meal he took bread and
wine and offered those to the Father. Through those he gave his own
body and blood for us. Thus he has established the Sacrament of the
Eucharist. He totally offered himself for us. In history there is no other
such example. S

N

Freedom and me 27

6. Establishing the example of service: During the Last Supper Jesus
established an example of humble service. He himself washed the feet of
his disciples. Through this event he made the disciples understand that he
came to this world not to be served but to serve. He became man in order to
offer himself totally for the service of the people. At the same time he gave
us a command that we also serve one another like him; so that we offer our
life for the people.

7. Establishing Sacraments: Through establishing seven sacraments
Jesus offered himself for us. He did this so that we can receive life in full;
so that we receive divine blessing in all conditions of our life. The
sacraments are some special means through which Jesus is offering himself
for us continuously.

8. In the Garden of Gethsemane totally surrendering to the enemies:
Jesus could have avoided the death on the cross, if he wanted. He even
prayed to the Father saying: "Father, if you will, take this cup of suffering
away from me. Not my will, however, but your will be done" (Lk 22:42).
Thus he fulfilled the Father's will until the end of his life on earth. He
accepted all sufferings in order to free mankind from the slavery of sin.

9. Being sentenced by Pontius Pilate: He accepted the mockery or false trial
of Pontius Pilate. Jesus was given the most shameful death penalty-death on
a cross. He accepted even that for the salvation of man.

10. Death on a cross: He suffered terribly on the cross and then he died. He
accepted this suffering willingly because through this he brought salvation
to this world. He sacrificed his whole self for the sake of human beings. He
humbled himself and remained obedient to the Father until his death on a
cross. He said, "There is no greater love than offering one's life for his
friend.

11. Appearing to the disciples and promising to send the Spirit: He died on
the cross, but after death he rose again. He overcame death. He sacrificed his
life fully and thus he brought life to us. He promised that he will send the

eo Holy Spirit to us. He fulfilled his promise by sending the Spirit on Pentecost
s day.

28 Christian Religion and Moral Education
As the head of the Church Jesus is with us always. Every time we receive
communion we receive Jesus. He comes to our hearts and gives us his life. He
also gives us life through the words that we read from the Bible.
Task: How does Christ’s self-sacrifice inspire you to sacrifice your life? Share
this in the small group.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. What is education?
a. Charitable work —_b. Humanitarian work
c. Service work d. Good work
2. How do we receive Jesus?
a. Through Word
b Through living life
c. Through Sacraments
d. Through Eucharist
Read the following Paragraph and answer the questions nos. 3 and 4.
With plenty of hard work Moni has established a nursery school. There she
appointed some poor people and thus helped them to stand on their own feet.
3. What was Moni’s field of service?
a. Person b. Family
c. Society d. Church
4. Moni, through her service
i. Eradicates poverty
ii. Gives financial security FS
iii. Serves human beings n

Freedom and me 29
Which one is correct?
a. iand ii b. ii and iii
c. iand iii d. i, ii and iii
Creative Questions
1. Prodip has established himself through family education as well as formal education.
One day while passing by a road he pushed an old man and threw him on the road.
Being an educated young man how can Prodip behave in such a way? He had a neigh-
bour called Pronoy who thought of telling Prodip to correct his bad behaviour. One day,
when Prodip was in a good mood, Pronoy told Prodip very softly about his rough
behaviour. At this Prodip realized that his behaviour with that old man was not appro-
priate.
a. What is the first step of knowing the self?
b. Why is one person completely different from another?
c. Which approach of Pronoy helped Prodip to be changed? Explain.
d. Do you think Prodip needs to have self-evaluation in order to be a free
human being? Analyze.
2. Trina and Trisha are twin sisters. Their external appearance, skin colour,
height, way of speaking-all are identical. Intellectually also both are almost
equal. In various ways Trisha helps poor students. She has a good reputation like
obedience to her parents, cultural experience and so on. On the other hand Trina
is lazy, non-attentive toward others, more attentive toward her own benefits, etc.
a. What is real education?
b. What is the necessity of keeping a relationship with human beings?
c. What is the difference between Trina and Trisha called? Explain.
d. The difference existing between Trina and Trisha has both positive
and negative effects—evaluate.
Short answer Questions
1. Explain two characteristics of individual differences
2. Describe in short the life of a saint that you know.
3. Mention three effects of individual differences.
4. Explain the importance of man-to-man relationship.
co >: What is meant by self-sacrifice in service work?
S
N

Chapter Three
MY FREEDOM AND MY SOCIETY

God created man and woman, and provided that they form families, multiply and
live together in society with others. We see varieties in God's creation: human
beings, animals, trees, flowers, birds, water, fish, the sun, moon, stars. Not only
are there varieties in creation; in living beings there is also community in each
category. We see birds flying together; pigs in fields in groups; trees together in
the forest; flowers in the gardens, and so many like this in God's creation. There
is unity and harmony in nature too. Human beings are also created to live in
harmony in their own society. A person is born into a family, and is expected to
die in a family. In their human society people have companionship with one
another. To live in society one has to respect the rights of others. Every human
being is created in God's image; all have their own dignity and innate rights.
Therefore, it is everyone's duty and obligation to respect the rights and dignity of
all other people.

At the end of this chapter we will be able to:

e compare loneliness and friendship.

e understand the need to build relationships with others.

e relate the teachings of the Holy Bible regarding freedom in our life.

e evaluate the life of good people.

e take initiative to make friendship with others.

e be respectful to the freedom of others.
Loneliness and Friendship
Loneliness is an experience in which a person stays or feels alone due to lack of
companionship, and usually due to lack of friendship. When persons lack
friendship, they feel empty, they feel that they lack an experience that they need
for their fulfillment and happiness. This experience of loneliness is very
personal, and the loneliness of one person is different from that of others.
Loneliness also can be seen as a longing when one feels the need to make
friendship with others. The human urge or desire to mix and share with others,
to build bonds of unity with them, is the urge to build friendship. And when two =
or more persons find joy or satisfaction in each other's company, usually &

Me freedom and me society 31
accompanied with mutual trust, they have attained friendship. Children learn
how to make friendship with others in their own families. Building on that
experience they are able to make _ friendships outside in the society. Gradually
their world of friendships grows broader and deeper, as they make friendship
with people of other faiths, colors, cultures and nations. As they gain friends,
and as they feel at ease and happy with them, they seldom have reason to
experience loneliness.
Loneliness and friendship are two opposite or contrasting experiences.
Loneliness tends to lead to indifference in our work and life. Friendship can
bring support and encouragement. Loneliness can bring pain, suffering and
gloom; while friendship promotes happiness, peace and joy. Lonely persons try
to be happy by avoiding contact with or interference from others, but fail to find
joy. They cannot fulfill their own personal needs; neither can they be aware of
needs in the lives of others. Friends provide an means to get help when in need
and it involves people to develop kindness by offering to share in the problems
and needs of others. Lack of friendship creates loneliness, aimlessness; gloom,
failure. Life can seems to be worthless, meaningless and aimless. But friendship
helps make life beautiful and meaningful; it gives opportunity for generosity and
sharing. A lonely person feels that something is lacking in life; while friends
bring activity, happiness and gratefulness.
Task: Discuss in small groups the characteristics of friendship and loneliness
and share with others.
Need to make Friendship
People live in society, and they want to do so, it is a basic innate human desire
for all people. People want to progress and develop their human qualities, and
they realize well that they can do this only if they interact with others in society.
They need to share with others, and they want the sharing and friendship of
others. When two people share their responsibilities with others and work
together with them, together they can do much more than the two of them
working separately. Alone they can become bored, sad and gloomy, together
they challenge and inspire one another. We need friendship to avoid loneliness
., and aloofness. We can find happiness and peace in friendship with others.
S People can do many great things while working together with others.

32 Christian Religion and Moral Education
There cannot be a beneficial society without sincere endeavor and active
participation. People must work together for the benefit of all. To do this requires
that we form relationships and friendships, leading to unity. We must share in
group work for the society the bonds of our friendships. We cannot restrict them
only to ourselves personally, we cannot keep them in containers to use it later
according to our own preferences. A society must build on the participation of
the members, in their relationship, sharing, active participation and care-giving.
Sharing and love for one another produce communion and friendship. There is
diversity of creeds and cultures, in Bangladesh and throughout Asia. In this
milieu, one's friendship grow can grow among people of other faiths and
cultures. There are always many good and liberal people in every religion. They
work together; help each other; and exchange their thoughts and opinions. Thus
relationships grows among them.

Task: Arrange a debate on the topic: "Friendship is the best way to happiness
in life." The audience will be the judge. You can ask opinions from
others on the debate.

Teaching of the Holy Bible about Freedom

The Holy Bible tells about the origin of human beings, and of the activity of God
among the Chosen nation. The first two chapters of the Book of Genesis
describe that God created man, named Adam, and placed him in a beautiful
garden where he could enjoy life in friendship with God and with all of His
creation. But Adam chose to disobey God, and he was then separated from
God and put in conflict with other humans. Genesis chapters 5 and 6 tell of
man' s rebellion against God and against other human beings. In Chapter nine,
even though man had gone against Him, God made a covenant with all
humanity and His creation promising that God will certainly save His people.
Yet man rejected the invitation of God and remained unfaithful to Him, in
conflict with other people and untrue to his own self. In all of this, God, who
had given man the gift of freedom, did not intervene in order to reverse the very
harmful decisions freely taken by sinful man. Instead God continued to off er x
him His love, and challenges to reform. Ss

Me freedom and me society 33
The Holy Bible speaks of two kinds of freedom: political freedom from foreign
dominion or slavery; and internal: freedom from slavery of sins. The political
freedom of the people of Israel from bondage of slavery in Egypt is recorded for
us in the Old Testament Exodus story. Again the prophets dealt with political
freedom for the Israelites in exile in distant Babylon. The New Testament dealt
with freedom or salvation from the slavery of sin. Jesus was born in this world
to set us free from our sins. Some passages from the New Testament.

John 8: 31-36: "Jesus said to those who believed in Him:"If you obey my
teaching, you are really my disciples; you will know the truth, and the truth will
make you free." "We are descendants of Abraham," they answered, "and we
have never been anybody's slaves. What do you mean, then, by saying, 'You will
be free'?" Jesus said to them, "I am telling you the truth: everyone who sins is a
slave of sin. A slave does not belong to a family permanently, but a son belongs
there for ever. If the Son sets you free, then you will be really free."

Romans 8: 15: For the Spirit God has given you does not make you slaves and
cause you to be afraid; instead, the Spirit makes you God's children, and by the
Spirit's power we cry out to God, "Abba! my Father!"

Galatians 5: 13: "As for you, my brothers, you were called to be free. But do not
let this freedom become an excuse for letting your physical desires control you.
Instead, let love make you serve one another."

1 Peter 2:16-17:"Live as free people; do not, however, use your freedom to
cover up any evil, but live as God's slaves. Respect everyone, love your
fellowbelievers, fear God, and respect the Emperor."

The Holy Bible teaches us that we are children of God, and that we are born
being free. God wants that we no longer remain under any dominion, but work
as free people.

Exemplary Lives of Persons That Inspire Us

Many people who had extraordinary faith provide us with wonderful models to
guide our own lives. We briefly introduce two of them here. They were human
beings like us; but they are respected as saints today because of their strong faith
and love. We love them as models of deeply committed lives of faith and love.
Forma-5, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

34 Christian Religion and Moral Education
1. Saint Paul

Saint Paul is person of extraordinary faith and zeal for serving Jesus. He was born
at Cilicia in Tarsus City, in what is now part of Turkey. His name was 'Saul', but
it was changed to "Paul" at the time of his conversion. His parents were Jewish
from the tribe of Benjamin, but were also citizens of the Roman Empire. Probably
he was born after Jesus. His parents sent him from Tarsus to Jerusalem to study
fundamentalist Jewish religion and law. He studied there under reputed teacher
Gamaliel. Saul was a very good orator and had special training in apology. He
returned from Jerusalem to Tarsus before Jesus began His public life.

Paul returned to Palestine after the death of Jesus. He was very zealous in his
fundamentalist religion, he strongly opposed the Christians and wanted to destroy
them. He was present when St. Stephen was martyred in Jerusalem. This young
man was deadly anti-Christian, and the high priest in Jerusalem appointed him
to go to Damascus, in Syria, and arrest the Christians there. But along the way
to Damascus Jesus stopped him and threw him from his horse. The Acts of the
Apostles here describes this miraculous event and his conversion.

(Acts 9: 1-19): "In the meantime Saul kept up his violent threats of murder against
the followers of the Lord. He went to the High Priest and asked for letters of
introduction to the synagogues in Damascus, so that if he should find there any
followers of the Way of the Lord, he would be able to arrest them, both men and
women, and bring them back to Jerusalem.

As Saul was coming near the city of Damascus, suddenly a light from the sky
flashed round him. He felt to the ground and heard a voice saying to him, "Saul,
Saul! Why do you persecute me?" "Who are you, Lord?" he asked. "I am Jesus,
whom you persecute," the voice said. "But get up and go into the city, where
you will be told what you must do."

The men who were travelling with Saul had stopped, not saying a word; they
heard the voice but could not see anyone. Saul got up the ground and opened
his eyes, but could not see a thing. So they took him by the hand and led him into
Damascus. For three days he was not able to see, and during that time he did not
eat or drink anything. There was a Christian in Damascus named Ananias. He
had a vision in which the Lord said to him, "Ananias!" "Here I am, Lord," he
answered. The Lord said to him, "Get ready and go to Straight Street, and at the
house of Judas ask for a man from Tarsus named Saul. He is praying, and in a
vision he has seen a man named Ananias come in and place his hands on him FS
so that he might see again. Ananias answered, "Lord, many people have told me“

Me freedom and me society 35
about this man and about all the terrible things he has done to your people in
Jerusalem. And he has come to Damascus with authority from the chief priests
to arrest all who worship you." The Lord said to him, "Go, because I have
chosen him to serve me, to make my name known to Gentiles and kings and
to the people of Israel. And I myself will show him all that he must suffer for
my sake."
So Ananias went, entered the house where Saul was, and placed his
hands on him."Brother Saul," he said, "the Lord has sent me, Jesus himself
who appeared to you on the road as you were coming here. He sent me here so
that you might see again and be filled with the Holy Spirit." At once something
like fish scales fell from Saul's eyes, and he was able to see again. He stood up
and was baptized; and after he had eaten, his strength came back."
Paul began his preaching at Damascus first saying that Jesus is the Son of God.
Many were surprised to hear him. The Jews at Damascus wanted to kill him. The
disciples sent him to Jerusalem. There he met Peter and the other elders of the
church. His power of preaching was increasing day by day. He introduced Jesus
as Savior outside the Jewish world. He went to many places to preach, such as,
Tarsus, Cyprus, Antioch, throughout much of Asia Minor (now Turkey), that
which is now Greece, Caesarea and Rome. He was arrested in Caesarea and put
in jail for two years. He was imprisoned twice in Rome and finally he was
beheaded in the year 67. We know about his strong Christian faith from his
letters written to various churches at various times. The church and the
Christians will ever remember his contribution and will try to follow his
many examples. The Catholic Church each year celebrates the Conversion of
Saint Paul on 25 January and his feast day with Saint Peter on 29 June. But in
the protestant church the feast of Saint Peter is celebrated on 29 June and the
Saint paul on 30 June.
2. Saint Maria Goretti
Saint Maria Goretti is one of the young Saints of the Church. She was declared
a Saint at a young age. She became a martyr to safeguard her purity and
personal freedom. She was born on October 16, 1890 in Italy. Her father was
Luigi Goretti and mother was Assunta Carlini. She was the third out of six
children. Her sisters were named Teresa and Ersilia; her brothers were Angelo,
% Sandrino, and Mariano. By the time she was six, her family had become so
& poor that they were forced to give up their farm and work for other farmers. Her

36 Christian Religion and Moral Education
father became very sick with malaria and died when Maria was just nine.
While her brothers, mother, and sister worked in the fields, Maria would cook,
sew, watch her infant sister, and keep the house clean. It was a hard life, but
the family shared a deep love. They had deep love for each other and faith in
God.
A young boy named Alessandro and his father Giovanni Serenelli lived next
door to them. Alessandro knew that everyday when Maria's mother, sister
and brothers went to work Maria stayed home with her little sister. Alessandro
would come by and check on Maria. He liked Maria. As day passed by he
became passionate toward Maria. She understood that and tried to keep a
distance from Alessandro. He used to look at Maria with lust. One day he
proposed to Maria to have sexual relation with him. Maria tried to make him
understand that it was not right. Another day, Maria was sewing alone. Her
little sister was sleeping beside her. Alessandro Serenelli came in and
threatened her with death if she did not do as he said; he was intending to
sexually assault her. She would not submit, however, protesting that what he
wanted to do was a mortal sin and warning Alessandro that he would go to
hell. She desperately fought to stop Alessandro from abusing her. She kept
screaming saying that it is a sin and God does not want it. But Alessandro would
not listen. He wanted to abuse Maria. She told him she would rather die than
submit to him.
When Alessandro could not manage Maria any more he repeatedly stabbed
her and ran away leaving the injured Maria. Maria's little sister Teresa awoke
with the noise and started crying. Hearing the shouting and crying, Maria's
Mother and Alessandro's father came in the house and found Maria senseless
and bleeding and quickly took her to the nearest hospital. Immediately the
doctors tried to operate her, but her injuries were beyond the doctors' help.
Halfway through the surgery, Maria woke up. She insisted that it stay that
way. The following day, twenty hours after the attack, having expressed
forgiveness for her murderer and stating that she wanted to have him in
Heaven with her, Maria died of her injuries.
Alessandro Serenelli was captured shortly after Maria's death and was
commuted to 30 years in prison. He confessed that he stabbed Maria, but he did
not tarnish Maria's virginity. While in prison he gradually had a conversion of
heart with the S
N

Me freedom and me society 37
help of a bishop. One night he dreamt that Maria gave him lilies, which
burned immediately in his hands. After his release, Alessandro visited Maria's
mother, who was still living, and begged her forgiveness. She forgave him,
saying that if Maria had forgiven him on her deathbed then she could not
do less, and they attended Mass together the next day, receiving Holy
Communion side by side. In 1950, Pius XII canonized Maria Goretti as a saint.
Since then the feast of Saint Maria Goretti has been celebrated every year
on July 6. Alessandro attended Maria's canonization and prayed every day
to Maria Goretti referring her as "my little saint." Serenelli later became a lay
brother of the Order of Friars Minor Capuchin.
3. St. Therese, "the little flower"
Therese, 'the little flower' was the last of nine children of Louis and Zelie
Martin. She was born on January 2, 1873, in Alencon, France. Her mother
died when she was 4 years old. Her father brought them to Lisieux.
Motherless Therese needed much love and care. As a result, her father and
sisters babied young Therese. She had a spirit that wanted everything. At the
age of 14, on Christmas Eve in 1886, Therese had a conversion that
transformed her life. From then on, her powerful energy and sensitive spirit
were turned toward love, instead of keeping herself happy. At 15, she entered
the Carmelite convent in Lisieux to give her whole life to God. She took the
religious name Sister Therese of the Child Jesus and the Holy Face. Living
a hidden, simple life of prayer, she was gifted with great intimacy with God.
Through sickness and dark nights of doubt and fear, she remained faithful to
God, rooted in His merciful love.
Therese, in her autobiography, described her life as a "little way of love."
In the Monastery, she offered her regular personal and communal work, prayer
and all big and small things to God. She lived each day with an unshakable
confidence in God's love. "What matters in life," she wrote, "is not great deeds,
but great love." Therese lived and taught a spirituality of attending to everyone
and everything well and with love. She believed that just as a child becomes
enamored with what is before her, we should also have a childlike focus and
x totally attentive love. Therese's spirituality is of doing the ordinary, with
8 extraordinary love.

38 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Therese saw the seasons as reflecting the seasons of God's love affair with us.
She loved flowers and saw herself as the "little flower of Jesus," who gave
glory to God by just being her beautiful little self among all the other flowers
in God's garden. Because of this beautiful analogy, the title "little flower"
remained with St. Therese.

Pope Pius XI canonized her on May 17, 1925. In 1997, on the
hundred-death anniversary, Pope John Paul II declared St. Therese a Doctor
of the Church. "My mission - to make God loved - will begin after my death,"
she said. "I will spend my heaven doing good on earth. I will let fall a shower
of roses."

4. Saint Maximilian Kolbe

Maximilian Kolbe was a Polish Franciscan priest. On 14 August 1941, he
volunteered to sacrifice his life in place of a soldier in a concentration camp
in Germany. He became famous for this great act of generosity. Blessed Pope
John Paul II called him "a martyr of love" and the patron saint of our modem
time.

Maximilian was born in 1894 in Poland, which then was under Russian control.
In 1907 both Maximilian and his elder brother decided to join the
Franciscan Order. They secretly crossed the border into Austria-Hungary to
join the Franciscan Order seminary at the city of Lwow, and studied for the
priesthood. In 1928, he was ordained to priesthood, and then came back to
serve in Poland, which had recently been freed from Russia and had again
become an independent country. Maximilian was a brilliant and very capable
and zealous person. He gained two doctorates, founded many
organizations, "The Army of Mary" for conversion of sinners, two
monasteries, a printing press and published a daily newspaper. During
1930-1936, he spent time as a missionary in Japan, and established a monastery
there. He then returned to Poland.

During World War II, Germany conquered Poland and were arresting and
killing all Jewish people there. Fr. Maximilian gave shelter to 2000 Jews in his
monastery in order to hide them from the persecution from the German ,
soldiers. In 1941 he was arrested, along with the Jews whom he was s

Me freedom and me society 39
hiding, and put into a concentration camp in Germany. In July of that year
three prisoners escaped from the camp, in response to this the German soldiers
set aside ten prisoners and would kill them; they did this so that no other
prisoner would dare to flee. One of the ten selected prisoners was crying
very loudly thinking of how his family would survive when he should die.
Maximilian thought that since he was a priest and had no family of his own;
his condition was less crucial than that of this man who had a wife and
children. Fr. Maximilian substituted himself for that man and accepted the
death penalty in place of him. He came forward to stand in his place. The ten
prisoners were kept in a separate room without food and drink so that they
would die a severe death of starvation. He alone was still alive after three
weeks, then was killed by a lethal injection by the German captors.
faith. Now prepare a list of their charisms and talents; then present it to
the others.
Things to do Today:
Open your eyes, open your mind.
When you open your mind, you also open your heart.
When you open your heart, you live with dignity.
When you live with dignity, you share divine life.
When you share divine life, you build a society of love.
When you build a society of love, you enter the eternal life.
When you enter the eternal life, then nothing can do any harm to you.
When nothing can do any harm to you, then you will live forever,
You can do this even now, at this very moment. (collected from Once Asia, p.57)
s
&

40 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. What do we need to overcome loneliness and friendlessness?
a. Forgiveness b. Friendship
c. Faith d. Love
2. According to Jesus how will the faithful Jews become appropriate
disciples?
a. By knowing the truth b. Being slave of Jesus
c. Being faithful to the word of Jesus _d. Being active in all the tasks
Read the following Paragraph and answer the questions nos. 3 and 4.
Sunil mixes with wicked people while his own cousin Anil is a moralist.
Anil despises Sunil. For this reason Sunil gathered some miscreants and
together they attacked Anil and punished him. Anil, being confined to
hospital forgave Sunil
3. Anil’s character is similar to whose character in the textbook?
a. St. Peter b. St. Stephen
c. St. Maria Goretti d. St. Paul
4. Sunil received from Anil
i. Help
ii. Forgiveness
iii. Love
Which one is corect ?
a.i b. ii
c. i and ti d. i, ii and iii
ho}
=

Me freedom and me society 41

Creative Questions

1. Kona and Bina-two are classmates. Besides her studies Kona keeps friendly

relationship with other students, respects her teachers very much, and takes part

in many extra-curricular activities. Above all, Kona is very much known to all

for her good behaviousrs. On the other hand Bina is also a brilliant student, but

she does not keep friendly relationship with other students, does not share her

stories of happiness and sorrows with others and does not look happy. As a

result she gets sick many times. (a) Every human being is created in whose

image?

(a) Every human being is created in whose image?

(b) Why is making friend important? Explain.

(c) Describe from the viewpoint of lesson—what kind of life Kona lives.

(d) Because of her characteristics what consequences might Bina have? Give
your opinions.

2. Jyoti and Romen work in a firm. Jyoti is older than Romen. Even though he is

younger than Jyoti, Romen's efficiency and competency are greater than that of

Jyoti's. The General Manager's post in their office was empty. The authorities

appointed Romen in that post. Jyoti could not accept this decision. Instead of

helping Romen, Jyoti got involved in spreading scandalous things about Romen.

Suddenly Jyoti got sick and got hospitalized. Romen went to see Jyoti in the

hospital took care of him. Romen's action influenced Jyoti. He made Romen his

friend.

a. Where was St. Paul born?

b. Why did St. Paul want to destroy the Christians?

c. Which side of St. Paul has been manifested in the behaviour of Jyoti? Explain.

d. It seems Jyoti is acting as a representative of Jesus—do you agree with
this statement? Give reasons for your opinion.

Forma-6, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

42 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Short Answer Questions
1. What do you understand by loneliness?
2. Why is it necessary to maintain friendship?
3. Describe friendship.
4. What do you understand by freedom?
5. Why is it necessary to respect others' freedom?
6. What is meant by purity?
7. What is the importance of purity in personal life?
5

Chapter Four
GROWING IN FREEDOM

God created, and continues to create, all members of the human race. They are
expected to live with one another in society. We are social beings; we are not
expected to live alone. For various purposes a person can live alone for a long
time. But that is not our normal situation. Living with others in society should be
a source of joy and satisfaction, not a burden. In society each person shares his
or her many gifts with others, in that way the whole society progresses. That is
the wonderful plan of God. This social aspect of our lives is one of the important
aspects of being human.
At the end of this chapter we shall be able to:

e explain about our responsibility to the society.

e evaluate the necessity of being mature in order to be able to make our

contribution to society.
e explain the positive influence for society of living our Christian value of
freedom.

e inspired to be faithful to this social responsibility will inspire us to live
Responsibility to the society
Society is a particular community of people who share the same customs, laws,
etc. The community is formed by the members. The customs or laws guide the
conduct or activity of all members in a manner that benefits the community, and
not only the individual persons. But the individual persons are also benefited by
their membership or identity within the society. A human society has both visible
and spiritual aspects. The visible aspect is our gathering or living together,
sharing activities, helping one another in time of need, physical and moral
support.
The spiritual aspect is the effect or influence the society has on the persons, on
their attitudes, values, etc. The society lives on in the members as they gain or
inherit the values and virtues that are held by the society. The individual
members continue to have their uniqueness, but it is greatly influenced by the

= society, and they in tum influence the society within which they grow as good
‘persons

44 Christian Religion and Moral Education
and devote themselves for the welfare of all. We need to obey the norms of the
society, as well as to use make our own contribution to improve or develop the
society. Membership in the society provides stability, guidance, protection and
security.
From the story of Jonathon Livingstone Seagull by Richard Bach we can have
an idea how to grow up in personal freedom while living in the society with
others.
The story is like this: along the seashore where the large white seagull birds
gather, there was a seagull named Jonathon Livingstone. He tried to learn many
ways of flying which were new and different. He would fly very high, then drop
suddenly from the sky, make sharp turns, twist in a spiral or circle, roll over and
fly upside-down, many new ways. In this way he spent most of his time. And
finally he succeeded. None of his companions ever thought of being able to fly
differently from what all the other seagulls did. So this seagull made others
astonished. Jonathon wanted to share his knowledge and skill with others. But
no one wanted to learn from him or follow him; they even said that Jonathon is
crazy. In this way Jonathon felt discouraged and insulted.
Most of the seagulls used to learn flying just to survive. They would go from the
shore and out over the sea nearby in order to seek food, and again come back to
shore. They learned only the few techniques of flying that were necessary to do
this, but learned no more. They were happy with this. They said that they need
to collect food to live, after that they should not do anything in vain. Collection
of food is their main effort. But the thinking of Jonathon was higher than that. It
was not the main work for Jonathon to look for food. His interest was to fly in
the vast sky. He loved freedom. But he could understand that that others did not
like what he was doing. They objected, "Why does he not do as we do?
One day the captain of the seagulls said at the top to his voice, "Jonathon come
forward and stand in the middle of all. To stand in the middle of all can be either
very respectful or very shameful. But why was Jonathon called to do that. Again
the captain shouted, "Jonathon you did what is most shameful in the sight of all,
so come and stand in the middle of all the seagulls." ws
Ss
N

Growing in freedom 45
Jonathon got frightened. Out of fear his knees were shaking and his wings fell
loosely down at his sides. The voice of the captain made echoes in his ears.
Jonathan thought. "What did I do that I have to be ashamed of? Actually they did
not understand my intention of my activity. They misunderstood me."

A third time the leader shouted: "Because of your indifference you must be
shamed in front of all. You have shamed the dignity of the family of seagulls."
Jonathon was thinking, "Why should I have to stand in their midst and be
shamed? Maybe I shall be thrown out from the society, or maybe will be sent far
away in any of the islands."

The leader said, "There is no mercy for the one who breaks the rules of our
society. We do not know much about life, it is not even possible for us to know
this. We only know that in this world we live until death by eating and eating.
Nobody speaks up loudly in the council of seagulls. But today Jonathon shouted
loudly "I am being punished because of my indifference? What wrong have I
done? Brethren, tell me, who in our society acts with responsibility? The one
who has found a higher aim in life, is he not being responsible? For thousands
of years we have been only flying low and looking for fish. But today we have
found something greater to do in our lives. We can learn something new, can
discover how to fly freely into the sky, and twist, tum and dive, and in this way
we become free seagulls. Is it not for us a matter of great pride and joy? I
humbly request you, give me one chance; I shall show you what I have found."
But by that time the seagulls had lost their patience. They all cried aloud "From
now you are no longer our friend. You are unknown to the society of seagulls."
Then they closed their ears so that they might not hear what Jonathon was trying
to tell them. They went away from Jonathon.

Task: Discuss in groups: What did Jonathon want to do in his life? How did
the leader of the seagulls and his companions behave with him? What
was the influence of their behavior in the life of Jonathon? What was
the idea of Jonathon about responsibility? Tell your opinion about the

N

46 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Now we shall see another example which shows how people can use their
freedom and responsibility. Martin Luther King is a very famous leader in
America, who was himself a Negro, and who fought for the rights of Negros in
America. In his own words he here tells of a disturbing experience in his life.
"It happened near the end of the month of January. I worked very hard all day,
then came back home and went to bed at midnight. My wife, Coretta, was
already asleep. Before I fell into deep sleep my telephone rang, and I answered
it. The person speaking on the phone said: 'You have gone too far, spoken too
much, you lead the negroes to make demands and cause disturbance. By the end
of this week you will be repaid for attacking our society."
After receiving that threatening phone call, I could not sleep at all. I felt so afraid
and helpless. I left my bed and walked back and forth inside the room, then went
to the kitchen and made a cup of coffee. Putting the cup on the table I became
totally involved in deep thought about how I could come out from this fearful
situation. I felt that I had no hope; I could understand that I had no power to deal
with this. To whom could I tum to for help? Finally I realized then what I must
do. I decided to tell everything to God. I put my head on the table and prayed. I
can
remember what I prayed. Even now, after many years, I can remember so well
what I said in my prayer. I told God that I always stood by what is right and just.
I spoke out to the people, I told them that their situation is unjust, and they must
protest and make this known to all. From my speech they got hope and
encouragement. Now they are looking to me for leadership. At this crucial time
if I go in front of them and they see me to be weak and unworthy, they will lose
hope, all their enthusiasm will be lost. They depend on me. Alone I do not have
the power and strength need. I depend on You to give me the power I need to face
this challenge." After praying I experienced the power of God in me. I never
experienced God before like this time.
Task: 1. In the light of the experience of Martin Luther King, try to think of

an event in your life when you too experienced God’s power.

that people are deprived and unwanted. Discuss also what would be x

your role in these situations. s

Growing in freedom 47
Becoming a mature person
In order to direct their lives toward the fulfillment of their vocation, people
must understand what they want and need. They must give first priority to
ideals and values, especially to spiritual ideals and values, to their spirituality.
Among those spiritual values are truth, beauty, goodness, love, sacrifice and
responsibility. Many of those values concern our relationship with others: our
attitude, our appreciation, love, service, responsibility toward them. Spiritual
growth and fulfillment of our vocation in life takes place in society, in acting
with and among others and in sharing with them.
AS persons grow in competence and spiritual qualities, we say they mature.
Their own personal worth or value as persons increases, and they are able to act
or speak with some degree of competence or authority. And mature persons
become eager to express to others the things that are important to them, their
beliefs, ideals, values, and also to share their cultural traditions, their interests
and joys. In the same way they desire to learn from and about others, to learn
what they consider important, to learn of their accomplishments, and to express
praise and encouragement to those with whom they share. They progress and
mature along with others in society. The result of this mutual sharing is that the
society itself advances.
There is an inseparable relationship between the individual man and human
society. So when a person grows in spirituality and morality, this benefits him,
and should benefit the society. The precondition of changing society is
change in ourselves first. To become responsible to ourselves and the society
we must evaluate our attitudes and behavior, then must choose, hold on to what
is good and reject what is bad both for ourselves and the society. Freedom and
responsibility go together. Together both of these contribute to the welfare of
ourselves and the society.
To become responsible we need awareness, we have to know or understand the
society and the world we live in. We must know the people in the society we
live in we should know their hopes, problems and anxieties. To be responsible
« i$ Not just to know all this, but to discuss and decide what initiatives we can take
S for them.

48 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Awareness has always been very important for us to gain. But as the world
becomes more advanced and complicates, we need awareness more than ever
before. The advanced technology, easy access to borrowing money, these can
improve our situation, but with great danger. If we use our opportunities with
maturity, with responsibility toward others and the environment, we can do so
much for our own good living as well as for the welfare of the society and
We lve in the present, we plan and prepare for the future. To prepare for the
future we must do our responsibility in the present. Every human being has
good qualities. We coordinate our efforts to develop a society to free it from
serious obstacles. We must emphasize:
a. All children must have the chance to attend school.
b. The schools must provide quality education.
c. Every effort must be made so that people live in harmony.
d. Politics must serve the needs of the people
e. Cultures must be respected and promoted.
f. Business affairs must proceed with honesty and justice.
g. All of our efforts must lead to the establishment of peace.
this in groups and, using posters, present it to the class.
Christ is our Model
Aman can be responsible only when he is free. He must be able to make choices
in order to act responsibly. With our free will to choose to accept responsibility
it means we respond God's people with open heart. We see this example in Jesus.
He was always faithful to the Father, and always acted only according to His
will. Jesus did everything to make happy the Heavenly Father and worked for
welfare of mankind. We find this in the John's Gospel chapter 8 verses 21-30.
2
R

Growing in freedom 49
We human beings have been created in order to give glory to God, and to gain
the reward He will give us, complete happiness when we see the face of God.
"For the creation waits with eager longing for the revealing of the children of
God". (Rom 8: 19)

The freedom is practiced in relationship among people. Every human being has
right to be free, along with the duty to love and respect each other. "You shall
love the lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all
your strength, and with all your mind, and your neighbor as yourself." (Luke
10:27)

Growing in liberty means to become responsible which means to become con-
scious about the world, society and neighbours. We will have to be conscious of
our neighbours' hopes, aspirations, expectations, problems and sufferings.
It does not mean only to deliver lectures about the poor, rather to do something
for them. By reading the following part from the holy Bible we will learn clearly
about the teaching of Christ in becoming responsible persons by growing in
liberty.

When the Son of Man will come in his glory, and all the angels with him, he will
sit on his glorious throne. All the nations will be gathered before him, and he will
separate the people one from another as a shepherd separates the sheep from the
goats. He will put the sheep on his right and the goats on his left.

"Then the King will say to those on his right, ‘Come, you who are blessed by my
Father; take your inheritance, the kingdom prepared for you since the creation of
the world. For I was hungry and you gave me something to eat, I was thirsty and
you gave me something to drink, I was a stranger and you invited me in, I
needed clothes and you clothed me, I was sick and you looked after me, I was in
prison and you came to visit me."

"Then the righteous will answer him, 'Lord, when did we see you hungry and
feed you, or thirsty and give you something to drink? When did we see you a
stranger and invite you in, or needing clothes and cloth you? When did we see
you sick or in prison and go to visit you?"

"The King will reply, 'Truly I tell you, whatever you did for one of the least of
these brothers and sisters of mine, you did for me."

Forma-7, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

50 Christian Religion and Moral Education
"They also will answer, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a
stranger or needing clothes or sick or in prison, and did not help you?'
"He will reply, 'Truly I tell you, whatever you did not do for one of the least of
these, you did not do for me.'
"Then they will go away to eternal punishment, but the righteous to eternal life."
Task: Make a list of our responsibilities. Discuss in groups the advantage of
accepting and choosing responsibilities, and the disadvantages of not
doing our responsibilities properly.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Human society consists of ?
a. Men b. Individuals
c. Educated d. Women
2. We shall be faithful to our responsibilities, because we want be:
a. real disciples of Jesus __b. established in the society
c. gain favor of the elders d. win friends
Read the following Paragraph and answer the questions nos. 3 and 4.
Apu's parents were very poor. Yet he wanted to become a doctor. He studied
hard, and also worked part time to earn money to pay his expenses. With great
effort and struggle he succeeded to pass college well, got admitted into a medical
college and finally became doctor. He served faithfully as a doctor, and also did
many social works. He established a free dispensary, school for poor children
and a night school. All who know of him have respect for Apu.
3. What kind of person is Apu?
a. Mature b. Aware of the society
ne)
c. Exemplary d. Obedient S

Growing in freedom 51
4. As a result of Apu:
i. Society will be developed
ii. Others will be inspired
iii. Rate of education will rise high
Which one is correct?
a.i b. ii
c. i and ii d. i, ii, and iii
Creative questions
1. Mr. Bivash is the Member of the city council named Sundorpur. He reads the
Bible and prays every day. He goes to church regularly. He loves his city very
much and has worked very hard to improve the city. Along with his council he
established schools, constructed roads, a dispensary, rehabilitation for the poor,
and a handicraft institute for the people. He bravely solves problems that occur
in the city. He thinks that God has given him these responsibilities. That is why
he does everything responsibly.
a. How many aspects of society are there?
b. How is freedom practiced?
c. In the works of Bivash which aspects of Christian life are most evident?
Explain.
d. “By the activities of Bivash one day people will see development”. Evaluate
this statement.
2. There is a slum beside the house of Shafin. Some of children of his same
age live there. Shafin gets sad seeing the poor life style of those children.
He asked his mother, "They live so poorly. I have a lot of nice clothes and
toys, but why don't they have? I live in a beautiful house, why don't they
have? I would like to give them some of my clothes and toys." His mother
said, "That is a good idea." Shafin wrapped some of his clothes and toys
with colorful papers. He invited them at his house, fed them good food and
=< offered them those gifts. Those friends were very happy.
N

52 Christian Religion and Moral Education
a. What happens in the mutual relationship of people?
b. How can we respond to the call to be human?
c. Which aspects of Christian values do you see in the attitude of Shafin - Explain.
d. “The relationship between Shafin and his friends shows growth in freedom” -
Evaluate the verse.
Short answer questions
1. Explain what it means to have responsibility towards the society.
2. How do we become mature by doing our responsibilities?
3. How can we be aware of the need of the society?
4. What lesson do you find from the story of the seagull? Explain.
5. What do you learn from the episode of the life of Martin Luther King?
s
&

Chapter Five
FREEDOM AND OBEDIENCE

We have come to know that man is a social animal and he cannot live
alone. He is a member of a society, and through relationship with others he
attains fulfillment in his life. Every society has its rules and regulations. In
other words, every society has the authority to govern itself. Every human
society has to give authority to some responsible people to protect its
institutions and social structure. Every human being has to reach the level
of a certain growth, development and maturity in order to obtain
fulfillment. It is only possible in a society where people are loyal to
obedience through following some rules and regulations.

At the end of this chapter we will be able to:

e achieve the competence to explain the meaning of freedom and obedience

as personal and social values

e attain the skill to explain the notion of authority

e attain the skill to explain the importance of loyalty

e achieve the competence to explain the attitude of Jesus towards obedience

e achieve the ability to show loyalty to our authority
Freedom and Obedience
Man is a rational being. Through his relationship with God a person
attains the ability to sustain his personality it is necessary in order to make
him a perfect man. Man is unique, and at the same time he is related to
others. He is at the same time an 'T' and a 'we'. We can comprehend the
meaning and relationship of freedom and obedience only when we are
able to see a person unite these two things in our understanding. At
present, when we are stressing the freedom of a person, we find it difficult
to properly judge together freedom and maturity. Freedom and obedience

~ are closely related. We cannot think of the existence of the one without the
§ other. In other words, freedom without obedience is not freedom at all, and

54 Christian Religion and Moral Education
obedience without freedom is not true obedience. Freedom and obedience
have the same objective. God created human beings in His own image. He
has given freedom to them, as well as power, so that man may know Him
and love Him. Jesus said, "Just as the Father has loved Me, I have also
loved you; abide in My love. If you keep My commandments, you will
abide in My love; just as I have kept My Father's commandments and
abide in His love" (John 15:9-10).

Obedience was one of the important qualities of Jesus Christ. But many do not
want to consider obedience as a quality. If all or most people would misuse
their obedience there would be a huge chaos in the society. People in
authority must respect the freedom of the ordinary people; and must pro-
tect their welfare. Proper usage of authority or leadership ensures our security
and lets our freedom blossom.

George Washington was the first president of America. This great man was obe-
dient to his parents. He had arranged to go for studies at an excellent school in
Europe, where his brother was studying, and had made all the preparations for
crossing the Atlantic Ocean He had ordered his people to put his necessary
things into the ship. As he was preparing to leave he went to see his mother. She
was not happy thinking that her son had to struggle a lot to acquire education, he
was only 15 years old. She felt heart-broken at the time of her son was about to
depart. She was anxious that this little boy had to leave home and cross the hos-
tile Atlantic Ocean, but at the same time she did not want to stop him. At the time
of farewell, the son saw tears in her mother'yes, and eventually he gave up the
decision of going so far away for studies and said, "I don' ant to break the heart
of my mother by leaving her and going across the ocean for studies."emotional
mother embraced him and said, "My boy, I bless you that someday you will
become a great person."This is the reason that George Washington remained at
home and received his education from private teachers. George loyalty towards
his mother was one of the qualities in this great president. George Washington
was the first, and one of the most praiseworthy, of the presidents in the history
of America. He is the only person who, after his death, was declared "Armies of ,,
the U.S.A", s

Freedom and obedience 55
Authority
The responsibility and power that is given to lead a group, society, institution,
country or nation is called authority. And the person to whom this power is
given is called authority. This power and authority is given that they may lead
their subordinates along the right path, give assurance to fulfill their rights,
protect the rules and regulations and work for their development and
upbringing. Proper governing does not mean only performing responsibilities
and fulfilling the rights of people entrusted to them, but it also includes
making relationships and establishing justice and brotherhood. The way a
human body is directed by its brain, likewise a family, social or religious
institution and a nation are governed by their leaders. In a family, the father
and mother guide the family. In each society there is a leader: a parish priest in
a parish, a prime minister or a president in a country, the Pope in our Catholic
Church, They hold the supreme power and
provide the leadership. To help them perform their responsibilities there can be a
governing body or a council.
Each person in a family, society or nation is expected to follow its rules and
regulations so that the society can function properly and in peace, prosperity and
success. But if we look at the world today, or even look at our country, what we
do we see? Why do we face indiscipline, strikes and unsteadiness? Sometimes
these happen as a last resort to seek rights. But other times we cannot find suitable
reasons for such action. Some people in the society do not accept leadership;
instead they oppose leaders and consider obedience as a weakness.
In the Gospel we find that Jesus pointed out the difference between the proper
exercise of authority and the misuse of authority. He told of the need for a spirit of
sacrifice and service on the part of the authorities in order to give true leadership,
even to the extent of giving ones life for others. We see two incidents in the Bible:
"A dispute also arose among them as to which of them was considered to be
greatest. Jesus said to them, "The kings of the Gentiles lord it over them; and those
who exercise authority over them call themselves Benefactors. But you are not to
~ ve like that. Instead, the greatest among you should be like the least, and the one
S who tules like the one who serves."

56 Christian Religion and Moral Education
In Mark 10:35-45 we see: "Then James and John, the sons of Zebedee, came to
him. "Teacher," they said, "we want you to do for us whatever we ask." He asked,
"What do you want me to do for you?". They replied, "In your glory let one of us
sit at your right and the other at your left." Jesus said. "You don't know what you
are asking, Can you drink the cup I drink or be baptized with the baptism I am
baptized with?" "We can," they answered. Jesus said to them, "You will drink the
cup I drink and be baptized with the baptism I am baptized with, but to sit at my
right or left is not for me to grant. These places belong to those for whom they
have been prepared." When the other ten heard about this, they became indignant
with James and John. Jesus called them together and said, "You know that those
who are regarded as rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their high
officials exercise authority over them. But it is not so with you. Instead, whoever
wants to become great among you must be your servant, and whoever wants to be
first must be slave of all. For even the Son of Man did not come to be served, but
to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many."

Sister Marian Teresa, a sister of the Congregation of Holy Cross, served very
many years as Principal of Holy Cross College in Dhaka. She was a dedicated
person, and, even though she spent many years as principal of this reputed college
she was not proud. Instead, she acted and lived humbly. She was prudent in doing
her responsibilities as college Principal, and maintained a good relationship with
the

people of every level, rich and poor. People were happy with her behavior and
leadership. She never hurt anyone with rude behavior. Because of her hard work,
sincerity and leadership that college acquired honors and fame as an excellent
college. In spite of all this, she did not boast about the accomplishment of the
college or feel self-gratification due to her own contribution. She knew and
understood that she received her responsibility from her society and was carrying
it out on their behalf. Throughout her life she depended on God and led her life
according to His guidance. Even though she is a powerful principal, through hard
work she reached to great height is a situation in which many other person would
be tempted to become proud and demanding but she did not because of her
humility. Ss

Freedom and obedience 57
Obedience to Authority

Obedience to Authority is a part of freedom. This obedience comes from our free
will. If it does not come easily from our hearts then we will not have true peace.
Out of our free will we are loyal to the masters of the family, to our father and
mother. Likewise, out of our free will we are loyal to the leaders of our society,
religion and country. If every person in a family, every student in an institution,
member in a society, citizen in a country is loyal to the leaders then there will
prevail peace and unity. Then leaders and authorities of that institution will be able
to lead everyone towards prosperity, growth and success.

The importance of loyalty at different stages in the society, and the consequences
of not doing so are presented below with some examples.

. Loyalty is necessary to | Misunderstanding, sorrow, conflict
Family Parents, elders and others in | and an intolerable situation in a
order to maintain good | family in the absence of obedience.
relationship, discipline, peace
and happiness.

Traveling | It is necessity to follow the | Accidents occur in our country very
onthe | traffic rules. Security is | often due to not following the
streets | assured only if everyone | traffic rules. Countless innocent

and |follows the traffic lights. people lose their lives. Many suffer

highways Pass ersby can move without losing their beloved ones. Many
esata, Int Gur ceinthy, tid families are on the brink of
tule is to move on the left side . . .
of the road. Everyone can destruction due to their loss in
reach his destination safely if | ttaffic accidents.
rules are maintained.

Educational] It is the duty of every student| If all students do not attend class

Institutions} to maintain discipline in the| every day, those who miss fall
school campus and classroom,| behind the others, cannot learn
to strive to acquire knowledge] properly, and cause difficulty for
and to actively participate in all} the rest of the class . Disorderliness
the activities. appears everywhere if rules are not

Forma-8, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

58 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Example: Shobuj is a meritorious student of Class nine. He studies regularly. He
always listens to his teachers. He is serious about being regular in the school. He
always acts according to the instructions of the teachers and school, such as
coming to school on time, participating in the assembly, wearing the uniform of
the school, not carrying a mobile phone and anything unexpected. He thinks
these rules are necessary for a disciplined life. So, he adheres by these rules in
order to make his life meaningful. He never goes astray and does not get carried
away by the influence of unruly students. His parents and teachers play a big role
in his life, Shobuj helps to make it so meaningful. The instructions and orders of
his parents and the teaching of his teachers bring good fruits into his life. Thus
be becomes an example to everyone. The authorities of the school gives him
some responsibilities, and he tries to perform those responsibilities with
humility and enthusiasm. His good attitude reflects in his actions. His obedience
is exemplary to the school authorities and a matter of pride.

Exercise: Answer the questions individually:

a. Do you like the example of Shobuj described above? Why?

b. What is your attitude towards authority?

c. Do you take distance from authorities or fear them? Why?

d. Do you feel secure in front of them?

f. If authorities understand you and are kind and impartial to you then what

attitude do you feel towards them?

Jesus and Obedience
In the Second Chapter we learned the notion and teaching of Jesus on Authority.
Now we shall see the attitude of Jesus towards obedience. We see many
examples of obedience in the life of Jesus. After the birth of Jesus, Mother Mary
and His foster father Joseph brought him up with great care. They felt anxious
when Jesus got lost in the temple of Jerusalem. They searched for him in great
panic. They had been sure that they would find him among the relatives. But no,
he was not among them. They could not even think that Jesus would get lost.
Then where S

Freedom and obedience 59
has Jesus gone without informing His parents? After everything His parents
returned to Jerusalem searching for Him. They found Him among the scholars.
There Jesus was discussing about the words of God.
He was asking questions like a scholar. Many were surprised at the way he was
answering their questions. His parents were surprised to find him in the temple.
His mother said to him, "Son, why have you treated us like this? Your father and
I have been anxiously searching for you." He replied "Why were you searching
for me? Didn't you know I had to be in my Father's house?" But they did not
understand what he was saying to them. Then he went down to Nazareth with
them and was obedient to them. There the golden days of His life passed by.
The example of Jesus' obedience is worthy of imitating. He was obedient to "His
Father" throughout His whole life. In the Gospel of St. John we witness the
obedience of Jesus "My food," said Jesus, "is to do the will of him who sent me
and to finish his work" (John 4:34). "When you have lifted up the Son of Man,
then you will know that I am he and that I do nothing on my own but speak just
what the Father has taught me. The one who sent me is with me; he has not left
me alone, for I always do what pleases him" (John 8:28-29). Jesus tried to fulfill
the desires of His Father till His life. He was in agony at the garden of
Gethsemane, thinking about His coming death. He said: "My Father, if it is
possible, may this cup be taken from me. Yet not as I will, but as you will." Then
he returned to his disciples and found them sleeping. "Couldn't you keep watch
with me for one hour?" he asked Peter. "Watch and pray so that you not fall into
temptation. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak." He went away a second
time and prayed, "My Father, if it is not possible for this cup to be taken away
unless I drink it, may your will be done" (Matthew: 26:39-42)
From Saint Paul's letters to the Philippians we come to know the true nature of
Jesus' obedience and what it demands from us: "In your relationships with one
another, have the same mindset as Christ Jesus: Who, being in very nature God,
did not consider equality with God to be used to his own advantage; rather, he
made himself as nothing by taking the very nature of a servant, being made in
human likeness. And being found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself
cx by becoming obedient to death, even death on a cross! Therefore God exalted
% him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name, that at

60 Christian Religion and Moral Education
the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth and under the
earth, and every tongue acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of
God the Father" (Philippians 2:5-11).
Task: Regarding Obedience compare between your attitude and the attitude
of Jesus.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Which one of the following is related to Freedom?
a. Respect b. Devotion
c. Humility d. Obedience
2. Why did Jacob and John, the two sons of Zebedee, want to sit on both sides of Jesus?
a. For power b. Out of obedience
c. Because of belief d. To serve
Read the following Paragraph and answer the questions nos. 3 and 4.
Chayan is a son very beloved to his parents. He always listens and gives
importance to what his parents tell him. He gets up early in the morning,
studies hard and takes part in daily prayers. This is why his parents feel
secure in giving him various responsibilities in the family.
3. What type of nature is found in Chayan?
a. Domineering b. Obedient
c. Authoritative d. Friendly
4. Because of Chayan’s behavior and attitude situation that may arise
in his family:
i, Strained relations
ii. Beautiful relationship
iii. Joy s
g

Freedom and obedience 61
Which one is correct?
a.i b.i & ii
b. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
Creative Questions
1. Hridoy and Uday are two children of their parents. They are very persevering.
Hridoy listens to his parents, respects his elders and never indulges in conflict.
But Uday, in spite of being intelligent, never listens to his elders and parents;
instead he mingles with the troublesome boys. Both of them want to study in
Dhaka. Knowing their interest their mother said, 'It was ever our will to let you
study in Dhaka, but the expense for you will not leave enough for the study of
your younger brothers and sisters. Listening to his mother, Hridoy took
admission in a village college. But Uday insisted on going to Dhaka to study.
a. Who got angry with James and John?
b. Why should the one who wants to be great become a servant to everyone?
c. Which story influenced Hridoy to decide to study at the village college?
Explain.
d. Do you see proper usage of freedom in Uday’s behaviour? Give your opinion.
2. Pabitra is a student of Class nine who is very humble, gentle and
meritorious. Because of his qualities the class teacher appoints him the
class monitor. After getting the responsibility he consults the Headmaster
about the problems of the class and tries to help solve them. He tries to
render service if any student becomes sick. He tries to maintain discipline
in the classroom if someone makes chaos. One of his classmates, Pritom,
wanted to become the class monitor. Since he could not become so, he
breaks the rules of the class, shouts aloud in the absence of teachers. He
goes out without permission and roams around. He often tells lies and does
many unexpected things.
a. What do the gentile kings do to their subjects?
b. Why should the elders become like that of young?
S c. Which kind of authority works in Pabitra? — Explain.

62 Christian Religion and Moral Education
d. Do you think this kind of behavior of Pritom is reasonable in order
to be obedient to the authority? Give reasons for your opinion.

Short Answer Question

1. What do you understand by freedom?

2. Why are obedience and freedom closely related?

3. What is authority?

4. Why do we need to be loyal to our authorities?

5. Why should we follow the obedience of Jesus?
=
8

Chapter Six
TRUE FRIEND
We have received many special gifts from God. Friends and friendship are among
the best of all. Jesus said, "There is no greater love than to lay down one's life for
one's friends". From the very words of Jesus we can understand the value of
friendship and its significance. In the Old Testament God called Abraham a
friend. Abraham too called God a friend. After Jesus came into this world and
took on human form, He chose his disciples to be his companions, which signifies
the greater meaning of choosing a good friend. A true friend is more precious than
Gold and Jewels. Friendship is very important in our life. Thus, we need to know
the deeper meaning of friendship. If we have a clear idea about friendship then
our life will be better and more meaningful.
At the end of this chapter we will be able to:
e explain who is a true friend.
e evaluate the importance of true friendship.
e distinguish between a good friend and a bad friend.
e analyze the significance of a trustworthy friend.
e be encouraged to make true friends.
Friendship
Life is beautiful. Friendship makes life more beautiful. Friendship keeps
loneliness away. One of the most attractive words in this world is friendship. The
word "friend" gives us a feeling of happiness. The word makes us remember
someone whom I trust, upon whom I can rely, with whom I love to spend time,
for whom I am ready to do anything, and I know he or she is also ready to do
anything for me. I love my friend and I know that he or she loves me too.
Friendship can be defined as a very close relationship between two persons.
There is an attitude of acceptance, caring, thoughtfulness, and love for each other.
The greatest act of friendship is when a person is willing to lay down his life
beloved friend. Friendship is a relationship of hearts, which is present between
co people even if there is no blood relationship.
S
N

64 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Who is our true friend

We are the gift of our parents’ love. Our relationship first grows with our parents,
brothers, sisters and relatives. Then slowly we build up relationships with other
people. As we grow, we begin to understand that we have a unique relationship
with various people: children, youth or old persons, it true for everyone. In
the school, roads, office or club, anywhere we may find someone who is
like me in nature and interests. Then slowly, when we get to know each
other, we may become friends. Depending on different personalities, age,
occupations, educational qualifications, distance of residence, all these may
be factors for friendship, or even may not be a factor at all. It is very
difficult to understand who will become whose good friend. Usually people
make friends with their peers, classmates, colleagues, neighbors or
relatives. Friendship is a relationship of hearts. In this modem world, there
are many ways for communication and social networking. Using the
facilities of the modem technologies like internet and facebook people are
making friends from all around the world. Some are being cheated too.
Then who is a true friend? There are some qualities of a good friend. If
someone has these qualities, then we realize that person is a good friend.
Sympathy: A true friend has sympathy for his friend. No matter what
happens, he always stands by his friend and feels his sorrow. Sympathy for
friend is one of the most important qualities of a true friend.

Well wisher: He is my true friend who always wishes me the best and
wants me to prosper. A true friend never wishes harm or the downfall of his
friend.

Trust: Trust is the heart of friendship. Trust is the foundation, and on this
foundation the other qualities of friendship flourish. A true friend is a like a
special gift in life. Friendship is more precious than gold and jewels. We can
share almost everything with our friends.

Sacrifice and Support: A true friend will make great sacrifice for the other.
The greatest sign of friendship is when a person is ready to lay down his life
for his friend. Jesus is the truest friend we could ever have. He loved us so
much that he offered his life on the cross for our salvation. A friend always
supports his friends. But we should remember that a true friend never 3
supports his friend's wrongdoings. “

True friend 65
Helping mind and attitude of Sharing: A friend in need is a friend indeed.
A true friend shares his friend's joys and sorrows. In any need he stretches
his helping hand for his friend.
Acceptance: As human beings we all are unique. We all have different
characteristics. With this uniqueness we become the other's friend. We
accept this uniqueness of our friends. This uniqueness is part of the beauty
of our friendship.
Freedom: Friendship does not create any border around the friends; rather
friendship lets them grow in freedom. Thu s freedom helps them to become
closer and more trustworthy. So they can grow in freedom and help one
another to become better human beings.
Task: Why do you think your close friend is a true friend? Write down his or
her qualities.
Importance of True Friendship
We are friendly to many. But not all are close friends. He is my close friend whom I
trust. We may have a lot of friends in our lives, but very few are true friends. IfI get one
or two true friends in my entire life, then I am lucky. If we look at the life of Jesus, we
can easily understand this. One of his own disciples, Judas, betrayed him. Even St.Peter
denied him three times. Later he felt extremely sorry, repented and he was faithful to
Jesus all his life. He received martyrdom for his Christian faith. Jesus Christ is the true
friend of all. He loved us so much that he offered his life for us.
True Friendship: (Ben Sirach 6:5-17)
In the Old Testament we find the importance of a true friend.
Pleasant speech multiplies friends,
and a gracious tongue multiplies courtesies.
Let those who are friendly with you be many,
but let your advisers be one in a thousand.
When you gain friends,
gain them through testing, and do not trust them hastily.
For there are friends who are such when it suits them,
but they will not stand by you in time of trouble.
Forma-9, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

66 Christian Religion and Moral Education
And there are friends who change into enemies,
and tell of the quarrel to your disgrace.
And there are friends who sit at your table,
but they will not stand by you in time of trouble.
When you are prosperous, they become your second self,
and lord it over your servants;
but if you are brought low,
they turn against you, and hide themselves from you.
Keep away from your enemies,
and be on guard with your friends.
Faithful friends are a sturdy shelter:
whoever finds one has found a treasure.
Faithful friends are beyond price;
no amount can balance their worth.
Faithful friends are life-saving medicine;
and those who fear the Lord will find them.
Those who fear the Lord direct their friendship aright,
for as they are, so are their neighbors also.
Essential truths about a true friend :
e makes a person’s life meaningful
e helps a person grow
e is blessing and lovable
e gets proper guidance from a true friend
e reliable and trustworthy
e isa life mirror, helps to discover inner self
e helps to uncover the mask that we wear, in order to be genuine
e is always there for his friend, no matter what happens
A reason why we all need a true friend in our life, is that a lonely life
without a friend, is terrible, it feels hopeless and meaningless.
Task: 1. How does your true friend help you?
Task: 2. If you want to be somebody’s true friend, what kind of person do -
you need to be? S

True friend 67
Good Friends and Bad Friends
There is a proverb in Bang la, (Iron floats in the water of bad company.) "Bad
company corrupts good character." What seems to be impossible alone, with
someone else becomes possible. Under normal circumstances iron cannot float in
the water. But a boat or ship is made with Iron in such a design that it floats in
water. It is true for friendship. When someone comes in touch with good friends,
he may be transformed and become a good person. Likewise bad company
corrupts good character. That is why we have to be very careful when we choose
friends. We need to find out who will be a good friend. Read the following
account of how friends can influence each other.
Rupen, Keya, Dutti, Sabrina, Aikka, Shammo and Akkash are students of class
nine. They are classmates and good friends. They go to school together, play
together, study together and together do many things. Keya, Dutti and Sabrina
helped each other with their studies. Rupen and Keya were very close friends.
Rupen had some family problem. He spoke very freely with Keya and used to
listen to her because he trusted Keya very much and could rely on her. They
always tried their best to help each other. Akkash was very friendly with
everyone except Rupen. He did not like Rupen at all. He used to criticize Rupen
all the time, but Rupen never reacted. One day Akkash invited Rupen to go to a
place with him. He took Rupen to a secret place and tried to tempt him to smoke
weed.
Akkash told him, 'If you smoke weed you will forget all your sorrows’. Rupen did
not accept this bad advice, he refused to smoke weed. Akkash criticized Rupen
and told him to keep quiet about this effort of his to tempt him to smoke weed.
He said, "Don't tell anyone’. After that incident, Akkash tried to avoid the others.
Rupen came to know of another incident of Akkash giving bad advice, that
Akkash had told Aikka and Shammo to steal money from their houses. But they
did not act according to that bad advice. One day they heard that Akkash ran
away from his house after stealing some money.
Let us know characteristics of a good friend and a bad friend:

=

&

68 Christian Religion and Moral Education
qualities.
Life in the richness of Faith
In the history of mankind friendship is so important in the experience of
people. Friendship of people for one another is found in the earliest days.
The relationship of people with God began with trust and a healthy
friendship. Trust is a foundation of life together. Because of God's love He
created mankind. He wanted that all people should always love him,
depend on him and have faith in him. God always loved his people, but
many times the people forgot this and abandoned Him. Even then God
remained ever faithful to them. He tried to make people understand that all
should live in harmony and trust, and thus they can live happy lives. In the
Holy Bible, we see many such incidents of Christian faith.
1. In the book of I-Samuel chapter -20, we see the beautiful story of the
friendship of David and Jonathan. When King Saul tried to kill David, Jonathan
saved David from his father's wrath. He did it against his father's will. Such a
beautiful story of friendship is this that it enriched both of their lives.

True friend 69
2. In the Gospel of Matthew 12:28-30 Jesus said-
"But if I drive out demons by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God
has come upon you. Or again, how can anyone enter a strong man's house
and carry off his possessions unless he first ties up the strong man? Only
then he can rob his house. He who is not with me is against me, and he who
does not gather with me scatters." Jesus invites us to be his friends. If we
become his friends, he will fill our lives with love, sympathy, friendship,
peace and care. If we become His friends we will be enriched.
3. John 13:23 "One of them, the disciple whom Jesus loved, was reclining
next to him." Jesus loved all his disciples and trusted them. He loved their
company. John was closer to Jesus than the other disciples. John knew that
very well. That is why his Gospel is very meaningful where he told of
J esus the way he experienced him.
4. John 15:12-15: My command is this: Love each other as I have loved
you. Greater love has no one than this: to lay down one's life for one's
friends. You are my friends if you do what I command. I no longer call you
servants, because a servant does not know his master's business. Instead, I
have called you friends, for everything that I learned from my Father I
have made known to you."
5. In the Old Testament Ben Sirach 6:5-17 we get a clear description of
friendship. "A true friend is more precious than gold and jewels." A true
friend enriches our lives.
Who is the true friend of our lives? Who can give understanding and joy?
He is Jesus. He gave new life to St. Peter, St. John, Lazarus, Mary
Magdalene and the Samaritan woman. Jesus has all the qualities of a true
friend. Our other friends may deceive us, but Jesus is ever faithful. He
never leaves us when we are in trouble. Saints and all faithful people
experienced His friendship in their lives. That is why they loved Jesus with
all their heart and soul. For example: St. Paul, St. Teresa of Avila, St.
x Teresa the Little Flower, St. Maria Goretti, St. John of the Cross and St.
& Catherine of Siena. Jesus is always with us. He loves us. He makes us free.

70 Christian Religion and Moral Education
He understands our sorrows, joys and loneliness. Sometimes we don't
understand that. Sometimes we don't consider Jesus as our good friend. We
need to realize that He is our true friend and he laid down his life for us.
Trust in Jesus will make our lives better and happier.
Task: How is your relationship with Jesus? What do you do to make a deeper
relationship with Jesus? Discuss this in a Group and share with each other.
Exercise

Multiple Choice Questions
1. What can we overcome by true friendship?

a. Loneness b. Insufficiency in life

c. Helplessness d. Tension
2. Why does Jesus call us friends?

a. For good relationship b. For heartiness

c. For the society d. For love
Read the following Paragraph and answer the questions nos. 3 and 4.
Shrea and Oishee are good friends. They study together. But when Oishee makes
a brilliant result in the examinations, Shrea becomes very Jealous. Aishe realized
that Shrea was jealous, but never misbehaved with Shrea for this and keeps the
same friendly relationship with her.
3. What quality of friendship is lacking in Shrea?

a. Sympathy b. Well-wishing

c. Acceptance d. Affection
4. Relationship between Shrea and Oishee is of:

i. Hearty

ii. Co-operative

iii. Intimate
Which one is correct?

a. 1&ii b. ii & iii S

c. i & iii d. i, ii & iii “

True friend 71

Creative Questions

1. Bimal is the only son of his wealthy parents. After finishing school, he got

admitted into college. He made friends with some boys there. Since Bimal was

very rich, the others made him their leader in order to take advantage of his
money. One of his friends, Shishir, came to know about their intention, he told
everything to Bimal and warned him not to mingle with them anymore. Later

Shishir gave him company and helped him in his studies.

a. With what has the true friend been compared?

b. How would you define friendship?

c. What kind of friend was Shishir to Bimal. Explain.

d. Evaluate the outcome of Shishir and Bimal’s friendship.

2. Tanoy, Shohel, Chancle, Protima, and Ovi are students of class seven. They
study together in school. Shohel is weak in studies, so he started avoiding his
friends. He made friendship with some bad boys and became addicted to
drugs. Ovi noticed the changes in Shohel., so he would go often to his house
after school to help him. Ovi spent a lot of time and worked hard to bring him
back to a normal life. He also helped him to understand his lessons and study
well. He encouraged Shohel very much to live a good life.

a. What is the purpose of human life?

b. Explain the role of freedom in making friendship.

c. What kind of friend Ovi is to Shohel? Describe.

d. Shohel is influenced by good and bad friends. Evaluate on the basis of
this chapter.

Short Answer Questions

1. Who is our truest friend?

2. Write down the importance of true friendship.

3. Write 3 characteristics of a good friend and 3 of a bad friend.

4. In the Gospel of Matthew 12:28-30 what did Jesus say?

5. Find out some of the qualities of your friend.

io)
8

Chapter Seven
MAN AND WOMAN
Who are we? We can give our identification, telling our name and family. But
more basically we are human beings created by God in His own image.
Furthermore we are either woman or man, different from each other but equal,
with equal value and rights. In our relations with each other it is our duty to have
the attitude of love and respect to each and every person.
At the end of this chapter we will able to:

e describe reasons of humans being created by God as woman and man.

e explain healthy relationship between woman and man.

e explain the equality of woman and man.

e analyze teaching on love according to Apostle Paul.

e have mutual respectful between woman and man.
God’s Creation of Man and Woman
Almighty God created everything. He Himself is love, and He created all things
out of His love, doing so with deep care. After creating all other things, He
created human beings, as are named in the Bible story in Genesis as Adam and
Eve. Through creation of human beings, the mysterious era of woman and man
began.
History of human creation
After creating everything suitable on earth for human beings, God created the
first man Adam in His own image and likeness, and kept him in the Garden of
Eden. "Then the Lord God said, ‘It is not good that man should be alone; I will
make him a helper as his partner’. So the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall
upon the man, and he slept; then he took one of his ribs and closed up its place
with flesh, and the rib that the Lord God had taken from the man he made into a
woman and brought her to the man. Then Adam said in delight, 'This is bone of
my bones and flesh of my flesh; this one shall be called woman, for out of man
this one was taken'."
Man and Woman by God’s plan
It was God's own plan and will to create human beings as woman and man. The
two are distinct selves as woman and man, yet there is total equality as human
beings. The fact is good that there are two sexes, woman and man, this happened
by the will of God. The most important thing about the human beings is that they S
are created in the image of God. God is the beginning and He is the end. He was “

Man and woman 73
always present, He is present now and He will be present forever. God created
each human being with an immortal soul. The holy, just and loving God has
given us the same holiness, justification and love. God created human beings as
His highest creation, and appointed them to rule over all creation. Also, as there
is complete unity and equality among the three Persons, God created human
beings distinctly as woman and man, but to live in unity and equality.
Before creating human beings, all that He had created was not complete. Nothing
else in creation could observe things as human beings can, because they were not
created in the image of God. By creating human beings His creation was
complete, to His total satisfaction, since God gave His own image and likeness
to human beings.
In the beginning God created one man and one woman. This was a symbol of
God's intention that a man will have one wife, and a woman will have one
husband, both of them created in the image of God. Therefore they shall both
inherit equal rights. God created human beings on "the sixth day" after creating
all other creation. They have no power over this creation, only God creates. But
human beings are created in the image of God, in which He gave them
responsibility to look after the His creation.

Task: Discuss in pairs about your feeling as God’s creation as man and

woman.

Healthy relationship of Man and Woman
Relationship requires that we share feelings. It is very common that one will
share his or her feelings with another. Healthy relationship helps us to share
feelings in a modest way. A good and healthy relationship helps us to go closer
to one another.
We know that man is a social being. To live in a social atmosphere is his nature.
Everyone hopes that there will be a healthy relationship with everyone in the
society. But when this relationship is between two of opposite sex, many
experience fear and anxiety. This is seen more in conservative societies. We
should build a good mentality regarding such anxiety; we should understand
that this arrangement in creation has come directly from God, so it is good.
Forma-10, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

74 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Woman and man are created by the same God. We have shown before that
woman and man have been created for one another. Though they are equal to one
another as man and woman, they are distinct in physical and emotional stature.
This distinction is apparent in their need, willingness, and judgment to build a
healthy relationship between each other, woman and man. These things
influence their behavior; therefore we must be aware of them.

In general a healthy relationship between woman and man requires that they
respect one another, be fully aware of their common humanity, understand each
others differences and needs, stand side by side as brother and sister, show a
friendly attitude toward each other, control their physical pleasures, express
sympathy an empathy and thus to come closer to each other by sharing feelings.
If these attitudes between man and woman are lacking then there is no healthy
relationship. Then the relationship seeks only physical pleasure. Human beings
then use one another as material objects, only to fulfill their own desires.
Therefore their humanity disappears or deteriorates, and an imbalanced sexual
desire arises. Doubt and disrespect for one another appear and morality declines,
so that person, family, and society suffer. This is not at all acceptable in our lives
as human beings.

increase the rows of the table.
=
&

Man and woman 75
Relationship of Man and Woman in Family Life/Conjugal Life
A healthy conjugal life of a woman and a man means a relationship of love
between husband and wife in their marital life. After creating man God said, ‘It
is not good that the man should be alone’. Therefore, creating a woman similar
to man He began a holy life of husband and wife. They come closer in their need
of their soul'and offer life to each other. For the believers of Christ this is a holy
sacrament giving grace from God. Taking the responsibility of love they involve
themselves in the work of God. Therefore, this relationship is holy. It is the
responsibility of a Christian husband and wife to keep this relationship honored
and holy.

Task: There can be a debate competition selecting good speakers from the class
on the theme, “It is the utmost duty of man to build a healthy relationship
between man and woman.” Those who will not perform can be the
listeners, and at the same time can share their opinions at the end.

Equality of Man and Woman
We have learned before that God has created human beings in His own image
and likeness as woman and man. Through this He has given self respect and
honor to every person. In these matters there cannot be distinction between man
and woman. They are equal in respect and honor. We realize that there are some
kinds of differentiation in physical structure, mental reflection, thinking and
emotions. This uniqueness has made the creation more beautiful, it has made
human beings helpers and complimentary for one another.
We are all distinct and unique as helps each with his or her own characteristics.
We are unique in reflection and thinking power. Whether being man or woman
is one aspect of one's identity, but neither one is higher in position because of
this. Likewise according to the love that God has for each of us there is no
classification between intelligent or unintelligent, higher or lower classes,
woman and man.

=

&

76 Christian Religion and Moral Education

The Idea of Male and Female Inequality

Many people claim that since God created Eve from the rib of Adam women,

this is a sign that women are inferior to men. Men who use such an argument

claim authority, influence and power over women. This is not a just attitude.

Another unjust situation is a male dominating social system. Due to this a

particular class of men in our county always uses women for their needs and

attempts to keep them under their control; they keep them in one comer of the

house. In a developing country like Bangladesh, this holds back efforts to give

women their proper respect and rights; day after day women are suppressed by

a lot of rules and regulations.

Fill in the blanks: Discrimination: (If necessary we can increase the columns

of the table).

Examples of discrimination Means to prevent these discriminations
between man and woman

Se

Teaching of St. Paul about Love

The Lord Jesus Christ has come to this world in order to reveal and spread the

love of God to all humankind. During His lifetime Jesus loved the poor and

wealthy, high and low classes, intelligent and unintelligent people and brought

them close to Him. He did not love only those who loved Him. He also loved His

enemies, forgave them and stood by their side in time of their need. By loving

others, He called us to love.

What is love

St. Paul, in his letter to the Corinthians, gave us a clear picture of love. 6
Ss
N

Man and woman 77
We can be big donors, a highly educated person, or we can speak in the tongues
of mortals and of angels, but according to St. Paul if we do not have love, then
we have nothing. That means we have no value if we do not love. St. Paul
describes qualities of love:
"If I speak in the tongues of mortals and of angels, but do not have love, I am a
noisy gong or a clanging cymbal. And if I have prophetic powers, and
understand all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I have faith so as to remove
mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing. If I give away all my
possessions, and if I hand over my body so to be burned, but do not have love, I
gain nothing" (1 Cor 13: 1-3).
According to St. Paul there cannot be impatience, rudeness, jealousy,
boastfulness in love. He says:
"Love is patient; love is kind; love is not envious or boastful or arrogant or rude.
It does not insist on its own way; it is not irritable of resentful; it does not rejoice
in wrongdoing, but rejoices in the truth. It bears all things, believes all things,
hopes all things, endures all things" (1 Cor 13: 4- 7).
St. Paul speaks of three cardinal virtues. These virtues are faith, hope, and love.
These are the cardinal virtues, because we have received these virtues or gifts
from God according to our need. Love is the main virtue among these three. He
says:
"Love never ends. But as for prophecies, they will come to an end; as for
tongues, they will cease; as for knowledge, it will come to an end. For we know
only in part, and we prophesy only in part; but when the complete comes, the
partial will come to an end. And faith, hope and love abide, these three; and the
greatest of these is love" (ICor 8-10, 13).
We can speak a lot about love. Many give their opinion in different ways. But it
is not enough to speak about or describe love. The main thing about love is to
feel it with the heart and express it in action. Love is pure. There should be no
argument in it. But the love which has no argument, which brings us closer to
oo one another, which thinks for others and wishes others well that is real love.
S Love makes human beings great.

78 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Teaching of Jesus on the Conversion of Sinful Human Beings

A Sinful Woman Forgiven (Lk 7:36-50)

One of the Pharisees asked him to eat with him, and he went into the Pharisee's
house and reclined at the table. And behold, a woman of the city, who was a
sinner, when she learned that he was reclining at table in the Pharisee's house,
brought an alabaster flask of ointment, and standing behind him at his feet,
weeping, she began to wet his feet with her tears and wiped them with the hair of
her head and kissed his feet and anointed them with the ointment. Now when the
Pharisee who had invited him saw this, he said to himself, "If this man were a
prophet, he would have known who and what sort of woman this is who is
touching him, for she is a sinner." And Jesus answering said to him, "Simon, I
have something to say to you." And he answered, "Say it, Teacher."

"A certain moneylender had two debtors. One owed five hundred denarii, and the
other fifty. When they could not pay, he cancelled the debt on both. Now which
of them will love him more?" Simon answered, "The one, I suppose, for whom
he cancelled the larger debt." And he said to him, "You have judged rightly."
Then turning toward the woman he said to Simon, "Do you see this woman? I
entered your house; you gave me no water for my feet, but she has wet my feet
with her tears and wiped them with her hair. You gave me no kiss, but from the
time I came in she has not ceased to kiss me feet. You did not anoint my head
with oil, but she has anointed my feet with ointment. Therefore I tell you, her
sins, which are many, are forgiven-for she loved much. But he who is forgiven
little, loves little." And he said to her, "Your sins are forgiven " Then those who
were at table with him began to say among [a] themselves, "Who is this, who
even forgives sins?" And he said to the woman, "Your faith has saved you; go in
peace."

From the above quotation we come to know that everyone knew that the woman
was a sinner. Though Jusus knew if she touches him, people will say ill of him
but he did not say anything. The woman touched his feet, and he said the woman,
"Your sin has been forgiven! Do you think Jesus was unnatural? Why did Jusus
not treat her like others? What is my feeling toward this kind of people? Am I
being proud of my good qualities and holiness? Which group do I belong
to- Jusus or the Pharisees? Only those who are repentent are forgiven. We allcan .,
be forgiven by Jusus. $

Man and woman 79
Task: Now discuss in groups, how we shall create a healthy relationship of
love according to the teaching of Christ.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Whom did God make with the rib of Adam?
a. Mary b. Jesus
c. Eve d. Cain and Abel
2. It is not good for man to be alone, because:
i. He needs a companion
ii. He needs help
iii. He needs to sacrifice
Which one is correct?
a.i b. i and ii
c.i & iii d. i, ii & ili
Read the following Paragraph and answer the questions nos. 3 and 4.
Apurbo lives abroad. Often he talks to his wife Bithy over the phone. He loves
his wife so much that he comes home from abroad to live for short times.
3. What is revealed through the conversation between Apurbo and his wife?
a. rude attitudeb. conscious relationship
c. sharing of feelings d. sociality
4. What type of characteristic appears in Apurbo and his wife?
a. simplicity _ b. artistic efficiency
ES c. good relationship d. respect and honor
N

80 Christian Religion and Moral Education

Creative Questions

1. Arnn and Runa love each other. They feel for each other. They meet and talk

every day. They talk about their future. They are having a very good love affair.

Therefore, Arnn wants Runa very closely for his deep love. Runa also has a deep

love for Arun. Runa has grown up with the teaching of religion in her family.

Therefore, she is able to make Arun understand about the holy relationship of

love.

a. On which day did God create man?

b. Why did God create man in His own image?

c. What kind of relationship appears between Arun and Runa? Explain.

d. If Arun does not accept the religion and family teaching of Runa, what may
happen to their relationship? Analyze.

2. Joly and Tuly are neighbors and friends. They go everywhere together. They
are committed to each other and always try to stand by each other in their
need. Because Tuly's poor family could not afford to support her studies. Joly
often supported her to continue her studies. One day when the two were out on
the street, they were caught by hijackers. They forced Joly to give up her gold
necklace. At the moment, without standing beside Joly, Tuly ran off to escape
the danger.

a. St. Paul speaks about how many theological virtues?

b. Why is Love the greatest among faith, hope and love?

c. Which aspect of love has been revealed in the nature of Joly?

d. What will happen to Tuly if she does not change her attitude? Give
reasons for your opinion.

Short Answer Questions
1. Why did God create human beings as woman and man?

2. Why is it necessary to keep a healthy relationship between woman and man?

3. What does equality of woman and man mean?

4. What is the teaching of St. Paul about love? 20
6. Why it is necessary for woman and man to be respectful to each other? S

Chapter Eight
FREEDOM AND VOCATION
God has a plan for the universe. We are part of the same universe, and He has a
plan also for each of us. He created each of us with a special goal, each of us has
a responsibility. Each must discover what that responsibility is for him or her. By
learning about the vocations of various other people, talking with elders, praying
and meditating we can try to discover our vocations in life and answer the call.
Thus we will find happiness.
At this End of this chapter we will be able to:

e explain the meaning of God’s call for us to be free.

e explain that I achieve freedom by following my vocation in life.”

e analyze the relationship between vocation and life.

e explain the commitment to my self vocation.

e bea free person who is listening to God’s call.
Importance of my Life Vocation
Once a little girl asked her mother whether she will grow up to be happy and
free. Her mother replied that future can not be seen. It is impossible to be certain
about the future. But the more a person becomes aware about his vocation in
life, the more he or she becomes free. To discover one's vocation is very
important for everyone. Each person is given vocation which is unique for him
or her and different from the vocations given to others. We have to discover that
vocation and listen to that call. As a Christian our first call is to the vocation of
freedom.
To gain a happy life a person needs a dream for his or her life, a goal to seek, a
guide to show the way and preparation needed. If I have a dream and hope, I will
work and pray to reach that destination. This puts unity and purpose into my life.
Everyone has the responsibility to build his or her own future, and to live and act
according to that plan or goal. Then he or she can progress without feeling
anxious, he or she can proceed to a life that is peaceful and happy.
Forma-11, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

82 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Some people have negative attitudes regarding the future. One such attitude is
being pessimistic about the future. Such persons have little hope for a bright
future. They think that the present is the most important in life and want to
experience the present with full strength. They give importance most on
becoming happy now rather than looking forward to an uncertain and gloomy
future.
Some have hopes or dreams which are not attainable due to the reality of their
circumstances. For an example, a bright student had a dream to become an
engineer, but he had to work, leaving school because of his family's poverty.
Now he works in a motor garage and is not happy because his dream has not
been fulfilled.
Then some think that everything will happen only according to the God's plan,
that we don't have freedom to choose the future. But what does this attitude tell
about our teaching on freedom? Certainly God knows what will happen, but He
chooses not to be the one who decides what will happen, He leaves that to our
free choice. That is the basic meaning of His magnificent gift to us of our free
will. So we have the freedom to discover and follow our vocation.

the paper and share with one another.
The Call to Be Free
To discover and choose our vocation is the ultimate subject of life. Our
vocation is fully related with the areas and the conditions of life through which
we are influenced.
For example, the father of Anil, who earns very little salary, wastes a large
amount of his monthly income through his addiction to drinking. Because of
this he cannot provide for the family well, and the expense of Anil's study. Anil
is very bright student. He has a great desire to become a doctor. But because of
the reality of the family, he had to discontinue school and find a job. After
working a few years he continued both study and work together. Thus
finishing his Masters he got a position of manager in his Office. As a result he
can manage the living expense of his mother and the study cost of his younger =
brother. &

Freedom and vocation 83
In this case, how much freedom did Anil have to choose the vocation of life?
The loss of the opportunity to fulfill his own desire to study to become a doctor
resulted in sacrificing that for the benefit of the welfare of his mother and
younger brother. Could he have chosen another way? What would have been the
result then?
In fact, there is no ultimate limit or path for the exercise of man's freedom.
Freedom is related with the history, education, surroundings, situation,
continuing reality, culture of the society and family, cultures, habits,
development and the present situation.
What is Freedom?
In Bengali etymologically the word "Freedom" comes from two words, "Self
and "belong". So freedom means that a person has control of his own decisions
and actions. When a person or a country is able to control his or its own
decisions and actions, then it is called a free man or a free country. On the other
hand, if the person or a country is restricted from conducting itself according to
its own choice, then that person or country is not free; and is enslaved to the
control of others.
Freedom is a right by birth of every human being; it is his fundamental need. It
is a universal value which is decreed for all people in the whole world. This
freedom is sought by persons of all ages. The baby with the mother wants to
wave its hands and legs freely, when he grows day by day he wants to move and
roll from one place to another place; When his freedom is lost or disturbed, he
becomes exited and cries. A married woman wants to live her conjugal life with
husband and children. When it is disturbed by the father-in-law or others, then
they build a new house in another place. Even when old parents realize that their
freedom is restricted by their son or daughter-in-law, then they might decide to
stay separately from their children. Many old parents cannot accept their son' s
and daughter-in-law's authority upon them.
Here below are some life stories about freedom and when a person is free. Life-
Story 1
When I began class six, in the new class and environment I was very timid. I
could not make decisions or do any work on my own initiative. After doing a
FS task I expected that people would praise me. When I would not get appreciation
“ I would be sad. One day the headmistress called me to meet her in her office.

84 Christian Religion and Moral Education
I could not understand why she called me in. I thought, "Did I do anything
wrong?" I could not find an answer. So I was prepared mentally to get a scolding
from her. What a wonder that after I entered full of fear, she was happy and
praised me. She even gave a report about me to take to my parents. Wow! I felt
very secure then. I could not believe it. Thanking her I left her office room. What
a wonderful feeling I had! I wished to jump with joy! Now I am free from fear
and worry. I am free.
Life-Story 2
I was student of class seven. Once I became sick, and my condition was so bad
that I had to stop going to school and could no longer play cricket with friends.
Cricket is my favorite game. I had to follow the doctor's directions all the time.
I became weak and could not walk well. As a result I also suffered mentally.
Finally, by the grace of God, I started to gradually heal. I remember that first day
after my full healing I went to school, and I played cricket with my friends. That
day I enjoyed a lot. I am free from bodily sickness! I am free from rules and
regulations of doctors! I am free!
God created every human being according to His own image and likeness ( Gen.
1 :26). Therefore man's first and highest vocation is to live in a manner that is
fitting of a person who is so honored. As the Creator is beautiful, pure, holy,
loving and peaceful, the vocation of every human being is to try to be like that,
and to grow and live in such a way and dignity that reflects that gift of God.
The New Testament of the Holy Bible reminds people of their calling, The
Gospel of the Mathew records the words of Jesus in which He says] "Be perfect,
as your heavenly Father is perfect" (Mt. 5:48). Jesus reminds us that becoming
like God is the greatest call of every hurnan's life. Jesus proclaimed for rnan to
become as God and maintain the image of His divinity through His three mission
works of preaching, teaching and healing.
The universal poet Rabindranath Tagore wrote about that great call of life in his
song,:
"Wonderful your word
That brings freedom to my body and heart" x
N

Freedom and vocation 85
He also wrote that to have freedom, salvation and perfection for all people is the
way for a human being to portray the full image of our creator bodily, mentally
and spiritually. Human beings, no matter which nation, religion or class they
belong to, are all called to be free. The sarne call applies to us all, since ours is the
sarne Creator, and He is the greatest, true, beautiful, loving and peaceful God.
Our loving God never pressures any to accept that call. Instead He invites us so
that we rnay freely and willingly say yes to that divine call. To us humans who
were created with the magnificent gift of free will, the fulfillment of our human
life comes in saying YES to that divine call.
Listen to the Call
God created every human being giving hirn the gift of freedom. Because God
Himself is free, He belongs to no one else. He created every one giving His own
image and similarity. In the Scripture Book of Genesis first chapter, verse 26,
God says: "Corne, let us create rnan in the image and likeness of God." So we are
created free rnen according to the great plan of God.
There is the real joy and expression of humanity in the freedom. Freedom inspires
and forms rnan for expressing himself. It makes it possible for the human
personality to gain greatness and glory. But freedom also makes it possible for
humans to fall into a life of indiscipline and meaningless, destructive, selfish
behavior. What is true for an individual person is also true for an institution,
society or nation.
Man has deep hunger and expectation for freedom, because no one wants to live
without it. People of all ages, babies to aged persons, all want freedom. When
their freedom of living is challenged, restricted or denied, people struggle or fight
to regain it. This can happen between husband and wife, parents and children,
authorities and employees, even between nations ..
There is a great joy in experiencing freedom. Man wants to live in freedom and
feel it with the fullness of life. This joy of freedom makes him cheerful and
inspired to create something beautiful. Freedom encourages him to live
wonderfully, and this brings praise and glory into his life, gives him gifts of
satisfaction and respect. But the absence of freedom destroys the zeal and will to
“work, it reduces the spirit and liveliness of life, attacks spontaneity and joy

86 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Freedom provides an atmosphere and incentive for responsibility. The person
who is free can think, write, speak and contribute to the society in so many ways
without hindrance. He has to judge how helpful or harmful for self and others is
his work, speech and writing. Therefore freedom is related with others. A truly
free person is always dedicated to help others. Activity, speech or writing that is
harmful for others destroy his freedom because it causes the person to become a
slave to evil..

Freedom is always beautiful and holy. God gave us holiness, keeping Himself
free and independent. God is always helpful; He always helps others. Any kind of
harmful acts to any one else destroys the beauty and holiness of freedom, because
a basic teaching of freedom is to protect the welfare of self and others. Doing
anything ugly and harmful can never be freedom. And that right is not given to
any one, since such action is sinful. Although we are free to choose sin, we too are
forbidden to do this, so we become disobedient.

Real freedom provides an atmosphere for creativeness. It is like a river or stream
which flows in a zigzag direction. There is beauty of nature in the flowing of such
a river or stream. As the river or stream makes more beautified and plentiful the
land where it flows, in the same way freedom opens opportunities for
creativeness in man. When freedom is restricted, creativeness is harmed, and the
flowering of the human personality is disturbed. Then the life of man becomes
like that of a slave.

Task: Some important pictures should be exhibited in the class regarding
listening to the call of God. The meaning of a call or vocation will be
explained, and what it means to remain open-minded, free, placing no
obstacles to trying to understand the call of God. From the discussion
with the class prepare a list of characteristics of being a person of real
freedom.

2
S

Freedom and vocation 87
Freedom and Commitment
Independence or Freedom can appear in various ways as related with other
subjects. Some applications of independence and freedom are considered below.
1. Freedom and My Personality
It comes from the inner part of the heart to become a free and independent person.
I want to grow as I am; I want to grow in my own name and identity. I want to
grow with my likes and dislikes, tastes, strengths and ability. I do not want to get
lost in a crowd of many people. I want to be established in my identity, selfness
and in my own self-respect. I want to be accepted as I am, not what others want
me to be.
2. Freedom and Love
There is a basic relationship between responsibility and love. I have freedom to
choose whom I wish to mingle with or love. I might feel attraction for someone in
my heart and I try to build friendship with him or her. Toward someone else who
does is not attract me, I love him or her as a human being and fellow child of God,
but I do not choose to build a close personal relationship. On the other hand, those
whom I love intimately, those who love me dearly, their closeness gives me joy, I
treasure their presence and strong feeling for me and choose to spend as much
time with them as I can give.
3. Freedom and Responsibility
Freedom does not mean that I do whatever I wish whenever I wish to do so.
Freedom requires conformity with customs, rules and regulations. For example, if
a policeman says, "Walk on the footpath", "Cross the road through by over bridge"
or "Obey the traffic signals", these are ordinary rules we must follow. There are
many more rules, regulations, customs and procedures in the family, society and
in the church. For example, "Do this", "Do that". I have to follow them to have
discipline and avoid accidents or conflicts. Irresponsible freedom causes chaos.
Without responsibility freedom is valueless.

io)

5

88 Christian Religion and Moral Education
4. Freedom is free from evil

Not long ago, four years in a row Bangladesh was declared to be the most corrupt
country in the world. Today that shameful reputation is not quite as bad as before,
but there is great need for improvement. There is an abundance of stealing,
dacoits, fighting, unfair money, bribes, dowry, torturing women and children,
family quarrels and marriage separation. This affects the country, society, and is
present even in myself .. Sometimes I hurt others by getting angry, use bad words,
harsh speech, lies, stealing, disobeying my parents and elders and doing other bad
things. I have to ask myself how can I free myself from the slavery of all those
faults and become a truly free person.

5. The Source of Freedom and Independence is God

Seeing so much evil and violence in the country and the world the situation seems
to be hopeless. I also get discouraged in my unsuccessful efforts to overcome my
own evils. How can I improve? Who will help to free me? I firmly believe that it
is only God Who can save me from all kinds of evils. So I depend on Him, He is
my power and source of freedom. He created me because He loves me, and He
sent His Son Jesus to make me free.

6. Freedom and Jesus Christ

Jesus came into this world to show us how to become free and to direct our lives
onto the road to God. The person who lives in His truth becomes a man of
freedom. So Jesus says: "If you obey my word, you are truly my disciples; and you
will know the truth, and the truth will make you free." (John: 8:31-32). Yes, as a
Christian I want to live in the truth of Jesus and be a man of freedom, as He is. The
path of truth, which is shown by Him, is the real way of freedom and
independence.

Many have died for freedom or independence. Jesus Himself died saving men
from evil. Many great men died in the struggle for gaining freedom or
independence. To make the people, society and state free from evil and injustice,
the founder of the nation in Bangladesh Bangabandhu, the great leader of India
Mahatma Gandhi, Martin Luther King of America and many others sacrificed ,
their lives. To gain freedom from evil I must sacrifice many things. s

Freedom and vocation 89
Task: Write a life history of a person who is living his life in real freedom and
listening to the call of God.

Jusus gave the responsibility to Saint Peter to look after His sheep. Reading the
lines of John 21: 15-17 try to understand the meaning of it.
When they had finished breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter, "Simon, son of
John, do you love me more than these?" He said to him, "Yes, Lord; you know
that I love you." He said to him, "Feed my lambs." He said to him a second time,
"Simon, son of John, do you love me?" He said to him, "Yes, Lord; you know
that I love you." He said to him, "Tend my sheep." He said to him the third time,
"Simon, son of John, do you love me?" Peter was grived because he said to him
the third time, "Do you love me?" and he said to him, "Lord, you know
everything; you know that I love you." Jesus said to him, "Feed my sheep."
Underline the sentence: Do you love me? Now close your eyes. Imagine that,
Jusus is coming to you and asking the same question to you: Do you love me?
What will your answer?
Jesus said to Peter, "Look after my sheep." If Jusus gives you the same
responsibility, would you do that? Why is Jusus calling you?

Task: Divide into small groups and share what Jusus asked you to do.

Exercise

Multiple Choice Questions
1. Etymologically from how many words do the word‘ freedom’ come?

a. two b. three

c. four d. five
2. Absence of freedom -

a. destroys the zeal of work

b. invades the speed of life

c. makes life boring
Forma-12, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

90 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Read the following Paragraph and answer the questions nos. 3 and 4.
The goal of Raju is to become a doctor after completing his study. He will
dedicate himself to serve the people. Therefore he is very attentive in his study.
He studies every day so that he may get good result and prepare well to become
a competent doctor.
3. For what reason is Raju so attentive of in his study?
a. obedience b. responsibility
c. vocation of life d. faithfulness
4. The result of this habit of Raju may be to
a. get established in life
b. fulfill his dream for the future
c. achieving a happy and beautiful life
Which one is correct?
a. i b. i& ii
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
Creative Questions
1. The teacher gave responsibility to Milon and Rubel, instructing them to
control the discipline of the classroom, clean the classroom, clall in the
teachers, do class tasks, collect papers of the home task and return them.
Milon very carefully does these works given to him. But Rubel, even though
is bright, still he does not do his duties properly and punctually.
a. What is man's greatest hunger and demand?
b. How is freedom polluted?
c. Which way does Milon achieve freedom in his response to the teacher's
instructions?
Lo)
=

Freedom and vocation 91
2. Both father and mother of Mita are employees. Mita is the elder among her
brother and herself. She loves her younger brother very much. She is always
aware of her brother. She feeds him timely, makes him go to sleep and helps
him to study. They have good relationship with one another.
a. What has the deep relationship to do with freedom?
b. What do you understand about irresponsible freedom in an undisciplined
life?
c. Which characteristic of achieving freedom is expressed in Mita?
d. Give your opinion about Mita, whether her qualities are enough or not.
Short Answer Question
1. What do you mean by vocation or call of life?
2. Explain the importance of a vocation of life.
3. Explain about achieving freedom by responding to the call of life.
4. What is the relationship between vocation and life.
5. How does a man become free by listening to the call of God?
=
&

Chapter Nine
IN FRONT OF THE FATHER
Many youth today think; "What is benefit of prayer? Praying is a waste of time."
During prayer we often recite something again and again. Some youth do not
like this, and are not interested to pray and go to church. Some even ask, "Does
God really Exit? Is there any heaven and hell?" Yuri Gagarin was the first person
to travel around the earth in a satellite. After he completed that historic journey,
he thought that science can do everything without the influence of God, and
even said "There is no God". Many youth try to avoid going for prayer in the
church, instead they like to gossip with friends and love to travel here and there.
But if they think deeply they must ask; "Where is source of life?""Who created
us?" "Where will we go?""Where will we find our Creator?" "How will we see
our Creator?"God. And we go to God in prayer. Faithful prayer brings us closer
to God and oneness with God.
At the end of this chapter we will be able to-

e know what prayer is

e recognize the presence of God in prayer

e learn how to hear God’s voice in prayer

e learn a methods of prayer

© be inspired to do regular prayer
What is prayer?
The simplest meaning of prayer is a request, like submitting a prayer for a job.
And that is the meaning of one type of prayer to God, asking, begging or even
demanding something from Him. For our daily needs, and especially in time of
great need, we tum to Him and ask for His blessing and favor. But there are other
aspects of prayer, other types of prayer which are much greater than simply
requesting favors from Him. If we only ask, request or beg from Him then we
are like beggars who have no relationship with the person he begs from. A
beggar begs from others in order to survive. Whenever he gets he becomes
happy, and when he does not get he is disappointed. If our relationship to God is
that of being beggars, then God gain no honor or glory from us. But in true
prayer we not only ask, but we give too. 2

Ss
N

In front of the father 93
The main meaning of prayer is having and building a good relationship with
God. He is present to us and we are present to Him. God is with us in our daily
lives. On the other hand, prayer is living in God, staying in His presences or
feeling his presence in our lives. It is conversation, talking and listening,
expressing our love for one another. The best word to describe it is intimacy
with Him. We are dear children of God and not beggars. Through prayer we
form and deepen an intimate relationship with God. We praise Him, thank Him
and express our gratitude to Him. We can also tell Him our needs, our concerns,
and leave it up to His mercy as to what He does in return
for one another. The best word to describe it is intimacy with Him. We are dear
children of God and not beggars. Through prayer we form and deepen an
intimate relationship with God. We praise Him, thank Him and express our
gratitude to Him. We can also tell Him our needs, our concerns, and leave it up to
His mercy as to what He does in return.
Importance of prayer
Some may ask, what is the benefit of prayer? They can also ask; what is the
benefit of food? Or why do people eat? The answer to these two questions is the
same; we eat in order to survive, without the energy we get from food our body
cannot live, so that is why we eat. We pray in order to survive, without the energy
we get from God our spirit cannot survive, so that is why we pray.
People can eat different kinds of food according to various needs of their human
bodies. But human life is not only in the body, there are also mind, heart and soul.
The food we eat is required to keep the body alive and healthy, but that food does
not give life for the mind, heart and soul. Many people who get plenty of food are
still unhappy, have no smile on their faces, feel tension lack peace and hope.
Some of them steal, take bribes, and get involved in other evil works. Man can
live not by food alone. Food does not give alone happiness.
God gives real food which gives life to our body, mind and soul. Jesus said "Man
does not live by bread alone, but by every word that comes from the mouth of
God" (Mt: 9:4). God created us in His image and likeness. He wants to share with
e us. Through our prayers we enter into God's midst and allow God to come in our
S midst.

94 Christian Religion and Moral Education
for one another. The best word to describe it is intimacy with Him. We are dear
children of God and not beggars. Through prayer we form and deepen an
intimate relationship with God. We praise Him, thank Him and express our
gratitude to Him. We can also tell Him our needs, our concerns, and leave it up to
His mercy as to what He does in return.
Importance of prayer
Some may ask, what is the benefit of prayer? They can also ask; what is the
benefit of food? Or why do people eat? The answer to these two questions is the
same; we eat in order to survive, without the energy we get from food our body
cannot live, so that is why we eat. We pray in order to survive, without the energy
we get from God our spirit cannot survive, so that is why we pray.
People can eat different kinds of food according to various needs of their human
bodies. But human life is not only in the body, there are also mind, heart and soul.
The food we eat is required to keep the body alive and healthy, but that food does
not give life for the mind, heart and soul. Many people who get plenty of food are
still unhappy, have no smile on their faces, feel tension lack peace and hope.
Some of them steal, take bribes, and get involved in other evil works. Man can
live not by food alone. Food does not give alone happiness.
God gives real food which gives life to our body, mind and soul. Jesus said "Man
does not live by bread alone, but by every word that comes from the mouth of
God" (Mt: 9:4). God created us in His image and likeness. He wants to share with
us. Through our prayers we enter into God's midst and allow God to come in our
midst.
Without prayer no one is able to live spiritually. Prayer is a source of strength, a
powerhouse. Faithful prayer unites us with God's life. A man is dead without
prayer. Those who do not believe in God have lives without ultimate meaning.
Sooner or later they will be unhappy, since they do not have a person with
sufficient love and power to tum to, and they will experience fear, frustration,
difficulties, and all this can even destroy their lives. But a person who prays can
always tum to God, in time of need, of doubt of joy. A prayerful life brings
closeness to God, makes a man good and holy, a saint. iS
s

In front of the father 95
We hear God's voice through prayer

In 1948, Mother Teresa was traveling by train to Darjeeling, in the Himalaya
Mountains in Northern India. While traveling she was praying, and she heard a
voice tell her "Give up everything". She heard several times this voice, Yes this
was God's voice. God instructed her to give up the Loreto congregation, and to
go where the j oumey is unknown. His call is like that to Abraham, who gave up
his own country, in order to go to settle to a completely new country, to start a
new nation. Such a journey, a spiritual journey, was taken by Abraham and
Mother Teresa, as well as for so many people in history who heard voice of God.
One day St. Peter went up on the roof to pray. While he was praying he saw
strange images. He saw the heaven opened and something like a large sheet
coming down, being lowered to the ground by its four comers. In it were all
kinds of four footed creatures and reptiles and birds of the air. Then he heard a
voice saying, "Get up Peter; kill and eat" ( Acts 10: 10-16). Jews are not allowed
to eat such things. But God told him to do it, God'oice and command were clear.
In this God revealed that Jesus is not only for the Jews, but also for those whom
the Jews considered to be unclean. Jesus came for people of all races and
backgrounds, for all humans. Jesus is Savior for all.

How God speaks to me:

I hear God’s message in many various ways:

1. I hear God’s voice while sitting in meditation — prayer in His presence.

2. I hear God’s voice while reading the Gospel.

3. [hear God’s voice when my conscience advises me to remain honest.

4. God speaks to us by elders and honest friends. Whenever we listen to
their suggestions and words we hear God’s voice.

5. God speaks by various events. For example, if anybody has an accident, if
the house of a family bums down, for these people I feel sympathy and love,
and I want to do some thing to help them. This is a God's voice suggesting
tome.

x 6. God speaks to us by Church authorities; by the Holy Father, Bishop,
8 Priest, catechist, brothers and sisters.

96 Christian Religion and Moral Education
God speaks when interpreting or explaining words of Jesus. Jesus says, he
who has ears, let him hear; this means God continually speaks to us. If we
wish to hear God's message, we must listen.

Prayer is a presence of the living God
Prayer brings consciousness about the presence of God. We are present in front of
God, and God is always present in our midst even tough we do not feel God
present in us. The presence of God with me is like breathing in and out. We need
oxygen from the atmosphere. We continually breathe in oxygen. But we do not
always think about it; rather we unconsciously take it in. Even though we are not
always aware of its presence, still we know that without oxygen we will die within
the few minutes.

When fishes are out of water, they want to jump back into the water to stay alive.

But when they were in the water, at that time they did not realize the importance

or necessity of water.

In the same way we are living in an atmosphere of divine grace. We are alive

because of divine grace. But we are not be constantly aware of its presence. When

we enter into prayer and sit in silence then we realize God's loving presence
within us. All of us, the poor, rich, sinners, pious, all are alive by Divine Grace.

God is our infinite life-sea, His grace is the water or fire or oxygen that gives us

the energy and spirit that is necessary for us to move and live. Through prayer we

feel the presence of God, and share His love, peace, holiness and joy.

Kinds of Prayer

There are many kinds of prayer. We can say different kinds of prayer according to

the place, time and situation.

1. Prayer of admiration: We make a prayer after had have deep meditation on

God's creatures and His greatness. In the first part of the Lord's Prayer Jesus

Praise His Father for his greatness and love. There are many prayers of praise of

God in the psalms of the Holy bible, we read Psalms 100,111, 113, 145, 146, 147,

148, 149, 450.

(An appropriate hymn of praise can be sung)

ho}
Ss
NX

In front of the father 97
2. Prayer of gratitude and thanksgiving: we are infinite love of God. We
express our heartfelt gratitude and thanksgiving prayer to God for His grace and
blessings. We thank and extend our gratitude for protecting us from sickness, to
saving us from the danger, making it possible to pass exams, to get good jobs,
There are many prayers of gratitude and thanksgiving to God in the psalm of the
Holy Bible. We read Psalm 138.

I give you thanks, 0 LORD, with my whole heart; before the gods I sing your
praise;

I bow down toward your holy temple and give thanks to your name for your
steadfast love and your faithfulness; for you have exalted your name and your
word above everything.

On the day I called, you answered me; you increased my strength of soul.

All the kings of the earth shall praise you, 0 LORD, for they have heard the words
of your mouth. They shall sing of the ways of the LORD, for great is the glory of
the LORD.

For though the LORD is high, he regards the lowly; but the haughty He perceives
from far away.

Though I walk in the midst of trouble, you preserve me against the wrath of my
enemies you stretch our hand, and your right hand delivers me.

The LORD will fulfill his purpose for me; your steadfast love, 0 LORD, endures
forever. Do not forsake the work of your hands.

3. Prayer of asking or petition: There are no limit to prayers of petition. We
ask for everything that is important to us for our concern for others. We humbly
express our requests to God, to overcome sickness, save us from the danger, get
successful results, a good job, good health, and a bright future. In second part of
the Lord's Prayer Jesus himself taught us to asking God for our daily needs.
Some people ask why we request God for what we need, since He already knows
everything that we need. Of course He knows all that we need. But our prayer, our
humble asking, is an expression of our faith in His power and infinite goodness.
He wants us to feel and express our faith and confidence in His goodness. Our
prayer of petition does not change God, but it changes us and creates a loving
relationship with Him, who is our loving Father. Jesus himself says; "Ask and it
will be given you; search, and you will find; knock and the door will be opened
for you. For everyone who asks receives, and everyone who searches finds, and
for everyone who knocks, the door will opened ( Mt: 7:7-8)

Forma-13, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

98 Christian Religion and Moral Education
4. Prayer of repentance: We are weak human beings. We make mistakes;
consciously or unconsciously, willingly or unwillingly. We fail to maintain always
our loving relationship with God Who became man for us. Our mistakes are so
foolish, still we do them. Hence for our many mistakes we repent or express our
regret, and ask His help that we become free from such mistakes and become holy
persons. Our sins and crimes are washed away, overlooked, by God's Mercy and
love. An ideal prayer of repentance is found in Psalm 51 in the Holy Bible. We
read it all together;

Have mercy on me, O God, according to your steadfast love;

According to your abundant mercy
Blot out my transgressions.

Wash me thoroughly from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

For I know my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me.

Against you, you alone, have I sinned and done what is evil in your sight, that
you might be justified when you speak and blameless when you pass judgment.
You desire truth in the inward being; therefore teach me wisdom in my secret
heart.

Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than
snow.

Let me hear joy and gladness; let the bones that you have crushed rejoice. Hide
your face from my sins, and blot out all my iniquities.

Create in me a clean heart, 0 God, and put a new and right spirit within me.

Do not cast me away from your presence, and do not take your holy spirit from
me.

Restore to me the joy of your salvation, and sustain in me a willing spirit. Then
I will teach transgressors your ways, and sinners will return to you.

Deliver me from bloodshed, 0 God, 0 God of my salvation, and my tongue will
sing aloud of your deliverance.

0 Lord, open my lips, and my mouth will declare your praise.

For you have no delight in sacrifice; if 1 were to give a burnt offering, you would =
not be pleased. ES

In front of the father 99
The sacrifice acceptable to God is a broken spirit; a broken and contrite heart, 0
God, will not despise.
Do good to Zion in your good pleasure; rebuild the walls of Jerusalem,
Then you will delight in right sacrifices, in burnt offerings and whole burnt
offerings ; then bulls will be offered on your altar.
Let us mediate together
Prayer is our inner food and drink which removes our appetite and thirst. Prayer
brings us peace and Joy. All the peace and joy come from God. Prayer helps us
to bring closeness of God. We see His face and hear the voice of God through
prayer.
Task: Let us sit for silent meditation for five minutes and feel the presence of
God.
Exercise

Multiple choice questions
1. Which psalm tells about repentance?

a. psalm - 51 b. psalm - 138

c. psalm -148 d. psalm - 150
2. Why is prayer an inner food?

i. to remove life ‘s appetite and thirst .

ii. to bring peace

iii. to make a joyful heart.
Which one is correct?

a.i& ii b. 1 & iii

2}
Ss c. i & iii, d. i, ii & iii.

100 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Read the following Paragraph and answer the questions nos. 3 and 4.
Every day a beggar begs money from Anal. He told the beggar; instead of
begging, pray to God and do some work. Do that and you will see that your mind
will be very good and you will have a happy life. So the beggar calls God
everyday and does his work. Somehow he found peace in his mind.a
3. What importance of life did the beggar realize?

a. Happiness b. Wealth

c. Honor d. Prayer
4. Because of his own work the beggar will receive:

a. Comfortable life b. Holy life

c. Luxurious life
Which one is correct?

a.i & ii b. ii & iii

c.i & iii d. i, ii & iii
Creative Question 1
Scene 1
Anna got A+ in SSC exam. All members of the family of Anna were happy. They
organized thanksgiving prayer service. They were so happy that they invited all
the poor people in a meal. Being united with the family members of Ann all the
people invited began to praise God for Anna's success in exam.
Scene 2
Without telling anybody Mousumi took away a pen from one of her classmates’
bag. The class teacher came to know about it. The teacher could not identify the
main culprit. So he punished all the students. Mousumi remained quiet. She felt
sorry for all but could not admit the truth. She continued to feel guilty and
begged pardon from God.
a. Mother Teresa was member of which religious order first?
b. Why do we pray?
c. Mousumi’s prayer is similar to which prayer of your text book? Explain.
d. Compare and contrast the prayers of Anna and Mousumi. x

N

In front of the father 101

Creative Question 2

Friend 1: How are your studies going on?

Friend 2: Somewhat good. I hope to do better in my next exam.

Friend 1: OK my friend, how do you remember all that you study? I always
forget the things I study.

Friend 2: In the beginning of my studies I always pray to God and read a
chapter from the Holy Bible. Then I begin my studies.

Friend 1: Is that true! I have never prayed before my studies. I just go to my
study table and start my studies.

Friend 2: Friend, you can follow my process. Pray and read from the Bible
everyday before your studies. You will see, you will be more attentive
and you will be able to remember the things that you study. If you do
so, you will remember during exam all and will be able to write them
well.

a. Who saw strange scenery during prayer on the roof?

b. What is the fruit of faithful prayer?

c. The second friend is dependent on whose power? Explain this in the light

of the lesson.

d. Compare and contrast the attitudes of the two friends.

Short Answer Questions

1. How do we hear voice of God during prayer?

2. Prayer is to live in the presence of God. Define.

3. What do you understand by prayer of admiration?

4. Why is prayer important in our life?

5. How does God speak to us?

=
§

Chapter Ten
HEALING THE SICK WORLD
Everybody in this world will sometime become sick. Nobody expects sickness,
yet it comes to all. Sickness can make our lives sometimes troublesome,
sometimes very difficult, or it creates serious problems, even death. It spoils our
happiness, peace and control of our minds. It results in annoyance, impatience,
unhappiness and loneliness. Prolonged sickness creates deep frustration and
disappointment. It disturbs our concentration and causes desperation. Therefore,
all persons want healing, they want liberation from sadness and desperation
caused by sickness. They want healthy, happy, joyful and peaceful lives.
It is not only human beings that get sick, also the earth and its environment get
sick or polluted, all are affected; animals, the atmosphere, air, weather, rivers,
oceans, all nature. This sickness is not only physical; human beings together with
the entire world suffer internally from moral, social, economic, and
environmental sickness. The internal sickness is more distressing than physical
sickness. When human beings are internally sick, the earth along with them
becomes sick. The world needs healing as human beings do. Human beings need
healing for a peaceful and joyful life; in the same way, a world health is essential
for a beautiful and peaceful world.
At the end of this chapter we will be able to:

e explain the notion of sin

e describe the brokenness of this earth

e describe the healing power of Jesus Christ

e describe the importance of the sacrament of reconciliation

e be inspired to avoid sins

e be motivated for the sacrament of reconciliation
Sin
Sin is the distortion or destruction of all that is good and beautiful, of the
spiritual, moral, ethical, economic, environmental and cultural values for
humans and for the world. God is complete Goodness, Truth, Beauty and Love.
Everything He creates is beautiful. But sin distorts both humans and the whole
world. The beautiful world which was created by God becomes a sick and x
broken-world because of the sins of human beings. 8

Healing the sick world 103
Task: Share in small groups, pointing out some example of the sick and
broken-world.
As examples of a sick and broken-world, consider some experiences described
here of a foreign volunteer who came to serve the people of Bangladesh after the
1971 Liberation War.
A War-Stricken Bangladesh
A foreign volunteer came to Bangladesh with a group of students to offer
volunteer service to the people. The group came to a village tormented by war.
They saw broken and burned buildings, houses, hospitals, broken roads, the
whole village and the fields seemed to be empty, hardly any people. They also
saw many wounded people, widowed women, and unmarried mothers, orphan
children without parents, without either father or mother. There was a clear sign
of holocaust of humans everywhere in the country, sadness, pain, suffering,
deprivation, poverty, all these created by hatred, anger and lust of some people.
This volunteer-worker, some students and some workers of volunteer agencies
stood beside these suffering people. They went from house to house to see
practically what happened and what they could do. They started making new
houses for those whose houses were burned in the war; opened temporary clinics
to care for the wounded people; and dug tube wells for the villagers. They started
schools for children; they also provided help to the farmers.
Gradually, there was a change in the whole village. Hope was arising amidst
hopelessness and sufferings. The clear sign of changes became more visible.
People were getting healthy; they were more decent in their dress, and they felt
interested in education. Consequently, many children started going to school
with nice dress and school-kits. A smile was visible in every face in the village;
their minds and hearts were filled with a new spirit.
The Wounded World
We can see a wounded Bangladesh in 1971 with many cuts and hurts. The blood
of three million martyrs, hundreds of thousands of broken and burned houses,
fifteen million refugees who left their homes, countless hungry and poor people,
sadness and sufferings, all these are clear signs of a tormented Bangladesh. All
< these are the results of hunger for power, hatred, and unlimited injustices.
N

104 Christian Religion and Moral Education
We can see similar pictures throughout the world:

e rapid growth of population and population-explosion

e 80% people of the world population are poor

e millions of people go hungry without any food, or with very little food

e hundreds and thousands of people are in prisons

e increase of injustice and exploitation

e huge gap and discrimination between the rich and the poor

e domination of the rich nations over the poor nations

e misleading and indoctrinating influence and effects of mass media

e lucrative arms business of the rich and powerful nations

e increase of corruption everywhere

e selfish political games

e environmental pollution

e the endangered earth

We can see that evils encompassed us in our individual life, community life,
social life and universal life. The individuals, society, state, and the world, none
of them are free from the influence of evils. How can we be liberated from these
evils or sins and live a sound and healthy life? We have to know what sin and evil
are, why evil exists, and where does it come from or how it is born.

What is Sin or Evil

Many people think of sin only as breaking or disregarding rules and regulations
prescribed by religions. The Jews had a list of 613 laws in the Book of Leviticus,
and considered sin to of any of these laws. Many Christians have this same
legalistic idea of sin, and want to guide their lives mainly by trying to obey the
Ten Commandments given to Moses by God. Seven of these Commandments
tell us what NOT to do: 'do not steal;' do not tell lies;' etc. This legalistic type of
morality considers sin as doing something bad or wrong, breaking the law. Jesus
gave only two commandments. He made POSITIVE what was presented
negatively in the Old Testament. Jesus said: "The most important one is this, ' ...
Love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your
mind, and with all your strength.' The second most important commandment is,
this: "Love your neighbor as you love yourself" (Mark 12:30-31; see also Matt S

Healing the sick world 105
22:37-39; Luke 10:25-28). Therefore, sin comes in not having with others a bond
or relationship of concern, of kindness, of sensitivity, or to put it into one word,
of LOVE. Persons who are self-centered and do not give importance to others,
who neglect or refuse to serve and love them, will also neglect to serve and love
God. THAT is sin. He expects us to have a relationship of love with God and
others, and sin would be a state of mind in which we do not possess that attitude.
Jesus went beyond the Old Testament understanding of sin and gave a new
meaning for it. According to the Old Testament sin means to do something bad.
According to Jesus' teaching, sin is not to love someone, or to break the
love-relationship. For example, according to the Old Testament teaching, the
priest and the Levite in the Good Samaritan story did not commit any sin; rather
they fulfilled their religious duties. They passed the injured man an continued
down the road. he probably had religious duties to perform someplace and
would consider it sinful to neglect them. But Jesus explained clearly that it
would be sinful to neglect that person who greatly needed assistance. What the
Samaritan man did for the injured man, as Jesus proclaimed, "That you did for
Me."Matthew 25:31-46. In another story or parable that Jesus told and St. Luke
reported to us, (Luke 15:11-32), Jesus tells of the loving father and his two
sons. The younger son ran away from home, then repented and returned and
was lovingly accepted by his father. It was probably wrong for him to run away
and waste the money he was given. But he realized that he was the son, and
returned with the hope that he could depend on the love of his father. He
was lavishly rewarded for his bond of love with the father. Meanwhile the elder
son felt that he himself had always been obedient, had never done anything
wrong and he felt offended that his father did not punish his brother. The did not
love his brother, did not feel joy that he had repented and returned, and refused
to accept him. He probably had little love for his father too. His love was for
himself, for his place in the family, gaining control of the property, but not for
his brother. The renowned theologian of South India, D. S. Amalorpavadas
taught that: "Sin is weakening or rupture of relationship. It is a refusal of God
and others. It is selfishness, 'self-fullness', unwillingness to give, withdrawal
of self. It fragments us within ourselves, among us and creation; thereby we
lose our identity and awareness. We become alienated or estranged from self,
others and God, we are locked up in self and loneliness; and this is beginning
of hell" (D. S. Amalorpavadaas, Renewal of The Sacrament of Penance,
Sacrament of Conversion and Reconciliation,

Forma-14, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

106 Christian Religion and Moral Education
p. 6). According to a famous theologian "Sin is also alienation from oneself; it
spells disintegration, loss of self-respect, frustration and disturbance in one's
relationship with others. Sin is a threat to the wholeness of man." (Bernard
Haering, The Entry of Sin, p. 59). According to Haering, sin is to refuse relating
with others, or to show no interest to make relationship with others.
Consequences of Sin

In the third chapter of the Book of Genesis we find that Adam and Eve were
punished and were driven out from the Garden of Eden because they became
disobedient to God's command and committed sin against Him. During the time
of Noah people became crooked and engaged themselves in sinful acts; so God
B punished them, He did not rescue them from the great flood (Genesis ch.7).
Again, we find in the Second Book of the Kings that the chosen people of God
were defeated by their enemies when they rejected God and worshiped pagan
gods. We can cite many examples from the Holy Bible in which we can find that
people were punished by God because of their sins.

Sinful Picture of the Present World

War means sin. War begins because of the sins of one or another. Many human
beings and animals die in war; many homes, goods, wealth, institutions, roads
and bridges are destroyed. War causes economic depression, famine and many
social problems. One and a half crore people died only in the Second World
War. Because of the atom bomb blasts by the USA thousands of people were
killed in Japan's Hiroshima and Nagasaki, numerous were crippled and many
were affected by poisonous radiation from the bombs.

Besides, because of some people's unbridled greed for wealth billions of people
are losing their property; unemployment is increasing; numerous people are
living an inhuman life in the slums and footpaths; the number of poor people is
increasing dreadfully. Poverty is forcing hundreds of thousands of women and
children to become prostitutes. Millions of people are becoming victims of the
powerful and rich people's persecution. Because of immoral propaganda of the
media and media culture immoral lives as in illegal sexual relationships,
separation in the family, illegitimate children, helpless and abandoned old
parents, abortion, human trafficking, etc. are increasing. Man's injustice and ,
abuse of nature are increasing. This is causing floods, landslides, death of S$

Healing the sick world 107
rivers, poisoning of river and sea waters, extinction of many kinds of animals
and plants; green lands are turning into deserts. All this sinfulness is becoming
severe.
God's Strength in Our Weakness
A guilty feeling rises in us when we commit any sin. This feeling must arise in a
healthy conscience. But he who has stifled his conscience will not have such
feelings of guilt or remorse, even if he or she commits hundreds of sins. Our
life's ultimate goal is union with God. Because of sin man has deviated from his
desired goal and takes himself away from love of God. At the same time he
separates himself from his own heart, from others and from all creation.
Our great God never sends weak sinners away from Him. The Holy Bible
teaches us that the compassionate and loving God Himself extends His hand to
rescue the weak sinners. When after committing sin Adam and Eve took distance
from God and hid themselves, then God Himself looked for them. He promised
them that He would send a Savior to save them from their captive life. One day
God sent that promised Savior. Jesus Christ the Savior suffered and then died on
the cross. Thus he exterminated the power of sin; he brought fallen man to God
(Eph 2: 16). St. John mentions in the beginning of his Gospel that, Jesus comes
to man's darkness of sin in order to illumine his life. The light shines in the
darkness of sin so that whoever believes in him many not be deprived, rather will
receive eternal life.
Jesus Christ the Healer
Jesus is the bridge between God and man. He has come to this world to reconcile
man with God, to rescue man from his broken and poor condition and heal him
and thus unite the whole human race and the whole of creation with God. In His
public preaching life Jesus preached, taught and healed. In these He manifested
His great love and boundless kindness to the poor and the sinners. Jesus Christ
Himself has fought against all evils and through the power of His death on the
cross He defeated the power of sin. By healing the sick Jesus revealed that He
wants to heal man's body, mind and soul so that man can become the Father's
children. Sickness makes man weak and slowly brings death to him. Jesus heals
man's sickness. God the Father sent His Son Jesus so that He makes man free
co from all slavery to sinfulness and gives him fullness of life. Jesus says, "I have
% come in order that you might have life-life in all its fullness" (Jn I 0: I Ob).

108 Christian Religion and Moral Education
The Sacrament of Reconciliation
Jesus wants to heal us from all kinds of sickness or evils of body, mind and soul.
For this reason in all the churches there are sacraments available. He has shared
His power to reconcile and power to heal with His apostles (see Lk 9:1-2, 6). He
has been distributing His salvatory and healing works through the sacraments of
the churches.
We receive forgiveness of our sins through repentance and the sacrament of
confession. We receive healing through the sacrament of anointing of the sick.
Through the Eucharist Jesus has given us Himself as the food of eternal life, so
that we can live a healthy life in body, mind and spirit and remain vigorous.
Through the Eucharist and the Church that He has founded He has given His
word, body and blood as food for the hungry and thirsty man to satiate his hunger
and thirst and give him eternal life.
Exercise

Multiple Choice Questions
1 What of human life does sickness destroy?

a. Loneliness b. Single-mindedness

c. Sharing d. Heartiness
2. Man separates himself from all creation:

i. Because of sin

ii. Because of weakness

ili. Because of violence x

N

Healing the sick world 109
Which one is correct?

ai b. ii

c.i & ii d.i & iii
Read the following Paragraph and answer the questions nos. 3 and 4.
While playing together Jim and Jerry found a wrist watch. Jim quickly put the
watch in his pocket. Jerry said, ‘It is not good to take someone else's thing. You
better leave it.'
3. Jerry is asking Jim to keep away from what kind of sin?

a. Stealing b. Greed

c. Envy d. Telling lies
4. The ruin that is taking place because of Jim’s sin is:

a. Physical b. Social

c. Moral c. Economic
Creative Questions
1. Simon is a son of very poor parents. He has nothing but the house left behind
by his parents. He borrowed money in order to farm land of his neighboring
landlord Mr. Ranjan. This cunning landlord took Simon's fingerprint on a blank
paper, as he was not educated. Thus he lost even what he owned, the house.
Simon could not understand it. One day the landlord came and told him, ‘Leave
this house right now. This is my house.' 'Why shall I leave my own house?’ The
landlord replied, 'Here you see this paper-you have given me this house.' At that
moment Simon recalled about the fingerprint that he had given in order to take
money.
a. What is sin?
b. Why did Jesus the healer come to this world?
c. What is revealed by the action of Mr. Ranjan?
d. What can be the consequences of the action of Mr. Ranjan? Analyze this

in the light of the textbook.

<
§

110 Christian Religion and Moral Education
2. Dina is brilliant, but restless. There is a hidden deception in her restlessness.
In the name of playing mischievous tricks she tells lies and thus ruins her
relationship with others. She even tells lies about the parish priest. Her
classmates told these all to the priest and asked him to cancel her
church-membership. The priest called Dina to him, put his hand on her head and
advised her not to tell lies any more. He also read the Bible texts for her and told
her of God's great love and boundless mercy. He advised her to pray so that Jesus
gives her power of understanding. The priest forgives her and shows her the way
of living a new life.
a. What do you mean by Sacrament?
b. What is the meaning of Eucharist? Explain.
c. Who inspired the priest to call Dina close to him? Describe.
d. Do you think that being inspired by the priest Dina received eternal
life? Evaluate.
Short answer questions
1. What do you understand by sin? Explain.
2. How because of sin the world is being damaged? Explain.
3. Explain what can be the consequences of sin.
4. How can one be free from committing sin?
5. How does God give us strength during our weakness?
ho)
s

Chapter Eleven

THE SILENT VOICE OF CONSCIENCE
God created human beings giving them body, mind and soul. At the same time
He gave each person a sound conscience which is God's voice. A person who
takes care of his/her conscience has a good and sound conscience. And the one
who has a good and sound conscience can hear God's voice more clearly.
Conscience is the core of human heart and the temple of God. That person lives
there with God in silence intimately; God's voice sounds and resounds there.
There the conscience reveals clearly God's commandments, which are full of
love for God and for human beings. Our God is a living God; He dwells in our
hearts and reveals his Word to us. He speaks to us in silence in our every day-life
in and through various events, activities, thoughts and actions.
We need a sound and healthy conscience in order to hear the voice of God. He
never shouts; rather He speaks in a very low voice. A good and healthy
conscience listens to that voice. His voice speaks, tells us clearly what is right
and what is not, what is just and what is unjust. Our conscience is the voice of
God.

At the end of this chapter we will be able to:

e explain the meaning of values

e discover the source of values

e know ways to form conscience

e explain how to have mature conscience

e discover bad effects of drugs and ways to get rid of them

e explain the Gospel values

e listen the voice of conscience

e live life according to Gospel values
The meaning of Values
Value is defined as: that which is, or makes something desirable, attractive,
worthy of approval, admiration etc. that which inspire feelings, judgments or
attitudes of esteem, commendation; that which is useful in view of certain ends.

ES (Sarcamentum Mundi, Vol.6, p 1331, 1975)
N

112 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Human life is meaningless without values. No one respects a valueless person;
without values one becomes like a common animal. A person who has good
values in life and lives life accordingly is loved and respected by all. Values help
a person to form one's moral character, which is helpful for one's moral
judgment and helps the person to live accordingly.

Values and Conscience

Values and conscience are related to each other. Both of them affect one another.
A person who has good and standard values also has a good conscience. In other
words, a person who has a good and pure conscience also has good and high
values in life. For example, a person who values holiness, sincerity, and
politeness has a good and sound conscience. On the other hand, one who has a
good conscience values holiness, sincerity, and loving relationship as the
guiding force in his/her life.

On the contrary, we cannot expect a good conscience from a person who does
not have good and high values in life. In other words, one who does not have
good and sound conscience has distorted and indecent values in life. For
example we can mention that those who are born and live in an unfair
atmosphere, where there exists fighting, stealing, many other crimes, from that
person we cannot expect politeness, sincerity, and good behavior. In such
atmosphere many do not consider an evil act as an evil.

Consider now two examples, one of people of good conscience and one of bad
conscience; of those who have good and high values in life, and of those who do
not.

Example 1:

Mr. Sujan and his wife Teresa have been living a happy conjugal life with their
two sons and two daughters. They have a good name in the village as good
Christians. They have good relationship with everybody in the village. They
pray together every day in the evening and go to Church on Sundays. One of the
sons became a priest, a daughter became a religious Sister. They offered their
lives to preach the Good News of Jesus. Many people say that this is a model x
family. s

The silent voice of conscience 113
Example 2:
Tony's fight began with a family regarding a love affair. At one moment Tony
brought his friends and started beating the members of the girl's family. Police
arrested him and put him in jail. Many times the villagers complained to the
police against Tony. The police were very aware about Tony. His parents are
poor and the atmosphere of the family is not good at all. His parents used to fight
for many reasons; they use to behave rough with their children and neighbors,
and would scold them. They seldom go to Church or pray at home in the
evening. Many times the father comes home late night and beats his wife and
children. The villagers say: "What is the future of this family?"

Task: Discuss in small groups the sources, reasons, signs and consequences

of good conscience and of bad conscience.

Sources of Moral Values
Sources of our moral values can be separated into two groups: sources within
(subjective sources) and sources outside (objective sources).
A. Sources within (Subjective Sources)
God created us in His own image and likeness. In the Book of Genesis God said:
"Let us make man in our own image and likeness"(Genesis 1: 26). Fr. Bernard
Hearing wrote in his theology book: "We are good in the depth our being and
created for the good. Only because 'our eye is made for the light' can it see the
light of goodness. Only because we are created for love, Eternal Love itself,
are we challenged by the force of love in the good and inflamed by it. This
natural affinity of ours for the good (ultimately for God) can be disturbed by
habits of sin, so that spiritually we become partially blind. But the seed of the
good is not destroyed. It still remains in our nature, and the warmth of divine
love, like rays from the sun can quicken it with life." (B. Hearing, the Law of
Christ, Vol. I, 1969, p 131-132)
Forma-15, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

114 Christian Religion and Moral Education
B. Sources outside (Objective Sources)
These are mainly two, namely, the community in which we live, and divine
revelation. According to "The objective sources are community and divine
revelation. It is a great service of community to propose moral ideals to the
developing personality through doctrine, precept and example. The moral man,
as a tule, owes his inner formation in the good to the family in which he was born
and raised." (ibid, p 131-132)
Sources of Moral Values
Sources of our moral values can be separated into two groups: sources within
(subjective sources) and sources outside (objective sources).
A. Sources within (Subjective Sources)
God created us in His own image and likeness. In the Book of Genesis God said:
"Let us make man in our own image and likeness"(Genesis 1 :26). Fr. Bernard
Hearing wrote in his theology book: "We are good in the depth our being and
created for the good. Only because ‘our eye is made for the light' can it see the
light of goodness. Only because we are created for love, Eternal Love itself,
are we challenged by the force of love in the good and inflamed by it. This
natural affinity of ours for the good (ultimately for God) can be disturbed by
habits of sin, so that spiritually we become partially blind. But the seed of the
good is not destroyed. It still remains in our nature, and the warmth of divine
love, like rays from the sun can quicken it with life." (B. Hearing, the Law of
Christ, Vol. I, 1969, p 131-132)
B. Sources outside (Objective Sources)
These are mainly two, namely, the community in which we live, and divine
revelation. According to "The objective sources are community and divine
revelation. It is a great service of community to propose moral ideals to the
developing personality through doctrine, precept and example. The moral man,
as a rule, owes his inner formation in the good to the family in which he was born
and raised." (ibid, p 131-132)

5

The silent voice of conscience 115
How do we form or develop conscience?
It is discussed earlier that moral values and conscience are related to each other
and affect each other. As moral values are developed in two ways, conscience is
also developed in two ways: by internal values and external values. From these
two kinds of values we see two kinds of conscience: internal conscience and
external conscience.
A. Internal conscience
God shared His goodness and beauty with every human being (Genesis 3:26).
For this reason every person can recognize moral values; can judge what is
good and what is bad; what we ought to do and what ought not to do. He/she
can make a decision according his/her conscience and proceed to act. The
more God-fearing and upright a person is the more beautiful is his/her
conscience. Here we can mention the example of King Solomon as a model (1
Kings 3:4-14).
B. External conscience (Influence from Outside)
As with values, our conscience is also influenced and affected by those of
others. One's family, religion, country, local and foreign cultural values and
moral standard, affect the formation of conscience. Practice of religion, charity,
and loving relationship in one's family and society influence a lot to the
formation of one's conscience. On the other hand, negative influences of one's
family, society, country and the world hamper the formation of a good and fair
conscience. For example, female fetuses are aborted without objection due to
attitude to women. In some countries abortion is legalized. In China millions of
babies are aborted because of the one-child policy. Prostitution, though sinful, is
legalized in almost all countries. Today many do not consider these sinful acts as
sins. Both positive and negative influences from outside have tremendous
influence in the formation of our conscience.
Personal Conscience
Very often a person's particular action is judged according to his/her conformity
< or non-conformity to laws, rules and customs. Children are expected to do what
“ they are told, but it is immature on the part of an adult to be so dependent on

116 Christian Religion and Moral Education
others. What is more important here is the personal decision of the individual
who has the freedom to choose according to the values he cherishes. A legalistic
attitude is an obstacle to maturity; it depends on considerations that are external,
not on values we have interiorized and made our the World War II A. Eichmann
sent thousands of Jews to their death. When that notorious war-criminal was
brought to trial, he defended himself saying that he only obeyed orders from
higher authorities. During 1971 the Pakistani soldiers killed millions of
Bangladeshi people, raped so many women, and burned hundreds of thousands
houses. If questioned why they did so, they surely would claim that they were
only obeying orders of their authorities.

Another extreme is moral autonomy. That is as if to say, "I am in charge of
myself." As soon as my control system breaks down; I take the attitude of doing
only what I want to do or what I think I have to do. But this cannot be, because
a man or woman is not an island; he or she lives in a community. This sort of
behavior is an attempt to isolate one's personal conscience from anything outside
the individual person. To him or her the only source of moral values is his or her
feelings and desires. The discoveries, experience, wisdom of others and of the
community are ignored.

Here we present an example. College student Sudip gave up is studies before
completing his course. When his friends asked him why, he said he was just fed
up. He took to drugs and became a total burden on his family, who had to bail
him out of jail several times. Both these attitudes noted above lead to a faulty
formation of one's conscience.

Growing towards Maturity

To grow towards maturity is a life-long journey. Through personal and
communitarian reflection on our present experience we come to a deeper
understanding of our own position with regard to the values we hold. We come
to realize that we belong to a society, the thought patterns of which we have been
following since our childhood. Today the world as a whole and the society we
belong to are neither stable nor static. They undergo radical changes, and new
problems present themselves. We need to awaken our conscience to face these ,
new challenges and problems in this changing world. s

The silent voice of conscience 117
Growth is a Combined Work of Individuals and Society
An individual and society are closely connected. Developing our conscience
according the values we hold and in relationship with the society in which we
live, in that manner we can grow towards maturity. Since man and society are in
continual growth it is necessary to re-assess our values. Very often we are
guided by the values of the society or group we live in. If we live only by own
conscience then we disregard our society; on the other hand; if we just follow the
conscience our society, we have nothing of our own. Therefore, one has to
discern the good values of the society and accept them as his or her own. For
example, there are many good things and bad things in media and internet. An
individual has to choose which values are good for his/her personal growth and
maturity. Only then a person can lead his/her life to the right path.
AIDS, Smoking and Drug-Addiction
Our values are like rail lines. As rail lines help the driver to guide the train in the
right direction, in the same way our good values lead us to the right path of our
life. But the one who does not have good values in life easily gets lost by evil.
This type of person can be spoiled by a "friend" and can get addicted by any bad
habit. That "friend" might also may have HIV, and can easily become a source
of transferring it to others. Therefore, it is necessary for young people to be
aware of this and to have some understanding of HIV and AIDS, and of smoking
and drug—addiction and their bad and alarming effects in our life. We can avoid
those bad things in our life when we are aware of them.
Dangerous AIDS and HIV
Today AIDS is known as a very dangerous disease which kills many lives. It is
a cause of so much panic and epidemic. Its widespread presence, especially in
Africa, causes great concern for WHO (The World Health Organization) and for
the whole world. In Bangladesh too, the number of AIDS and HIV victims are
alarmingly increasing.
AIDS and HIV come from few English terms taking the first letter of these
words:

co AIDS= Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome

S HIV= Human Immunodeficency Virus

118 Christian Religion and Moral Education
AIDS and HIV are mentioned side by side. HIV so readily infects a person, but
it does not display symptoms, which means the person is not aware that he or she
has gotten the virus. And with any careless act it will easily be given to another
person. But HIV also can very easily develop into AIDS. A person who gets
AIDS loses the resistant power to fight against even the simplest of infections,
and remains in a very precarious situation just trying to maintain his or her
health and life.
Social Attitude Towards the AIDS
Due to ignorance and lack of proper knowledge about AIDS, many people are
falsely condemned for having contacted that infection. The reason for that unjust
judgment is that a major source of the transmission of HIV is sexual relations or
sharing of needles in the use of narcotics. So many look at AIDS victims with
fear and hatred. From the religious and moral point of view AIDS is seen as a
mortal sin and collapse of moral values; AIDS victims are considered as
‘sinners.’ As a result, an AIDS victim becomes an object of hatred, is abandoned
by the society and cannot live a normal life any more. Though living, he or she
is dead, has no honor, no dignity, no welcome to attend a public ceremony such
as a wedding or any other social celebration.
How to Face AIDS and HIV
Today the medical experts and religious leaders are strongly proposing a method
to face AIDS. They propose ABC method as the best force to face AIDS and
HIV:
A= Abstain/Avoid: For unmarried youth: to abstain or avoid sex without mar
riage.
For married people: to avoid sex with anybody other that the life-partner.
B= Be faithful: For unmarried youth: to be faithful to sanctity and holiness of
life.
For married people: to be faithful to the life-partner.
C= Change of behavior: to change bad habits to live a holy life that leads to
Christian freedom.
In Preventing AIDS we have to remember that only the physical relationship
does not spread this disese. AIDS can be spread if anybody uses the used
syringe, takes blood from the AIDS patient, being born of AIDS affected
mother, breast feeding on AIDS affected mothers, transplanting the limbs of S
AIDS patient also spread the disease. So we must be cautious about it. s

The silent voice of conscience 119
Life spoiled by Drug-addiction
My son has destroyed our family", said Bilash's mother as she was crying. While
I wanted to know what happened to her she said in reply: "My son was a very
good boy from childhood. There was no complaint against him, we felt so proud
of him. We had many dreams. But now all our dreams are gone; for last two
years we have been suffering badly because of him. He got addicted to drugs
with some of his friends. He has taken money from me many times telling me
lies. His father was angry with me for this. I used to believe my son, as I love
him very much. I discovered many things were getting lost from my house: a
watch, cell phone, money, rice, and what not."
Small Beginning of Drug-addiction
One day Suman came to the field with his friends. They went to the comer of the
field, one of them brought out cigarettes and all began to smoke. Suman's friends
gave him one and he started to smoke. Gradually he was feeling very relaxed, he
liked the feeling. Thus he became addicted to heroin. Consequently, what
happened with him was what was sure to happen: Suman stopped his studies;
things were getting lost from his house, and it became his habit to tell lies. The
villagers began to hate him. Finally he was taken away for treatment at a Healing
Centre.
Consequences of Drug-addiction
Today there are hundreds of thousands youth, children, adults are spoiling life
by drug-addiction. We can see the following consequences of drug-addiction

1. habit of telling lies

2. stealing

3. disobedience and misbehavior with parents and others

4. absence in family prayer and Sunday Masses

5. moral degradation
Say "NO" to Drugs
Today many parents, like the parents of Bilash and Suman, are crying with tears

w for their beloved sons or daughters. All the parents want happy and beautiful
Ss lives for their children. It is their desire and prayer that their children will be

120 Christian Religion and Moral Education
established in life, and will bring a good name and honor for their families. Like
their parents, all the youth have to see the same dream and to live life
accordingly. Every youth should take an oath to make life beautiful, to say "NO!
No drugs at all." Let this be their vow.
Gospel Values in Our Life
The Gospel values are the criteria and model for every Christian. Jesus Himself
taught these values and commanded His disciples to teach them to others: "Go,
then, to all nations everywhere and make them my disciples: baptize them in the
name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and teach them to obey
everything I have commanded you" (Matt 28:19-20).
The Gospel values are the guiding force and foundation of our good moral life
and beautiful life. Therefore, every Christian has to read the Gospels, reflect on
them and live life accordingly. Jesus wants us to make His values of life as our
own and to live our lives according to these values. Only His values of life will
lead us to the truth and salvation. Jesus said: "I am the way; I am the truth; Iam
the life" (John 14:6).
Prayer
We have to pray to God every day for a right and sound conscience. With similar
words of king Solomon we can pray:
Loving Lord, grant me wisdom that I may know clearly the difference between
good and bad, and lead my life to the right path every day.
=
8

The silent voice of conscience 121
Exercise

Multiple Choice Questions
1. Our conscience is called

a. our core of heart b. our perseverance

c. our hidden talent d. our integrity
2. A person of too much freedom

a. makes no sacrifice b. is broken easily

c. seldom cares for others' opinion _d. criticizes others
Read the following Paragraph and answer the questions nos. 3 and 4.
Romesh is a pious man but had no job for many days. He does not pray each day
with his wife and children. He does not have a job. Being jobless his mind is not
in peace. He returns home late every night. Because of his neglect for the family,
his wife and children no longer love him. Finally, he changed his behavior. One
day he got a good job.
1. What forced Romesh to change his life?

a. Poverty b. Conscience

c. Feelings d. Emotions
2. What would have happened if Romesh had not changed his life?

a. Degradation of values

b. Losing integrity

c. Increase of social accountability
Which one is correct?

a.i b. ii

c.i& ii d. i & iii
Creative Questions
Scene -1
Family of Abraham and Teresa. Their family is a true Christian family. They
have a good relationship with the villagers. They go to Church on Sundays and
every evening. They give good education to their children. They help the poor
people of their village.
Forma-16, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

122 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Scene -2
Bidhan and Promilla had a love marriage. Yet after few days they started
fighting. Many times they fought over small things. Consequently, they did not
have peace, they doubt each other. Bidhan beats his wife due to the
misunderstanding between them.

a. What is relation of their life with values?

b. Why do human beings need values in life?

c. What are the values that led Abraham and Teresa to live a happy life ?

Explain
d. Do you see any harmony between the minds of Bidhan and his wife ? give
your opmions.
2. Payel was nice boy from his childhood. His parents were proud of him. When
he was a student of class nine, his parents observed that Payel made company
with bad friends and he made a bad result in school too. He returns home late at
night, sometimes being drunk. His parents tried very hard to bring him back to a
good life but totally failed. Finally, he became a drug-addict; he was infected by
a complicated disease and thus his life was spoiled.
a. How is AIDS known today?
b. Why is an AIDS-victim hated by society?
c. How can Payel correct his life?
d. What steps can Payel take to come back to good life?
Short Answer Questions
1. What do you understand by value?
2. What do you understand by the internal source of conscience?
3. How can you form conscience?
4. What is AIDS?
5. Why should you say "NO" to drug-addiction? co
S
N

Chapter Twelve
SEVERE PAIN OF THE HEART
There is a saying, "Life is not a bed the roses". Besides their joyous moments in
life, all will have to face hard challenges, afflictions and suffering. In our world
we have day and night, light and darkness. So too there exist in our lives
happiness and sorrow, joy and suffering. Beginning with Adam and Eve, in the
lives recorded in history of the great men and women such as the prophets,
founders of religion, and the saints, we see there is no man or woman who did
not experience suffering, sorrows, pain, anxiety or conflict. They all accepted
suffering and endured it as part of their human experience, and as an obstacle to
overcome in their effort to do something great for others.
At the end of this chapter we will be able to:
e describe various kinds of pain or suffering
e have a positive attitude regarding pain and suffering
e describe the teaching of the Holy Bible on pain and suffering
e have a positive attitude regarding pain and suffering
e be ready to bear pain and suffering
Kinds of Pain
Different kinds of pain in human life can be listed as follows:
a. Physical pain: Suffering from diseases, long time illness, tiredness,
malnutrition, travel, hard work, death agony.
b. Mental Suffering: Mental and physical pains have some similarity. Often
mental suffering is more painful than the physical pain. Feelings of anxiety,
frustration, hopelessness, loneliness, rejection, misunderstanding, negative and
destructive criticism, are some causes of mental pain.
c. Pain of Heart: Lack of Joy, tranquility, acceptance or friendship, being
unable to tell to another one's inner suffering, all these create pain of the heart.
The suffering of the poor is usually due to their poverty and inability to provide
basic needs for themselves and their families, while the rich suffer from tension
% and anxiety from managing their wealth, and from unfulfilled expectation.
S
N

124 Christian Religion and Moral Education
d. Pain or anxiety for our World: Conflict, disasters and blatant
mismanagement in the society, country and world create mental suffering. This
includes such things as dire poverty, unemployment, epidemics, war,
earthquakes, famine, economic greed and manipulation and terrorism. All these
conflicts and crises cause mental suffering and anxiety for themselves and for
all humanity.
The following story presents one person's pain.
Story
I am the only son of my fairly wealthy parents. Never did I feel any need for
clothes, food, money. Whatever I needed or wanted they supplied for me. Ours
was a good Christian family, but I did not like to practice religion, to go church
and pray. I used to try to forget God, to not believe in Him, even to detest Him.
I thought that since I had everything I needed, why should I need God? But as
much as I tried to forget Him, it seemed to me that God still called me and
sought a place in my heart. I can't explain clearly, but I am suffering extremely
from mental and spiritual pain. Oh! What a suffering it is! Is there any kind of
treatment that shall free me from this pain?

Task: 1. From what kind of pain is the young man suffering: physical, mental,

spiritual or worldly?
Task: 2. Can you describe a true story of a person who suffers a lot?
Task: 3. When you see people are suffering, what kind of feelings do you feel?
Discuss these three questions in your group.

Are pain and suffering essential?
For hundreds and thousand years doctors and scientists have been trying to
reduce suffering and pain of human life. In many fields, science has made such
extraordinary progress, sending a person to the moon, a vehicle to Mars,
bringing knowledge from all over the world into a little hand-held computer. It
seems that there are almost no limits to what can be done. In medical science
there is progress of reducing pain, but not to our full satisfaction, and with side
effects. Despite such progress of science, pain and suffering for human beings
continues, people live longer and spend many more years of disability and &
loneliness. Pain, suffering, anxiety continue in human life. 8

Severe pain of the heart 125
The senseless sufferings of innocent people throughout the world are such a
shame and disgrace. Refugees spend their lives fleeing from place to place,
hungry children cry for food and warmth, children and women are captured and
sold into slavery, towns and cities are devastated by war, completely innocent
people are purposely killed by terrorists. Human society has so progressed that it
can put a vehicle on Mars, but it has not succeeded in coping with the matters
that are most important to all, to bring peace, harmony and justice to all. Seeing
all this suffering, some raise the question of how the merciful God, the loving
Father, can allow all this. This is not a new question. Centuries ago in the Old
Testament book of Job dealt with the same question. Job suffered immensely
from all kinds of physical and mental afflictions or pains. His friends questioned:
why do the just and innocent people suffer? But God did not give a simple and
consoling answer to him. What is most important is that Job remained faithful to
God, always faithful, he always praised God. The suffering of human life is
mysterious. It can be said for certain that people who are believers or atheist,
religious or not religious, all will experience sorrow, suffering, and agony.
People try to avoid it through medicines, pleasurable activities, counseling, but
there is no complete cure.
So we cannot give a satisfactory answer to the question of a reason for the
existence of suffering. We can only point out causes of the suffering, the acts or
events that bring the suffering, But to try to give reasons why that should happen
is not within our capability to know. People tend to try to explain everything
from the point of view of their own experience,. But God's purpose and methods
are not always the same as ours. In regard to suffering, we accept that it exists,
try to do what we can to decrease it, then try to find positive value in it for
ourselves.
Causes of pain or suffering
Here is a list of some of the causes of suffering. the acts or events from
which suffering springs up.
1. Laws of nature: People become old, they lose strength and alertness, and
« finally die. This is the way we have been created. Can you imagine it being any
S other way, that people would continue to carry on in full strength and never die?

126 Christian Religion and Moral Education
God offers us the wonderful gift of immortal life, but not our bodies while on we
are on this earth. Though human beings have overcome many sufferings because
of the amazing discoveries of medical science, many very painful things have
not been conquered. Man tries to control nature, but has had little success.
Tremendous destruction and suffering results from earthquakes, cyclones, floods
and famine. people have to face many challenges and sufferings.
2. Human created suffering: Many sufferings and pains in human life are created
by the activity of people: selfishness, neglect, indifference, ignorance, war,
economic manipulation, road accidents, murder, adultery, trade in narcotics,
food adulteration. The environment is being destroyed due to over consumption
and lack of proper regulation, the forests are being depleted, deserts expanding,
oceans rising, atmosphere becoming polluted, ozone layer depleted, plant and
animal species wiped out, and even many races of people disappearing along
with their unique languages and cultures.

please share it with your partner,.
The positive side of pain or suffering
Jony is a handicapped boy. Feeling helpless and disappointed, he considered
committing suicide. Fortunately he changed his attitude and turned to God. At
first he prayed to God for a cure. But he was not healed, and remained
disappointed.
Many of his friends prayed that he regain normal life. They also gave good
advice to Jony, and suggested that he thank God for all the good qualities he had.
After a long time of disappointment, Jony thanked and praised God for his good
qualities. He found that God has a nice plan regarding him. Jony learned how to
write and draw pictures by mouth instead of with his hands. He saw that he was
able to make wonderful pictures, Greetings Cards, Christmas Cards etc. Now
they are displayed in shops for selling. He also noticed that on the back side of
the pictures are put the trademark "Jony-PTL" that means "Praise The Lord".
We see the physical disability that was very painful for Jony has now becomea ,,
source of joy and praising the Lord. s

Severe pain of the heart 127
In the perspective of Jony's life, consider how we can express a positive attitude
toward our sufferings. We can learn it from St. Peter. He said, "Beloved, do not
be surprised at the fiery ordeal that is taking place among you to test you, as
though something strange were happening to you. But rejoice insofar as you are
sharing Christ's sufferings, so that you may also be glad and shout for joy when
his glory is revealed. If you are reviled for the name of Christ, you are blessed,
because the Spirit of God is resting on you. But let none of you suffer as a
murderer, a thief, a criminal, or even as a mischief maker. Yet if any of you
suffers as a Christian, do not consider it a disgrace, but glorify God because you
bear His name. For the time has come for judgment to begin with the household
of God; if it begins with us, what will be the end for those who do not obey the
gospel of God? And "If it is hard for the righteous to be saved, what will become
of the ungodly and the sinners? Therefore, let those suffering in accordance with
God's will entrust themselves to a faithful Creator, while continuing to do good"
(I Peter 4: 12-19).

From these words of St. Peter, we have to keep three things in our mind:

1. To be delighted: we have to see ourselves as another Christ because through

Jesus, he Son of God, we have become children of God. To remain as the

children of God we are suffering along with Jesus. Now we can understand why

the disciples of Jesus would feel pleased while they were persecuted because of

Jesus. Bearing the persecutions and sufferings in their lives, they would

participate in the suffering of Jesus.

2. Glory comes after suffering: As gold is tested by fire, like we are refined

through our sufferings or pains. These sufferings make us fit as the children of

God, and through sufferings we can participate in the glory of Christ our Lord.

That's why the poet says: why are you, seeing thorns, afraid of collecting lotus?

3. Keep in mind your self-identity: God Himself lives in us. St. Paul says, "Our

body is the temple of the Holy Spirit". So, when we suffer, God lives in us and

sees our sufferings. That's why there is no need to worry for our sufferings.

4. Surrender to God: When we are able to feel that God Himself lives in us, we
co don't depend on ourselves but rely on and trust in God. Relying on God we can
S
N

128 Christian Religion and Moral Education
say that He will supply strength and inspire us for doing good works gradually.
Teaching of the Holy Bible on Sufferings

We notice that in the Holy Bible suffering is considered differently in the
Old Testament and in the New Testament.

A. Suffering in the Old Testament

Suffering is seen in a very negative way in the Old Testament, it is considered as
a curse and disgrace. If someone would suffer, it would be regarded as the result
of his or her sin. When Peter asked Jesus, "Lord, for whose sin is the man
suffering?" he was expressing the Old Testament attitude toward suffering.
Jesus answered him, "Not for any sin, but for the glorification of the God this
man is suffering."

Though people show their sympathy towards a suffering man, suffering was
regarded as bad thing (sin). The writer of the Psalms wrote that after considering
suffering of the world, "A wicked person would say, 'There is no God in the
universe" (Ps.10:14). On the other hand some of them used to think that even
God doesn't know the reason of their sufferings (Ps. 73: 11)

When Job was suffering severely, his wife suggested to him "You curse your
God" (Job 2:9). The same attitude was expressed by Job's friends who
represented the view point of the Old Testament regarding suffering on that
period. The people of the Old Testament looked for reasons behind each
suffering. They believed either that there is natural power, or that the evil things
are in the world to cause suffering.

B. Suffering in the New Testament

Jesus himself assumes our pains and agonies, and shows a very different attitude
of looking toward sufferings. Being God He became flesh and accepts all kinds
of human limitations except sin. Thus St. Paul says, "Though He was in the form
of God, He didn't regard equality with God as something to be exploited, but
emptied himself, taking the form of a slave, being born in human likeness. And
being found in human form, he humbled himself and became obedient to the
point of death- even death on a cross" (Philippians 2:7-8). As a man like us Jesus ~
had dreams and desires, expectations that he wanted to fulfill. Like us, He was Ss

Severe pain of the heart 129
hungry, thirsty, tired, suffered failure and faced challenges and hostility. He
experienced not only his own sufferings, he also was sympathetic to the
sufferings of others. Whenever Jesus saw someone in pain or distress, he was
filled with love and mercy and would cure or console the person.

Jesus' victory on pain and suffering

During his ministry Jesus preached about the kingdom of God, healed various
kinds of sick people, gave life to the dead and performed many other miracles.
Above all, by his rising from the dead he proved that he is the Son of God whom
God the Father sent into this persons who were sufferings reasons. He told to his
disciples that in His Holy Name they can perform all kinds of healing. The same
power of Jesus is present in the Holy Church and in her sacramental activities.
Jesus Blessed the Suffering One: It is true that Jesus does not remove our
sufferings or death, but He gives us the courage and strength to face them. He
says, "Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted" (Mt. 5:4). Jesus
does not remove the tears of the mournful one, but he wipes them away while
walking with him in his daily life (L 7: 14). It is a joyful sign that God is with the
mournful or suffering one that we see in the book of Revelation, "He will wipe
every tear from their eyes" (Revelation 21:4).

Sorrows and suffering can be a blessing for us, since they prepare us for the great
glory of the kingdom of God.

Forma-17, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

130 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Which one is mental suffering among the followings?
a. Absence of tranquility b. Tiredness
c. Frustration d. Unemployment
2. Who was resurrected?
a. Laser b. Virgin Mary
c. Joseph d. Jesus
Read the following Paragraph and answer the questions nos. 3 and 4.
Badal is a rich man. He has sufficient money and wealth. Yet he cheats others
and gains money in illegal ways. Doing this he possesses more than one home,
car and plenty of wealth. Yet he wishes to be more fashionable, rich and to spend
a more luxurious life. He is totally unable to accept any kind of harms and
sufferings.
3. What kind of suffering is in Badal?
a. Man created b. God created
c. Created by the Nature d. miraculous
4. The cause of Badal’s suffering:
i. Excessive demand
ii. Tlusion for wealth
iii. Attitude of sacrifice
Which one is correct?
a.i& ii b ii & iii
c. i & iii di, ii & iii
Creative Questions
1. George is a devoted faithful person. He has been physically, mentally and
spiritually very strong.. Since he is sincere in his responsibility, he tries to be
friendly with all, as well as to avoid all kinds of conflict. He usually does not get,
sick. But he learned that he had become diabetic. He knows that this weakening S$

Severe pain of the heart 131
disease will remain with him till his death. He accepted that discouraging news
with faith in God, trusting in God and grateful for all his blessings, he accepts
this with good attitude. He knows that through sufferings God express His love
towards mankind.

a. As a man who has suffer most among human beings?

b. Why is suffering essential for all? Explain your answer.

c. Explain George’s attitude toward sorrows and sufferings.

d. The attitude of George is the mirror image of Peter’s lesson. Explain this..
2. Mr. Raju is an industrialist. He appoints some abnormal employee to work
along with the normal employees at his factory. The gatekeeper, who was
appointed by Mr. Raju, was physically very weak. Most of the time he used to
sleep sitting in front of the gate. Since he could not do his duty properly, he had
to digest his colleagues rebuke. The telephone operator remains silent most of
the time; he seems to be worried of something. If people ask him some thing, he
replies to them with very few words. Since he is not attentive in his duty, others
don't get sufficient co-operation

a. How the suffering is seen in the Old Testament?
b. Why have the saints have born their sufferings?
c. What kinds of pain is in the gatekeeper. Explain this.
d. ‘The teaching of Jesus about suffering can change the attitude of the
telephone operator’. Evaluate this.
Short Answer Questions
1. What do you about worldly sufferings?
2. Why is suffering essential in human life?
3, What is a natural catastrophe?
4. What was the point of view of the New Testament upon suffering?
5. Why can sorrow and suffering be a blessing for us?
2}
S

Chapter Thirteen
VIOLENCE AND PEACE
When we look at the world today, almost everywhere their exists war, violence,
enmity and riots. It appears that no group can tolerate any other group. People
become famous by leading revolts, many gain by deceiving others. It is almost
the same story for so many. The condition of our own country is not out of
danger. Every day we get news in the mass media of vengeful acts of killing,
burning, destroying and demolishing .. We learn of these violent acts and
become terrified, and deeply saddened on behalf of the innocent victims.
Considering all this we feel insecure. We want to bring such situations to an end.
At the end of this chapter we will be able to-
e describe different kinds of violence
e describe harmful consequences of violence
e describe the notion of violence
e avoid violence
e play an important role to establish peace
Violence
Task: Some contemporary pictures of violence would be presented. They
should be analyzed by the group, then they can answer the following
questions.
a. What do you see in the pictures?
b. What is your feeling after looking at them?
c. Can violence bring solutions to all or any problems?
d. Who should do what in this context?
What is Violence
Violence is extremely dangerous and destructive .. Modem society and nations
are supposed to be governed by laws, logic, consent, compromise, by many forms
of action in order to attain agreement or consent. But violence is directly opposed
to such procedures, against efforts to progress humanly and with dignity and
justice .. In a certain way it might be considered as a distorted form of love, of
self-love or passion. In general, that which is not gained by dignified and =
civilized means is done illegally by force, that is violence. R

Violence and peace 133
Violence is that action taken when life and property is damaged or injured by
force, strength, and power. Violence is a brutal action in which there is
inhumanity, immorality, hatred, impunity, hypocrisy, deception, anything in order
to gain ones own goals without regard for the rights or claims of the other. In
short, violence is the death of human interaction, and of humanity itself.
To destroy, and even to enjoy doing this, is very much a part of the human
experience. When a person or party feels certain that it has a claim to something,
that it has been unjustly offended or oppressed and decides to retaliate, that
person or group might resort to the action of suppression or oppression, in that it
resorts to violence .. As a result so many men and women become indulged with
immoral and illegal activities. When any family, society, nation or country is
corrupted with fighting or anarchy, the rights of people are subdued, the means to
protest are few, so people resort to force. Again, if there is lack of patience and
tolerance, that creates restlessness in our relationships with others. It can turn into
violence. Violence causes harm to the person, society at large and the nation. No
person, society, or country can ever desire violence.
From the religious point of view violence springs from a death of love. When
love in a person is dead or does not work, then an inhuman nature affects him or
her .. The person gives no priority to the beautiful creation of the Creator and His
other gifts; instead he portrays an inhuman image which is totally self-centered.
After all, because of the effects of an inhuman behavior entire societies can
become endangered.
Again, violence doesn't mean only bodily torture. Threatening, blackmailing,
refusal of rendering ones due or rights are also considered violence. Physical
torture and punishment deny ones human dignity. This causes us to suffer from
inferiority complex in various situations.
[Vioence [Causes ets
es
a
a
&

134 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Evil Consequences of violence
Everywhere in this world violence exists. Even those who carry out violence
know that no one could ever bring progress into this world through violence.
Rather, through violence, mental, physical and spiritual harm results. This
becomes almost like a contagious disease. If it starts in any family, society and
nation, very soon they are thrown into turmoil. The bonds that hold together that
society; cooperation, participation, loyalty, will not continue in an atmosphere
where there is threat of violence. Mistrust and hatred can destroy the society. If
we consider in detail the evil consequences of violence in a society, this will help
us to comprehend the endangering consequences.
documentaries. By doing this we would explain various evil
consequences of violence.
Evil Effects of Violence on a Family
The family is the basic unit of the society. Psychologists have determined that
during the first six years a child gains three fourths of his or her character
formation. The broader society is guided by laws and rules, but the most
effective element for a proper functioning society is the character and
responsibility of its members or citizens. It is hard to overestimate the
importance of responsible, harmonious, holy family life. But if there is violence
in the family, misbehavior mistrust, negligence, what effect does this have on the
character formation of the children? The best means of guidance for the young
maturing youth in a family is the living example of a harmonious and happy
relationship of the parents and their love and concern for one another and for the
children. The human journey begins in the family. A family suffers immense
harm when it is afflicted by violence .. Considering all this, the devastating
effect when violence enters is obvious.
Evil Effects of Violence on Society
All those harmful consequences of the presence of violence in the family will
have similar effects when they show up in the broader level of society. There is <
the same need for cooperation, sharing of responsibilities, and most of all mutual “%

Violence and peace 135
trust and harmonious relations. But if selfishness enters, which leads to
demands, cheating, then this can also lead to violence and destruction or
devastation. The effect of this on the society is the end of social progress and
development.
Evil Effects of Violence on State
The harmful effects of violence in family and society are felt also by the state.
When violence spreads in the state, rules and regulations of the state are
weakened; economic growth is hindered. Assets worth crores and crores are
damaged by bombing strikes, kidnapping, killing, burning, throwing of acid,
rape .. It destroys the security and peace.
Violence and Love
The opposite of violence is non-violence. More broadly stated that means love.
If we follow non-violence we love even our enemy. Then we treat everyone
equally.
Friends and enemies are treated equally. This is what Jesus commanded when He
told us to love our enemies. Jesus does not merely command it, but he himself
also practiced it. At the garden of Gethsemane when the soldiers came to arrest
Jesus with swords, then Peter with his knife cut off the ear of a soldier. Then
Jesus said those who use swords will die by them. There is a saying, violence
gives birth to violence. This is why Jesus spoke of love, because the greatest gift
of all gifts is love. This love makes man courageous and enthusiastic. This love
can win over all. Only love can stop violence and it can save the family, society
and the country from the evil effects of violence.
Role of leaders in establishing peace
All levels of people in the society desire peace. So in order to live a peaceful life
we make many kinds of effort. Important powers and responsibilities are given
to leaders and teachers in the society. The teacher must educate students.
Soldiers and police are given responsibility to protect the country. Some people
die for peace. Pope John Paul II strongly called everyone to stop the violence. He
co requested all people of the nation to stand against violence, with the theme of the
® world peace day "Not Violence, We want peace".

136 Christian Religion and Moral Education
What is Peace?

Peace is a kind of atmosphere in which unity prevails, in which we are free from
feelings of fear, tension, enmity, anger, of any violence or compulsion. It is such
a situation where there is unity, serenity, freedom to think and act without
disruption or compulsion. It is an atmosphere which is very conducive to human
development.. Jesus is named the Prince of Peace, since He has come to offer
peace to mankind. After his resurrection He appeared to His apostles, and His
first words to them were, "Peace Be with you".

Role of Students in Establishing Peace

The role of the students is very important in establishing peace in our society.
The life of a student is a preparation for future involvement in building the
society. At this level a student does much to decide his future, since the activity
and attitudes he experiences will form him for future involvement. But students
face challenges and temptations that can lead them astray, even toward
becoming demanding, irresponsible and violent. This will lead to frustration and
loss of peace of mind. Factors which play the fundamental role in establishing
peace are: personal values, social values, moral values and spiritual values.. So,
student must gain knowledge, competence, motivation and values. This will lead
to building a peaceful society and country. Besides gaining human values, the
following factors are also important in establishing peace.

To be United in Protesting Corruption

Almost everywhere in this world corruption is prevalent. Corruption is a major
obstacle to progress and peace of this country. Students must stand against
corruption, in order to build strong attitudes and begin effective activity to resist
corruption. Students are the future of the nation. Therefore, by meetings,
seminars, protests, we will be able to play a positive role to prevent corruption.
Avoiding intoxicating Drugs

Many students spoil their lives and future by taking drugs. This is the time for
formation and growth, to understand properly good and evil so as to take proper
decisions for life, Students must say "No to any kind" of intoxication and drugs,
and to strongly encourage others in the same attitude. 8

Violence and peace 137
Optimistic World View

Student life is the time to grow and blossom. There is need for a positive attitude
in everything. Basically, instead of being critical about most things and
uncooperative, they should judge people and movements favorably, try to
determine what is good, and follow such leadership with enthusiasm.
Creativity

During Student years one can even do something considered impossible and
discover something new. Therefore, this is the best time to express ones
creativity. The human mind is limitless in its scope. May our students make use
of such powers to contribute from their own abilities and initiative.
Punctuality

Punctuality is also very important. During the time of student life if students
have the sense of punctuality they will be able to gain much more from the
opportunities given. A punctual person lives an orderly life, and is a blessing and
example to others

Self Confidence

Trust in your own abilities. Insofar as one is confident in his/herself, he or she
can more readily lead others. So develop your self confidence in order to get the
most out of your opportunities.

Justice

By learning and practicing justice, students prepare themselves to stand for
justice in all aspects of life. Justice and peace go hand in hand. There can be no
peace where there is injustice or violence.

Friendship

Friendship is a loving relationship between persons. It depends on mutual love
and respect. Friendship unites people; this is a very helpful means to establish
Forma-18, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

138 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Optimistic World View
Student life is the time to grow and blossom. There is need for a positive attitude
in everything. Basically, instead of being critical about most things and
uncooperative, they should judge people and movements favorably, try to
determine what is good, and follow such leadership with enthusiasm.
Creativity
During Student years one can even do something considered impossible and
discover something new. Therefore, this is the best time to express ones
creativity. The human mind is limitless in its scope. May our students make use
of such powers to contribute from their own abilities and initiative.
Punctuality
Punctuality is also very important. During the time of student life if students
have the sense of punctuality they will be able to gain much more from the
opportunities given. A punctual person lives an orderly life, and is a blessing and
example to others
Self Confidence
Trust in your own abilities. Insofar as one is confident in his/herself, he or she
can more readily lead others. So develop your self confidence in order to get the
most out of your opportunities.
Justice
By learning and practicing justice, students prepare themselves to stand for
justice in all aspects of life. Justice and peace go hand in hand. There can be no
peace where there is injustice or violence.
Friendship
Friendship is a loving relationship between persons. It depends on mutual love
and respect. Friendship unites people; this is a very helpful means to establish
peace.
Lo)
ES

Violence and peace 139
All the points we discussed above are the virtues which are the means of
establishing peace. The students can play an important role to bring peace by
practicing all those means of establishing peace mentioned above. Peace is a
criterion for happiness. And our role is very important in bringing peace.
Therefore it is the responsibility of each and every one of us to stand for peace.
Task: Enlist all that you can do for bringing peace into your family, village,
school etc.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Which is the opposite of violence?
a. Praise b. Love
c. Peace d. Justice
2. What role can the students play in bringing peace?
a. Through games b. Through reading books
c. Through justice d. Through meetings and demonstrations
See the picture below and answer the questions Nos 3 and 4.
Be a | C_
° Cree NINA tai he asilllend pie Tinos CME
£5 Fe Se f
ia rit }46@; 4s 6a eer
8 SS

140 Christian Religion and Moral Education
What does the picture reveal?
a. Violence b. Tolerance
c. Non-violence d. Teaching instruction
Through the action of the picture:
i. Human values will be depreciated ii Corruption will increase
iii. Participation will increase
Which one is correct?
a.i b. ii
c.i& ii d. ii & iii
Creative Questions
1.
CD
oo
ES

Violence and peace 141
a. What is peace?
b. What does it mean by Justice? Explain.
c. What does provoking “?” sign signify for? Explain.
d. Love is only Means to come out of from provoking information- Evaluate it.
2. Annadpur High School is a model for all other schools. It is run by the well
organized authority of the head master. Students have good reputations. Apart
from this the school has a beautiful garden which creates a nice atmosphere. The
students help one another, and they also help the poor. The teachers are also
happy with the performance of the students. Everyone in the school lives as one
family.
a. What is violence from a religious view?
b. What does it mean by Justice? Explain.
c. What did you inspired by the above mentioned school? Explain.
d. What role can the students play to make the same atmosphere as the above
mentioned school? Explain it in connection with the text.

Short answer questions
1. What do you understand by violence? Explain.
2. What is peace?
3. Write the roles of the students in establishing peace.
4. How can we overcome violence through love?
5. What is creativity? Explain.

<

§

Chapter Fourteen
WE WANT A CHANGED WORLD
Looking at the reality of the present world it is not difficult to imagine that our
society is full of unsocial activities. It seems man's conscience is no more free; it
has become subjugated. His conscience does not prohibit him from doing
injustices. Eating and drinking have become greater to him than religious
practices. Man has become more attracted to the materialistic world than to
spirituality. As a result anarchy, injustice and disorder are spreading everywhere.
We want to change this world and construct a new one. If we the students
become changed, only then will the world also be changed.
At the end of this chapter we will be able to:
e describe the unwanted unjust picture of the society.
e explain the bad results of the violent movement employed to change society.
e explain Christ’s way that is employed in order to change society.
e avoid violence, accept Christ’s way to bring change in our society.
A Portrait of Social Injustice
There was a prominent businessman called Tilak. One morning as usual he went
walking. There was a dustbin near a five-star hotel. A woman wearing a tom and
patched sari, carrying a two-year old baby on her lap, collected some
thrown-away food from the dustbin and ate, sitting by that place. A dog also
came and started eating the left-over food in the same dustbin. Seeing this scene
early in the morning Tilak's conscience was moved.
Task: Make small groups of five. Discuss the above-mentioned incident in
your group:
eHow did you feel after reading the incident?
eWho is responsible for this?
eHow can you describe the human and emotional issues of this incident?
eFrom your experience you may share some more incidents of this kind with
other members of the group. After listening to the stories of each friend you may
analyze them. According to you what can be the root causes of these inhuman and
unjust situations? After analyzing the pictures of the society write down some
points in a poster and set it in a place so that all others can read them. S

We want a changed world 143
The portrait of the society is dreadful. Poverty, over-population, different kinds
of fear, superstitions, drug addiction, hypocrisy, hatred, theft, robbery,
selfishness~all these are spread all over the country.
Rabindranath Tagore, in his poem "Dui Bigha Jami," has shown how a king has
taken away a piece of land from one of his poor farmers. The king did not think
of the poor farmer's life. Two lines of Tagore's poem go like this:
In this world he wants more and more who already has plenty, The hand of the
king steals all the poor people's property.
In this worldly pleasure-seeking world man is constantly going after worldly
pleasures. He who already has plenty, wants more. An unquenched thirst always
lures him to get more and more. And so a small piece of poor farmers land could
not be protected from the king's greed. He needs even the last resort of the poor
farmer.
Our country has sufficient wealth for all, but mal-distribution is the problem.
More than almost 80% of the people are living beyond the poverty line. They are
occupying only 10% of the wealth. On the other hand 10% people are occupying
more than 80% of the wealth. Some people are enjoying a huge amount of
wealth and on the other hand many are begging after losing their last penny. The
rich are becoming richer and on the other hand the poor are becoming poorer.
Thus the oppression of the mighty over the weak is constantly going on. The rich
think they are mighty everywhere-they have all the power and wealth. They live
a luxurious life and ignore the poor. Gradually, poverty is becoming grave.
Today man is running after a dream of becoming like a king. With unquenched
desire, all are running after their unknown destinations. Because of this desire he
is forgetting his own brothers and sisters, relatives and neighbors. He is
becoming self-centered and selfish. Constantly he is seeking his own happiness
and prosperity. He does not hesitate to follow unjust and dishonest means. As a
result we see mutual enmity, quarrelling, stealing, robbing, raping, killing, etc.
There is a discrepancy in the social structure. The structure allows some people
~ © enjoy all kinds of opportunities, and some others are deprived. Class
$ distinction, racism, color distinction, differences of religions-all these are

144 Christian Religion and Moral Education
creating disputes, which at times tum into war. An attitude of communalism is
taking away the democratic rights of the people. Corruption is spreading
everywhere in the society.
Theft, robbery, terrorism, militancy, war, imperialism and bomber attitude are
taking over the whole world. Women and children are unable to move on the
streets alone. Nobody is safe today. At any time a hijacking might take place and
they may lose their money, cell phone, hand bag and other valuables. Anyone
might be kidnapped and then be concealed forever. Some people are teasing
young girls and women.
The problem of succession of once property has become serious. The family
members are getting involved in court cases, even for a minor issue.
Professional killers are being hired to kill one's own brothers. Girls are being
burned with acid. Many are being raped, even in front of their husbands or
parents. Boy friends are cutting their girl friends to pieces. Housing is one of the
major problems today.
bad effects. Write them on a poster and hang it in a suitable place for all
to see.
Bad Effects of Violence
Once a Hindu man came to Mahatma Gandhi and told him that he was going to
hell. Gandhi enquired, why? The man said, after the British left India, a Muslim
had killed his son in the Hindu-Muslim war. Being angry he also killed a son of
that Muslim, hitting him. On hearing this, Gandhi said, now you go, look for a
Muslim boy that has lost his parents in the war; bring him to your house and
adopt him, raise him as a Muslim. The man was satisfied with the non-violent
advice of Gandhi and went home with peace in his mind.
In order to eradicate injustice, corruption, terrorism and to establish peace in the
society many people take various steps. Some people may try peacefully and
some others may use violence. In history there are many instances of this kind.
We might have heard or read about the French Revolution. It began in 1789. This S

We want a changed world 145
took place in order to stop unjust activities in France, to protect the poor from the
hands of the rich, to be free from religious rules and regulations, to get the
laborers' justified demand. Besides France, this kind of movement began in the
whole of Europe. There were many advantages of this, as there were many
disadvantages as well. Many people had to lose their valuable lives. This was
leading many nations toward a world war. There were two world wars, one after
another. We must have heard of the destruction that took place during the Second
World War in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. We know how two great cities were
destroyed by atom bombs and how many people came to be burnt alive.
In many nations and countries many revolutions and wars took place in order to
free people from their slavery, to diminish class distinction, quarrels between
traces, to stop the oppression of the powerful on the powerless and so on. Many
wars took place in the past between two countries or two nations or two
religions.
We still remember the wars that took place in China, Vietnam, Yugoslavia,
Africa, Libya, Egypt, Middle East, Afghanistan, Iran and Iraq. Revolutions took
place in South America and various countries in East Africa. Those revolutions
took place in order to eradicate poverty, fanaticism, blind faith and old-fashioned
politics and to gain human freedom. people lost their lives in those wars and
revolutions, much wealth and property was destroyed. It will not be possible to
compensate the damage that was done. The evil consequences of these wars are
much more than their positive effects. We know peace cannot be established
with violence.
Mahatma Gandhi is the bright example of non-violence in this subcontinent. He
freed India from the hand of the British by non-violence. Through his
non-violence he not only help to win independence but also conquered many
people'hearts. Although dead, he is still living.

Chapter 21 on Naboth’s Vineyard.
Forma-19, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

146 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Christ’s Path in a Changing Society
"You have heard that it was said, 'Love your friends, hate your enemies’. But
now I tell you: love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, so that
you may become the sons of your Father in heaven" (Mt 5:43). In the past Moses
told the people to love their friends and hate their enemies, perhaps to keep
crime suppressed. The reason is that in the society of that period much
oppression and many injustices used to take place.
We have got an idea of an unjust society through acting out the story of Naboth's
Vineyard. In those days, in order to from all these injustices, very hard rules
were imposed on the people. One such law was that if anyone did any harm to
someone else, then the harmed person could do the same amount of harm to his
enemy. For example, if during a quarrel, party A has damaged an eye of party B,
then the verdict will be that party B will come and damage an eye of party A. At
that time this law was imposed on the people so that before doing any harm to
another person people may think that the same amount of harm might be done to
him also. The law was never applied literally but a judge imposed a fine equal to
the damage. Even with the existence of such a law society could not be free from
crimes and injustices.
In the law of the past there was no mention of forgiveness and love. Because of
this, enmity increased and dispute between two parties increased and lasted for
ages. In this situation Jesus, our Saviour, came to this world. He did not abolish
or do away with the old laws, rather gave them fullness. First of all he called
people to change their mind saying: "This is the time of fulfillment; the kingdom
of God is at hand. Change your ways and believe the Good News" (Mark 1: 15).
Jesus did not begin the movement of change of heart all of a sudden. The reason
is that if anything gets started suddenly, it does not last. This gives rise to
different questions in people's minds about the revolutionary leader. Jesus was
not like that. He fully prepared himself for the movement. In order to prepare
himself he went to the desert 40 days before he began to preach publicly. In the
solitude on the mountain he prayed day and night alone. He prepared himself
through prayer, meditation, fasting, etc. He himself was not a sinner, yet he
received baptism from John the Baptizer. He manifested his chastity and
holiness to the public. Being God he humbled himself so that he can call others
to be humble.

=

&

We want a changed world 147
He went to the temple and read that particular part where it was written about
himself (Lk 4: 18-19). He has come to give new sight to the blind; to free the
oppressed. His words came true when the people heard it from the mouth of
Jesus. Thus he revealed himself to the people and then began his work of
salvation. He has come to save the poor, destitute, persecuted, neglected, hated,
and the unwanted.
Jesus challenged the laws which were excessive. He protested against the
immoral practices, persecutions, injustices of the society. He chased away the
businessmen from the temple. He reprimanded those who were engaged in
religious business. To his disciples he said that they are not supposed to fast as
long as the bridegroom is with them, i.e. they are called to experience peace and
salvation in the presence of Christ. He told them that his coming to this world is
for the salvation of mankind. Those who will believe in him will be saved and
will live for ever.
Jesus announced that the poor are blessed and the kingdom of God is theirs. He
has come to this world to show the way of the Kingdom of Heaven. It is the poor
who will walk in that path before everybody else. He said, "It is easier for a
camel to go through the eye of a needle than for the one who is rich to enter the
kingdom of heaven" (Mt 19:23). He also said, "Healthy people don't need a
doctor, but sick people do" (Mk 2: 17). He became the friend of the poor and on
the other hand he has brought closer those who were sick, crippled, possessed,
tax collectors+, and so on.
He went from place to place and preached the Kingdom of God. He went to the
houses of the poor and the sinners; he ate and drank with them. He considered
them as his friends .. He used to tell them: "There is no greater love than this, to
give one's life for his friends; and you are my friends if you do what I command
you. I shall not call you servants any more, because a servant does not know
what his master is about. Instead I call you friends, since I have made known to
you everything I learned from my Father" (Jn 15: 13-15). Jesus did not teach
these
lessons in words only, but he has shown them in his own life. He sacrificed his
life on the cross and thus he has proved his love for us.

=

&

148 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Jesus spoke about developing a relationship between the rich and the poor. At
the same time he wanted us to give value and importance to each human being.
His call to us: Love one another as I have loved you. He did not come to be
served, but to serve. He said that those who want to be great must be the servant
of all ( cf. Lk 22:26). If we want the respected seats in the front we must first be
seated in the last seat. Saying these words Jesus wanted to teach us that we do
not make ourselves great; that we give more importance to others than to
ourselves; that we do not think ourselves the best in everything, rather that we
give opportunity to others first, that we think of others and serve others, that we
make ourselves humble. Jesus was God. "Though being divine in nature, he did
not claim in fact equality with God, but emptied himself, taking on the nature of
a servant, made in human likeness, and in his appearance found as a man. He
humbled himself by being obedient to death, death on the cross" (Phil 2:6-8).
Jesus taught about our conscience and values, through which he formed a
movement of building a new world. His movement was much different from
others'. His teaching was capable of turning the whole world. His teaching
changed the society, it It is because his movement was a movement of truth,
beauty, forgiveness, service, love. He did not have to fight to make his
movement successful, rather he revealed the love of the Father for man and the
world; for this love he sacrificed his life. He showed us the way of self-sacrifice.
The Lord Jesus wanted that we follow his way. His way is of faith, love, charity,
poverty, friendship, humility, service, holiness and above all of self-sacrifice. He
said, he who will offer his life for the Kingdom of Heaven will receive it back a
hundredfold. He wants that we change not only our mind, but also our heart. For
this we need self-sacrifice, dialogue, reconciliation, unity and love. It is the duty
of all Christians to walk in the path of Christ. At the same time, as an honest and
brave soldier of Christ we should eradicate immorality and injustice and work to
build a peaceful society. Only then there will be a world of peace, beauty,
orderliness and happiness.

Task: 1. If possible show the movie “Jesus Christ Superstar”. By this the

students will see Jesus in the midst of the poor.
Task: 2. Make a list of your suggestion by which following christ's teachings
we can change the world. s
N

We want a changed world 149
Exercise

Multiple Choice Questions
1. With what word did Jesus address the poor?

a. Kind b. Poor

c. Afflicted d. Blessed
2. Why was Jesus born?

a. To do away with the old laws b. To change the old laws

c. To give fullness to the old laws d. To glorify God
Read the following Paragraph and answer the questions nos. 3 and 4.
An influential person of the society Mr. James always tries to develop his area.
He always takes care of the poor and goes to visit them. In the last pre Christmas
program he was asked to take food before all others. But he did not do that. First
he saw if others got food sufficiently. After all had eaten, then he came to take his
meal.
3. What kind of attitude is manifested in James?

i. Meek

ii. Humble

iii. Self-sacrifice
Which one is correct?

a.i b. i and ii

c. ii and iii d. i, ii and iti
4. What can be the effect of the behaviour of Mr. James?

a. Establishing peace b. Pride

c. Grabbing power d. Self-conceit
Creative Questions
1. Jiban and Sujan read in the same class. But they do not talk to each other, do
not stay together, and do not help each other in their work. One day two of them
had a hot discussion on a very simple matter. At one point it turned into beating
each other. After a few days suddenly Sujan got a message that Jiban had an

se accident and was now confined to a hospital. Sujan ran to visit Jiban in the
% hospital. Seeing Sujan beside him Jiban became very happy.

150 Christian Religion and Moral Education

a. What did Jesus manifest for man by giving his life on the cross?

b. Why was it not possible to eradicate injustice from the society?

c. What teaching of Jesus did influence Sujan? Explain.

d. What kind of change can Sujan bring in the society? Evaluate.

2. Shatabdi studies by staying in a hostel. Every morning he goes to the Church

and at the same time obeys all the rules and regulations of the hostel. One

morning, while going to the Church, she saw that the hostel cook was suffering

from fever. She gave her medicine and took care of her. Gradually the cook got

well.

a. What did Jesus teach going from place to place?

b. Write about the bad effects of violence.

c. What teaching of Christ teaching on changing society was manifested
in Shatabdi? Explain.

d. Following of Jesus’ path has been manifested in Shatabdi’s behaviour.
Interpret the statement.

Short answer questions

1. Cite three injustices of the society and show their evil effects.

2. Explain the evil effects of violent movements of changing society.

3. Christ’s path is one in bringing change in the society—Explain.

4. How can we bring change in the world by following Christ’s teaching?

5. Mahatma Gandhi by his non-violence not only triumphed over country but
also overcame many people’s hearts—Explain the statement.

2
S

Chapter Fifteen
OUR WAY OF FREEDOM

Everyone has some goals in life. With these goals of life he leads his life. Many
get diverted from their goal but most people succeed in reaching their goals. The
life of those who cannot reach their goal becomes meaningless. But the life of
those who succeed in reaching the goal of life becomes meaningful. As
Christians our ultimate goal is to gain eternal life and live a happy life in heaven.
The only mediator through whom we can be eternally happy is Christ Jesus.
Lord Jesus is our way to freedom and fullness of life. He is the way, the truth and
the life. If we go through him we can experience the taste of eternal life and be
eternally happy in the presence of God.

At the end of this chapter we will be able to:

e describe the desire of attaining a meaning goal of life

e explain the reason of not always succeding in finding a meaningful life

e explain the point—the path that Christ showed is our path

e live our life in Christ’s path
In Search of a Meaningful Goal of Life
As children grow up, the parents teach them words and language. They teach
them nursery rhymes and songs, buy them children's books, teach them how to
draw pictures and then send them to school. What is behind all this? Why do we
go to school and study? In the beginning we went to school because it was our
parents who sent us. Later we took part in different exams. Why did we do
those? We might have done those things in order to make better results and get
a better place in the classroom. Now, being in this high school class how shall
we explain that? Why do we go to school, study, and write exams? Why do we
select science, commerce or humanities group? We ourselves need to think
about these and find out their answers.
Martin Luther King Jr. of the United States of America said that he who does
not have a goal in life, should not have right to live. Each human being must
have a goal in life. He should live his life according to that goal. Without a goal
life does not proceed well. If the goal is not decided in time, life becomes

S meaningless. As a result the person can be depressed.

152 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Therefore, every one of us must decide what our goal of life should be. We need
to ask ourselves: What is life? What is the purpose of this life? Who am I? Who
I am for? What am I doing now and what do I have to do in the future? If life is
a reality then what is truer than my life? What is death? Why do people die?
When I leave this world what shall I leave behind? Where shall I go after my
death? When answers to all these questions are clear to us then it will be easier
for us to fix a goal of life and lead our life accordingly.
Prokash, a young man, has just finished his college studies. He is a very brilliant
student and his results were excellent. Reaching this point of his life he is
hesitating-where to go now! What shall he study! From his childhood he had a
desire to become a medical doctor. On the other hand his older brother is a
doctor. He likes his brother's profession. But what decision will he take for
himself? He is unable to make a clear decision.
One evening while Prokash was wandering in the playground someone from
behind put his hand on his shoulder. Turning back he saw the Principal of his
college! He took this opportunity and expressed the cause of his restlessness.
Prokash accepted his Principal's advice and took steps accordingly. Today he is
a very famous doctor in a hospital.
In order to reach life's goal people spend time so that they can increase their
competency and efficiency and at the same time can form their character and
conscience. It is very important to form well our character and conscience. For
this reason one must exercise knowledge and work very hard. People look for
that which is appropriate for reaching their goal; they seek to reach that however
hard it may be. For this reason people go to school, attain knowledge, sit for
exam, and seek to know the unknown.
When man faces any impediment to the way of seeking, he starts to find a way
of overcoming it. He finds no peace in mind sees no light, until he gets out it. He
does not seem to have any meaning in life. He looks for and goes to more
experienced, competent and efficient persons for advice or help. He perhaps
goes to a family, educational institution or a guru. Thus everyone looks for a
meaningful goal in life.

5

Our way of freedom 153
Task: 1. Write down you own desire or goal of life.
Task: 2. What desire do you see, the gratification of which brings lasting
happiness and joy in life?
Reason for Failure to Attain Perfection
Answers to all questions cannot be found in many cases of life. All searches are
not successful. All problems also cannot be solved. Many times in our life we
face failure. In those cases we cannot reach our goals. Failures come in personal,
family, institutional and even state life. When we attain success, we rejoice in it.
At that time our minds become full of joy. Immediately after that we seek
success in another field.
Sometimes the smiles from our face fade away. Tears come into our eyes. We do
not feel good. Frustration and even depression come to our life. At times we do
not realize the causes of our failures. We might be able to find out the failures'
reasons if we ask ourselves the following questions: Was our goal right? Did we
proceed according to the goals? Have our character and conscience been formed
properly? Did we listen to our conscience? Did we decide the correct goal at the
appropriate moment? Above all, did we depend on almighty God or depend on
our own strengths and capabilities?
Jesus told a young man, "If you wish to be perfect, go and sell all that you
possess and give the money to the poor and you will become the owner of a
treasure in Heaven. Then come back and follow me. On hearing this answer, the
young man went away sad for he was a man of great wealth" (Mt. 19:21-22).
Jesus wants full surrender from those whom he calls for perfection. This young
man in the gospel had a very strong impediment on his way to attaining
perfection and that was his excess attraction for wealth. Secondly, as a rich man
in the society he had a great social respect. Therefore, losing his wealth meant
for him losing his respect as well. This fear was the impediment on his way to
attaining perfection. He asked for advice, but he did not have the attitude of
following the advice. Therefore we see that the big impediment on our way of
perfection can be our selfishness and individualism.
Selfish and individualistic people get involved in different unsocial activities in
order to fulfill their self-interest. Failure comes to their lives because of such
kind of actions. They cannot proceed very far on the way to perfection. Thus
they cannot find the right direction of life.
Forma-20, Christian Religion and Moral Education 9-10

154 Christian Religion and Moral Education
satisfying what kind of desires give birth to negative happiness or side
effects? Write them in two separate columns.

Path Shown by Christ
The way to attain perfection that Christ showed is the best way.
Once, two girls were interviewed. One of them was a garment factory worker
and the other was a college student. Both were asked the same question
separately. The question was: "Do you believe that God exists?" Both answered:
‘yes'. The next question to them was: "What does God look like?" The garment
factory worker girl did not have much interest in it. With that situation of mind
she answered: "It is likely that you will not be satisfied with my response, but I
think God has created human beings as subjects of a game." On the other hand
the college girl took some time to think and then replied: "I think God is very
honest; He has created this universe and man very beautifully."
The garment worker girl was the child of a broken family- separated. On the
other hand the college girl was from a rich and noble family- in the realm of her
parents, friends and teachers' love. What is the reason for the difference between
these two girls' answers? The reason is we are all influenced by our
environment. We are influenced by the family in which we are born and in the
realities in which we grow up. Our thinking, intelligence and dreams are led by
our environment.

Like these two girls we also see everything in the light of our personal

experience of frustration or happiness. The reason is that these feelings are so

deep in us that the feelings can influence our thinking and thus our viewpoints
can be changed.

We have to remember, we must not allow ourselves to be led by our emotions.

In reality we see there is no businessman who invests his money in a certain

institution only because he likes that particular institution. In the same way there

is no doctor who would like to do surgery on a patient only because his feelings

are good at that moment. 20

S
N

Our way of freedom 155
In truth we all are somehow led by the realities. We must not be led only by our
thoughts and feelings. The same fact is true for the above-mentioned business or
medical treatment fields. That means like them we also must not be influenced
by our feelings, rather we should go with our realities.
In fact we will not be successful and happy and will not attain perfection either
unless we find out truth and reality of events and incidents. All of our successes
and failures, prosperity and downfall, bright or dark future-The way we seek the
truth, by that way will we be led in life.
Depending on long experience psychiatrist Carl Jung once said, "Of all the
persons ... whom I have treated, there was not one whose main problem was not
religious and the solution, in every case, had to be religious."
Why did this prominent psychiatrist put religion in the central place of attaining
health? The reason is very clear. What subjects of discussion are placed in the
bottom place of each person's heart? They are about life, death, good and bad
experiences, love and hatred, suffering and so on. Satisfactory answers to these
questions can come from religion. The problems that become impediments on
the way to gain a healthy life, cannot be solved only by psychiatry. Man needs
to reach a deeper level for that. That means he has to enter into his heart and
being there he has to ask for answers from the religious point of view. He will
surely get answers.
get from religion? Write them down and share with the members in the group.
Religion gives us power to understand one thing - that the changing situations
around us are various signs. These signs help us to get answers to "Why""How"
questions. These want to tell us about God and his plan.
Another prominent psychologist of the world is Victor Frankle. He was born in
Vienna of Austria on 26th March 1905 and died on 2nd September 1997. During
the II World War he was caught by the Germans and greatly suffered in a Nazi
Concentration Camp. He said that to him imprisoned life was like a hell in the
= world. The prisoners were tortured very ruthlessly. Day after day they had to
‘starve. Thus they became very weak. The weakest ones were taken every day

156 Christian Religion and Moral Education
and thrown into the gas oven. There, inside the burning oven, they were finished;
they just became smoke-nothing else remained. Frankle said that it is not only
the physically healthy ones who were saved from the ruthless tortures, rather
those who had a passion to live were saved. This kind of people did not lose their
health and as a result did not have to be thrown into a gas oven. After he got out
of the concentration camp he wrote a book on psychiatry called "Logo
therapy."invented this therapy completely out of his own experience. Through
this therapy the mental patients were asked to set a purpose of life. With that
purpose they were able to follow the rest of the therapy process. He used to say:
if you get the answer to your "why" question you will certainly get an answer to
your "how"question as well.
God is the basis and deep reality of all life and truth. He wants to help us find the
real situation of all things. For this he has taken different means. Whatever we
see and experience every day are not only earthly; rather those remind us of the
presence of God.
The greatest sign is Jesus Christ who came to this earth and explained to us the
meaning of everyday signs. Thus, showing us the way and guiding us on that
way he gave us opportunity to go to the Father.
To us as Christians the most important truth is that God is our loving Father. He
invited us to become his children. When we respond to this call in our pure heart
then we can find the deepest meaning of life. How can we know the Father? First
we have to find out about him and only then we can love him.
Through our forefathers in the olden days God has revealed to us an important
truth of life:
"God has spoken in the past to our fathers through the prophets, in many
different ways, although never completely; but in our time he has spoken
definitely to us though his Son. He is the one God appointed heir of all things,
since through him he unfolded the stages of the world" (Heb 1: 1-2).
2
&

Our way of freedom 157
Jesus says, "I am the way, the truth and the life" (Jn 14:6). Jesus answers all the
questions that rise in our mind and thus he shows us the way to the Father. He
has given the proof in his own life. This way is the way of love, love of God and
love of man. He himself first walked in this way. He went through death and rose
again, As a human being he attained perfection, became a worthy son of the
Father. If we follow in his footsteps, in whatever crossroad we might reach, he
will show us the proper way, because he is the real way and life.
here and there. Together with others in the small group make a plan to
bring this boy back to school.
=
&

158 Christian Religion and Moral Education
Exercise

Multiple Choice Questions
1. How is the life of those who do not succeed in reaching their goal?

a. Incomplete b. Effective

c. Disorderly d. Meaningless
2. Impediments on the way of perfection can be— i. Selfishness

ii. Individualism

iii. Poverty
Which one is correct?

a.i b. i & ii

c. ii & tii d. i, it & iii
Read the following Paragraph and answer the questions nos. 3 and 4.
Sajal and Ranjan live side by side in the same village. Sajal is affluent but
Ranjan is comparatively less affluent. Sajal has by force occupied a piece of land
that belonged to Ranjan and made a house for him. Ranjan approached the union
council chairman for justice. But Sajal, coming to know of this, sent some
valuable gifts to the chairman. The chairman played some tricks and in the
meeting approved the argument for Ranjan.
3. What is manifested in the conduct of the chairman?

a. Honesty b. Selfishness

c. Corruption d. Nepotism
4. What can be the consequence of such conduct of the chairman?

i. Betterment of relationship

ii. Anarchy co

iii. Disorderliness s

Our way of freedom 159
Which one is correct?
a.i b. i and ii
c. ii and iti d. i, ii and iti
Creative Questions
1. Shima is studying. Her parents want their daughter one day to be a medical
doctor. But Shima is not attentive to her studies at all. Her parents always tell her
to be attentive. They tell her that if she wants to make a very good result she
must study attentively. Shima did not pay attention to her parents' warnings. She
was very indifferent. As a result she made a very poor result in her exams.
Because of her poor results she could not take part in the admission test of
medical college. Not only that, later she could not get admitted in any good
educational institution.
a. Which way is the best to attain perfection?
b. What do you mean by Logo therapy?
c. What is the reason for Shima’s failure? Explain.
d. Analyze what Shima needs to do in order to be successful in life.
Short answer questions
1. What do people do in order to reach their goal?
2. As Christians what should our ultimate goal be? Explain.
3. Christ’s way is our way—explain.
4. Explain why it is not possible always to attain meaningful life.
5. Write how you will lead your life in the way of Christ.
The End
io)
5

Academic Year
9-10 Christian
VifarTe Teer AwCw Kcr et aat PaCS Aes
~ staat aera ott Sat
Wee BPS AAs WS
mat 6 fre Fdtecra eat eoert afosta e eifocatcet GAD TPT CST OFSICt
Sop TIA (Corr BR, 28 VST ASA) CRT PT
8 Hy
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh
|

