aff gee 0,8 a
i Civics and Citizensh
, Classes Nine-Ten ~

ui >

Prescribed by National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a Textbook for Class Nine-Ten from the Academic Year-2013
Civics and Citizenship
Nine-Ten
Written by
Dr. Selina Akter
Dr. Sabbir Ahmed
Md. Rofiqul Islam
Edited by
Prof. Dr. Harun-or-Rashid
Translated by
Dr. Sabbir Ahmed
Javed Haider Kareem
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel commercial Area, Dhaka.
[All rights reserved by the Publisher]
First Publication: September, 2012
Revised Edition : November, 2014
Revised Edition : , 2017
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
For Free Distribution by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Printed by :

Preface
The aim of secondary education is to make the learners fit for entry into higher
education by flourishing their latent talents and prospects with a view to building the
nation with the spirit of the Language Movement and the Liberation War. To make the
learners skilled and competent citizens of the country based on the economic, social,
cultural and environmental settings is also an important issue of secondary education.
The textbooks of secondary level have been written and compiled according to the
revised curriculum 2012 in accordance with the aims and objections of National
Education Policy-2010. Contents and presentations of the textbooks have been selected
according to the moral and humanistic values of Bengali tradition and culture and the
spirit of Liberation War 1971 ensuring equal dignity for all irrespective of caste and
creed of different religions and sex.
The present government is committed to ensure the successful implementation of
Vision 2021.Honorable Prime Minister, Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina expressed her firm determination to make the country free
from illiteracy and instructed the concerned authority to give free textbooks to every
student of the country. National Curriculum and Textbook Board started to distribute
textbooks free of cost since 2010 according to her instruction.
The subject civics and citizenship offers learners to know the role of citizen in family,
society, national and international contexts and at the same time addresses formation of
moral values, characters, creates obligation to society and patriotism. By reading civics
and citizenship students will have correct concepts on our secular culture, history and
heritage will experience original history of our great Liberation War. This is how they
will become self-confident and will be able to self-employ themselves. Thus they will
play positive role in political, social and economic development.
In regards to spelling of the words, the spelling rules developed by Bangla Academy
have been followed. I thank sincerely all for their intellectual labour who were
involved in the process of writing, editing, art and design of the textbook.
Professor Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

Table of Contents
om Giemtciip |
[Gowers 0
a are toch|8|

Chapter One
Civics and Citizenship

Civics is called the science of citizenship, because all matters relating to citizenship
are discussed in Civics. As a citizen of the state, we all need to have a clear idea about
Civics. In this chapter, different aspects of Civics and Citizenship such as family,
society, state, the origin of the state and government are discussed.
After studying this chapter we would be able to-

* explain notions about Civics and Citizenship.

* explain the importance of studying Civics.

* explain the notions of family, society, state and government.

* describe the origin of the state.

* analyze the relationships between family, society, state and government.
Civics and Citizenship
'Civics' is an English word. It is derived from two Latin words: 'Civis' and 'Civitas'. The
word 'Civis' means citizen and 'Civitas' means city-state. In ancient Greece, citizen and
city-state were inseparable. At that time a city-state comprised small regions. Those
who directly participated in city-state functions were called citizens. As only the
males enjoyed the privilege of participation, they, therefore, were called citizens.
Slaves, women and foreigners had no such privilege. The subject-matters of Civics
included all these citizens' behaviour and functions.
At present the notion of citizen has changed with the rise of large-scale nation states.
For example, the area of Bangladesh is 1,47,570 sq. kilometers and the total population
is nearly 150 millions. We are all Bangladeshi citizens. Besides enjoying citizenship
rights, we perform responsibilities and duties to the state. However, those, who among
us, are under 18 years of age cannot cast their votes and do not have the right to be
elected. In addition, foreigners have no political privileges for enjoying all kinds of
political rights. For instance, neither can they vote nor stand for election. Essentially,
the status accorded to the citizens by the state is called citizenship. Everything related
to citizenship and state is the subject-matter of ‘Civics and Citizenship’. British political
scientist E. M. White, therefore, rightly said that Civics is such a valuable branch of
knowledge which deals with the past, present and future of citizenship along with its
local, national and international dimensions of humanity in detail.
In the light of subject-matters, the discussion on Civics can be done in two senses.
First, broadly Civics discusses everything related to citizenship. For example, it includes
rights and duties, social and political institutions, local, national and international
dimensions of citizenship. Civics also discusses the present, past and future of

Forma-1, Civics and Citizenship- Class-9-10

2 Civics and Citizenship

citizenship. In the narrow sense, the subjects of Civics include rights and duties.

So it can be said that the subject which imparts knowledge about ideal citizenship

by continued discussions of the behaviours and functions of citizen, family, society

and the state is called 'Civics and Citizenship’.
Individual work: Make a comparison between ancient and modern concepts of
‘Civics and Citizenship’.

Scope of Civics and Citizenship

The scope of Civics and Citizenship is wide and comprehensive. We are going to discuss it

below:

1. Citizens' Rights and Duties: As we enjoy state-given fundamental, social,
political and economic rights as citizens of the state, so we have to perform
responsibilities and duties to the state. For example, expressing allegiance to the
state, to abide by laws, to pay taxes at the right time, to educate children, serving
the state and casting votes with honesty and so on. The rights and duties of a citizen
are the subject-matter of 'Civics and Citizenship.' Moreover, the characteristics of
good citizenship, barriers to earning it and the ways to remove the barriers are
discussed in ‘Civics and Citizenship."

2. Social and Political Institutions: Social and political institutions have been raised
in order to develop and enrich citizens’ lives. For example, family, society, the state,
election and political parties etc. The origin, nature and functions of these
institutions are also discussed in Civics and Citizenship . Besides, the subject-matters
of Civics and Citizenship also include social values, law, liberty and equality,
constitution and public opinion.

3. Local, National and International Dimensions of Citizenship: At the place
where we live, various local institutions develop centering us. These institutions
are as follows: union parishad, pourashava and city corporations. In the similar
fashion, legislature,executive and judiciary have been in existence at the national
level. The UN and the Commonwealth are international institutions. ‘Civics and
Citizenship’ deals with the structure and functions of these institutions and their
relationships with citizens.

4, Past, Present and Future of Citizenship: ‘Civics and Citizenship focuses on the
past, present and future of citizenship. For instance, how citizenship was
determined in the past, how citizens’ rights and duties were in the past and
what the present status of citizens is. On the basis of these three questions,Civics 2
and Citizenship’ lay the guidelines for citizenship in the future. 8

Civics and Citizenship 3
Team work: Discuss the importance of studying 'Civics and Citizenship' within the
team, then present it in the class.

Family

When husband and wife live together after a socially recognized system of marriage,

this is called a family. In other words, the organization which grows through marriage

between one or more than one male and female including their children, parents
and other members is called a family. According to Mclver, family is the small
social unit that gives birth to children and raises them. In our country, generally
family comprises mother-father, brother- sister, uncle-aunt and grandfather-grandmother.

But only one female or one male is not recognized as a family. Essentially, family

is a social unit in which its members are tied together with the bondages of affection,

attachment and love.

Classification of Family

We all live in the family. But the nature and structure of families vary. Therefore,

family can be classified based on some principles. For instance, a. lineage count

and leadership, b. family structure and c. marital status.

a. Lineage count and leadership: Family can be divided into two types based
on this principle, such as partriarchal and matriarchal. In the partriarchal families,
posterity is identified in line with father's lineage and father leads that family. Most
of the families in our country are of this type. On the contrary, posterity is identified

in matriarchal family with the lineage of mother and mother takes the lead in that
family. This type of family exists amongst Garos in our country.

b. Family structure: Family can also be classified into two types according to the
structure.These are:unitary and joint family. Unitary family consists of mother-father

and brother-sister. These families are small in size.In the joint families,father-mother,
brother-sister, uncle-aunt and other members live together. Joint families are large
families. Both types of families are seen in Bangladesh. However, at present the
number of unitary families is on the rise. A joint family consists of a number of
unitary families.

c. Marital status: Three types of families are noticed according to the principle of
marriage. These are: monogamous, polygamous and polyandrous. Inthe monogamous

family, one husband has one wife. In the polygamous family, one husband
has several wives. Likewise, in the polyandry, one wife has many husbands. In
so our society, most of the families are monogamous, but there are exceptions of
& polygamous families. Polyandrous families are not seen in Bangladesh.

4 Civics and Citizenship
Individual work: Students will fill in the table below.
Principles/basis Name of families
2.
: 1.
3. Marital status 2
3.

Functions of a family

A family performs manifold functions to make its members’ lives beautiful and safe.

Generally, a family has the following functions:

1. Biological functions: We are born to our parents and raised by them. So one of the
main functions of a family is to reproduce children and raise them accordingly.
These kinds of functions are called biological functions.

2. Educative functions: Many of us become familiar with the alphabet before going
to school. Family provides the first opportunity to learn values from its members
such as honesty, etiquette, kindness and punctuality. These are educative functions
of a family. Thus the children in the family receive their primary education.
Therefore, family is called the eternal school or the first school of life.

3. Economic functions: A family has to meet the demands of its members such as
food, clothing, shelter, education, medical treatment and the like. These demands
are met with income earned by family members. The economic functions of
a family include handicrafts, fishing, agriculture, animal husbandary and so on.
The spheres of functions of a family have changed due to splendid progress in
science and technology and new employment opportunity has been created. In some
spheres, it has been abated. However, a family still meets the needs of its members.

4. Political functions: In a family, parents and elder siblings act as guardians. We obey
their instructions and guidance. They play their role to protect our rights. They
inculcate intelligence, conscience and self-control into us and help us to become
good citizens.This education becomes worth at later stage in the affairs of the state.
The children in a family thereby receive political education by obeying family
education and rules. Besides, we become politically conscious by listening to and %&
taking part in discussions with the elders in the family. S

Civics and Citizenship 5

5. Psychological functions: A family fulfills the psychological needs of its members
by giving them love, affection and kind behaviour. By sharing weal and woes,
happiness and sadness with other members in the family, the members find solace.
Say, if anyone gets upset for some reasons, it can be sorted out through discussions
with parents and siblings. This sort of discussion helps wipe out mental agony.
Besides children learn kindness, tolerance and fellow-feeling from this family.
These enrich their mental strength.

6. Entertainment functions: By having a chat, sharing jokes, singing songs,watching
TV, going out, family members enjoy their time. Due to progress in science and
technology, these kinds of functions have been somewhat reduced. However, to
ensure the maximum welfare of the family members, the importance of these
functions is enormous.

Work: Students will prepare a list of different types of functions of a family.
Spheres of family functions Description/examples of functions

SEconomicfinsien [SY

| 6.Entertainmentfunction |

Society

Society is an organized population who get together to fulfill some common objectives.

In other words, when a group of people is organized to fulfill some common purposes,

a society is formed. Analyzing this concept of society, two characteristics can be

noticed, such as 1) a group of people living together in an organized way, 2) they

must have some common purposes for this organized living. Besides some more
characteristics are found among the members of the society. These are as unity and
mutual assistance, dependency, action-reaction, similarities, dissimilarities and so on.

Relations between man and society are inseparable. Society consists of humans. And

society meets multiple needs and thereby provides people with developed and secure

social life. Human qualities and social values grow in the society. Humans make society
as they perceive that society provides the ideal and civilized life. Greek philosopher

Aristotle rightly said that man is by nature a social being. One who does not live in

x the society is either a beast or a God. In reality, humans from cradle to grave foster and
“evolve themselves in the society.

6 Civics and Citizenship
Group work: Determine relationships between family and society (tips for
group work; inseparable/mutual influence/provides security/helps in personality
development).

State

The state is a political institution. People all over the world live in a state. In our world

there are 206 small or large states. Every state has its definite territory and population.

Besides, in order to operate a state, government and sovereignty are two important

ingredients. No state can exist without the above conditions. Professor Garner said,

‘an independent population permanently residing in a definite territory, allegiant to the

organized government by nature and free from external enemies is called the state.’

Analyzing this definition, we get four elements of a state, such as 1. population

2. definite territory 3. government and 4. sovereignty.

1. Population: Population is an inevitable element of state formation. If a
population permanently resides in a definite territory, state can appear to exist.
However, there is no fixed rule about how much population is required for a state
to form. For example, the population in Bangladesh is 150 million, in India 1210
million (2011) and in Brunei it is 200,000. According to views of political scientists,
the population of a state should be consistent with the resources it possesses.

2. Definite territory: To form a state, a definite territory is obligatory. Territory
comprises land, water and sky areas. A state can be either small or large. For
example, Bangladesh has an area of 1,47,570 square kilometers. But according
to the signed land boundary agreement between Bangladesh and India, exchange
of enclaves between two countries on 31 July, 2015 resulted an addition of
1004.25 acres of land to the total land of Bangladesh. Besides the maritime area
of Bangladesh has been increased. At present, the sovereignty of Bangladesh has
been established on 1,11,813 km in the maritime area. The People's Republic of
China, the United States and Canada are larger than Bangladesh in terms of area.

3. Government: Government is a necessary element of a state. No state can exist
without a government. Government operates all state activities. Government
consists of three organs: legislative, executive and judiciary. Though the formation
of government is the same in all states, forms of government vary from state
to state.For example, in Bangladesh we have the parliamentary form of government,
but in the United States it is the presidential form of government. Government
operates all the functions of the state.

4. Sovereignty: Sovereignty is the most important and inevitable element of a state. %
This is the absolute power of the state.There are two dimensions to it, such as &

Civics and Citizenship 7
internal and external. Internal sovereignty means that the state exercises its authority
over individuals and associations through fiats. On the other hand, external
sovereignty keeps the state free from external control.

states or not.

Origin of the state

Itis hard to say when and how state originated. Political scientists having examined

the history, past political events have given some theories about the origin of the

state. These theories are: 1. Divine theory, 2. Force theory, 3. Social Contract theory
and 4. Historical or Evolutionary theory.

1. Divine theory: This is the oldest theory related to the origin of the state. According
tothis theory, God himself created the state and He sent rulers to run the state in
the right direction. Rulers are the representatives of God and are only accountable
to God for their deeds They are not accountable to the people. Just as rulers rule as
per the instructions of God, so the violation of rulers' instructions is tantamount
to the violation of God's instructions. According to this theory, rulers combine
the duties of Head of State and Head of Religious institutions. Modern political
scientists criticized this theory as dangerous, undemocratic and irrational. In their
views, where rulers are not accountable to the people, there develops autocracy.

2. Force theory: The main idea of this theory is that state has come into existence by
force and it continues to exist by force. It is stated in this theory that powerful
persons in the society through warfare or by applying force have established
control over the weaker sections and established state. From the creation to date,
this is how states have come to existence. Critics labeled this theory irrational
and wrong. They said that if states had survived by force then militarily weak
states would have failed to survive. As a matter of fact, it is not the force, rather
states exist and survive on the basis of consent.

3. Social contract theory: The gist of this theory is that state has come into existence
through mutual contract among the people living in the society. The architects of
Social Contract Theory were British philosophers John Locke and Thomas Hobbes

S and French philosopher Jean Jack Rousseau.

8 Civics and Citizenship
\ :
\“
LF § Y
Thomas Hobbes John Locke Jean Jack Rousseau
According to this theory, before the birth of state, man lived in the state of nature.
But there was no authority to punish the offenders who violated laws in the state of
nature. As a result, anarchy and disorder were created in the social life. Men became
selfish and egoistic. The strong in the society tortured the weak.Consequently, people's
lives were full of pains and unbearable. In addition, with the rise of population, the
aspiration and necessity for having private property began to grow among the people.
In order to get rid of such anarchy people entered into signing a contract thus creating
the state. People conferred power upon this authority to rule over themselves in
exchange for giving security to them.

4, Historical or Evolutionary theory: This theory states that state was not created
all on a sudden. State has emerged through a prolonged evolution and changes of
different forces and elements at different stages in the society. State emerged
after the confluence of elements like kinship, religious ties, wars, economic
and political consciousness and activities. Regarding this theory, Dr. Garner said,
‘State is not the creation of God, nor the creation of force . It has rather been created
out of historical evolution’. Of all the theories related to the origin of the state,
historical or evolutionary theory is the most logical and acceptable. This theory
gives the right explanation as to the origin of state. In reality, the state that exists
at present is the result of the long historical evolution.

Individual work: Historical or evolutionary theory is the most important and
is)
scientific one. Give reasons for this statement. s

Civics and Citizenship 9
Concept of government
Government is one of the important elements of a state. No state can be formed
without a government. State is run by the government. Government performs three
kinds of functions to steer the state. To do legislative, executive and judicial functions,
a government has three organs, such as legislature, executive and judiciary.
Legislature enacts the necessary laws for a country. Executive governs the country
by enforcing these laws. Judiciary punishes the guilty and establishes justice in the
society by freeing innocents. So the government refers to that population who are
associated with law making, governance and establishing justice. In a modern
democratic state, government implies the population, because government works as
the agent of population.

Relationship between state and government

In ancient times there was no difference between state and government. Louis the

fourteenth of France said, ‘I am the state’. In modern times, differences are made

between state and government. These are as follows:

1 Formation: Population,territory, government and sovereignty- these four elements
constitute a state. Government is one of those elements by which a state is run.

2. Population: A state consists of all the population in a country. And the government
consists of the persons employed in the legislature, executive and judiciary.

3. Permanence: State is a permanent institution, but government is temporary
and changeable. Change of government occurs due to people's demand. It also
occurs to run the government in a convenient way. For example, the government
of Bangladesh has changed many times. But the state has never changed.

4. Nature and characteristics:All the states have the same nature and characteristics.
But the nature and characteristics of government varies from state to state. For
example, Bangladesh has the parliamentarian form of government whereas
USA has the presidential form of government.

5. Sovereignty: State is sovereign or the possessor of absolute power. Government
is the agent of implementation of sovereign power.

6. Concept: State is an abstract concept. State can neither be seen nor imagined or
felt. But government is a living organ, because the persons who comprise the
government are seen.

So,despite the differences between state and government, their relations are close.One

cannot be imagined without the other.Government is formed only for running the state.

Group work: Determine the relationships between state and government.
Forma-2, Civics and Citizenship- Class-9-10

10 Civics and Citizenship
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Which one is the local body of citizenship?
a. Pourashava b. Legislature
c. Commonwealth d. The UN
2. Which is one of the inevitable elements for running the state?
a. population b. territory
c. government d. sovereignty
3. According to modern political scientists, divine theory is dangerous, because in it
the ruler is
i. accountable to God for his deeds
ii. both head of state and head of religious institutions
ili. viewed by himself as representative of God.
Which of the following is correct?
a. iand ii b. ii and iii
c. iand iii d. i, ii and iii
Read the paragraph below and answer the questions 4 and 5 :
Nurjahan Begum makes bamboo baskets and sells them at the market. She makes
good profit out of this job. Jamila learns how to make baskets from her and makes
baskets by herself for the use of her family.
4. What sort of family work does Nurjahan do?
a. educative b. entertainment
c. economic d. psychological.
5. Which type of work mentioned below is applicable for Nurjahan?
a. only for enhancing self solvency
b. it makes the people of her village employable
c. it increases the production and uses of bamboos
=
d. to increase self-employment 8

Civics and Citizenship 11
Creative Questions
1. The states Ka and Kha are located side by side. Ka defeats her neighbouring state
Ga and occupies it. The state of Kha cooperates with its neighbouring countries
and gradually becomes stronger in a body.
a. What theory of the origin of state is related to philosopher Jean Jack Rousseau?
b. What is the absolute power of a state? Explain.
c. Explain the theory in relation to the fact that Ka occupied Ga by force.
d. The theory that explains the rise of state as strong is more acceptable. Analyze.
2. Mr. and Mrs. Parvez are a working couple. They have put their only son Ripon in
a hostel since his childhood for study. When he comes home during vacation,
his parents cannot give enough time to him as they have always been busy. Most
of the time Ripon stays alone. Therefore, he cannot share his weal and woes and
he never feels others' pleasure and pain. One day he visited Mr. Ramiz's house
while his son Robin opened the door and gave salam to him. With honour, he
welcomed him to take a seat and went off to call his father and to get some tea and
snacks for Mr. Parvez. Mr. Parvez was amuzed at Robin's gesture and felt pain that
he could not raise his son like Robin.
a. How many types of family exist according to the structure?
b. Which type of function is self-control of a family? Explain.
c. The function of a family has been hampered due to Ripon's lack of mental
growth. Explain.
d. Evaluate the function of a family that has played an important role in raising
Mr. Ramiz's children.
2}
~
ES

Chapter Two
Citizens and Citizenship

We are all Bangladeshi citizens. As citizens we enjoy some rights and perform some
duties. By possessing some qualities, we could be good citizens. Good citizens are
assets of the state. We should learn about good citizenship. Concepts of citizen,
means to acquire citizenship, dual citizenship, concepts and characteristics of good
citizens, citizen rights and duties have been discussed in this chapter.
After studying this chapter, we would be able to

* explain the concepts of citizen and citizenship ;

¢ describe the means to acquire citizenship ;

* explain dual citizenship;

¢ describe a good citizen's rights and duties ;

¢ explain the relationships between a citizen's rights and duties ;

* be enthusiastic to perform a citizen's responsibilities and duties.
Citizen and Citizenship
Concepts of citizen and citizenship originated in ancient Greece 2500 years ago. In
ancient Greece, small city states existed, called city states. In those small city
states those who directly participated in city state governance were called citizens.
They had voting rights. But in the city states, women, foreigners and house-mates were
not treated as citizens. In course of time, the concept of citizenship has undergone
changes. At present, to be a citizen no discrimination is made between individuals.
We are the citizens of Bangladesh, because we are born in this country and are
enjoying all kinds of state-given rights (social, political and economic) and
carrying out our responsibilities and duties to the state. So the person who lives
permanently in a state and admits his/her allegiance to the state, enjoys state-given
rights and performs duties to the state, is called a citizen. To some, citizen and
citizenship are the same. But, they have different meanings. 'Citizen' is the identity
of an individual. For example, our identity is that we are Bangladeshi citizens. As a
citizen of the state, the status and respect one receives, is one's citizenship.

Team work: A chart will be made on the characteristics of a citizen.

Ways to get citizenship 20
There are two ways to achieve citizenship: a) by birth and b) by approval. 8

Citizens and Citizenship 13

a. Methods to achieve citizenship by birth: To get citizenship by birth two
principles are followed, such as birth policy and the place of birth policy.

1. Birth policy: According to this policy, citizenship of the children is determined
by their parents’ citizenship.In this case, wherever the children are born, their
citizenship is determined by their parents’ status of citizenship. For example, a
Bangladeshi couple have a child in the UK. Then he or she will be a Bangladeshi
citizen as his or her parents are Bangladeshi citizens.

2. Place of birth policy: According to this policy, whichever country's citizens
parents are, the citizenship of their children is determined by the country in which
they are born. For example, if children of Bangladeshi parents are born in the
USA, they would be US citizens. Here, to determine citizenship, the state is given
the priority. According to this policy, if children of any parents are born on a
ship or inside the embassy of another country, they would be citizens of that
country which owns the ship or the embassy mentioned above. It can be noted
here that most of the countries in the world follow the principle of birth policy
in granting citizenship. Bangladesh is one of them. On the contrary, the USA
and Canada follow the principle of place of birth policy in granting citizenship.

b- Getting citizenship by approval: By fulfilling some conditions, citizens of one

country can achieve citizenship in another by approval. Generally, the conditions that

need to be fulfilled to get citizenship of another country are as follows: 1. to marry a

citizen of that country; 2. to be employed in a government job; 3. to show honesty;

4. to know the language of that particular country; 5. to purchase assets of that

country; 6. to live in that country for a long time; 7. to join the army. These conditions

may vary from country to country.

If a person fulfills one or more of such conditions, he is eligible to apply for

citizenship.When his application is approved by the government, he becomes a citizen

of that country. The citizens of many countries in the world including Bangladesh are
enjoying citizenship by approval in such as the USA, Canada, the UK and Australia.

In addition, citizenship is also granted on humanitarian ground. For example, if a

person takes shelter in any other country due to persecution, that country may grant

his/her citizenship upon his/her application for citizenship.

Dual Citizenship

When a person is simultaneously holding citizenship of two countries the

phenomenon is called his/her dual citizenship. Generally,one person gets an opportunity

% to get citizenship in one country. As two principles relating to birth exist regarding
® the achievement of citizenship, in some cases it may result in dual citizenship.

14 Civics and Citizenship

For instance, Bangladesh follows birth principle to grant citizenship while the USA
follows both birth and place of birth principles. So when children of Bangladeshi
parents are born in the USA, they become US citizens according to place of birth
principle. Again they become Bangladeshi citizens according to the birth principle.
This is called dual citizenship. But after being an adult he or she has to become either
a Bangladeshi or a USA citizen.

Good Citizens

All citizens in a state are not good citizens. Those who are intelligent among us,could

solve problems with ease, could distinguish between good and bad and stay away

from bad deeds and those who are self-controlled and could sacrifice petty interests
to the cause of larger ones are called good citizens.

Inthe light of above discussion, we find three main qualities of good citizens:

1, intelligence; 2. conscience and 3. self-control.

1. Intelligence: Intelligence is one of the best qualities of a good citizen. Intelligent
citizens can identify multifaceted problems of family, society and state and take
right decisions to solve these problems. The success of a democratic state depends
upon the intelligence of good citizens. Therefore, intelligent citizens are the best
assets of the state. Every state should make their citizens intelligent by imparting
proper education to them.

2. Conscience: Citizens of a state have to be conscientious. By dint of this quality,
citizens can distinguish between justice and injustice, honesty and dishonesty and
good and bad. Just as conscientious citizens on one hand enjoy state-given rights,
so they perform duties and responsibilities properly to the state and stand by justice.
For example, conscientious citizens remain loyal to the state, abide by laws, pay
tax in due time, cast their votes for competent and honest persons in the elections.

3. Self-control: Good citizens should have self-control. In other words, keeping
hinVherself above all kinds of greed, he/she discharges all duties and
responsibilities with honesty and dedication. To give up petty interests to the
cause of greater social interests is self-control. Those among us having this
quality can express ther opinions freely. They are tolerant to other peoples’ rights.
In addition, every citizen must keep themselves above corruption, nepotism and
partisan attitude. In this way democratic values emerge.

Citizens and Citizenship 15

Citizen Rights

We get ideas about some rights from the pictures below. Besides these,there are some

more rights the citizens are entitled to.

re ee | be "he afr F @
Right to education Right to have a family : Voting rights

Rights are some of the privileges recognized by society and state. By enjoying these

nights, citizens could develop their personality. Without these rights, people cannot

realise their personality. The main aim of rights is to ensure universal welfare of the
individuals. Rights are important to nourish the mental, social and economic growth of
citizens of the state. Sometimes we understand rights as doing whatever the individuals
wish to do. But doing whatever one wants to do is not rights. Rights are given by
the state for the betterment and development of all citizens. In the name of rights, we
should not do anything harmful to others.

Individual work: Write two features of rights.

Classification of rights

There are mainly two kinds of rights: 1. Moral rights and 2. Legal rights

1. Moral rights: Moral rights come from people's conscience and social morality or
justice. For example- the weak have the moral right to get assistance. This is not
enacted by the state. As a result, it has no legal basis. In addition, if someone
violates this right he/she cannot be punished. Moral rights vary from one society to
another.

2. Legal rights: Legal rights are those recognized by laws of the state. Again, legal
rights can be divided into social, political and economic rights.

a. Social rights: We enjoy some rights in the society to live in peace and happiness.
These rights are called social rights. For example, right to protect life, freedom
of movement and expression, right to have a family, right to education, right to
equal treatment in the eye of law, right to property and freedom of religion.

b. Political rights: Right to vote, right to be elected and redressing of all complaints

2% made by application are called political rights. Enjoying these rights, citizens
& indirectly get opportunities to run the state.

16 Civics and Citizenship
Group Work: Prepare a chart on the classification of rights.
Pair Work : Describe the differences between social and political rights.

c. Economic rights: Rights given by the state to develop the standard of living are
called economic rights. For example, right to work according to competence,
Tight to receive proper wage, right to enjoy leisure and the right to labour union.

Law on Right to Information
Law on Right to Information is an epoch-making law to protect the fundamental rights
of the people. Adopted in Bangladesh Jatiya Sangsad, the President gave his consent
to this law on 5 April 2009 (22 Chaitra 1415). Then the law was made public. Before
this law came into effect, some information was kept secret. But now people could
know such information and enjoy their rights. It will help establish institutional
overseeing, making their work disciplined and truthful. To establish rule of the
people, Law on Right to Information is necessary. So, all the citizens should know
this law.
Information’ refers to any kind of memento, book, design, map, data, order,
circulars, document, sample, letters, report, statement of account, project proposal,
film, audio-video, drawings, any instrument made of electronic process, machine
readable documents and physical structure and informative matter or xerox of it
irrespective of their characteristics. These are related to the organization, structure
and official activities of any authority. However, official note or xerox copy of
official note is not included into this category

Right to information means the right to receive information from any authority.

Under this law, every citizen is entitled to receive information from any authority.

Upon request from any citizen, the authority is bound to give information. In

order to ensure the right to information, every authority must preserve a list of

information along with the contents of information properly.

Censored information

According to the law on Right to information the citizens of Bangladesh have rights

to know about the information of different institutions. But the authority is not bound

to give some information. These are: 1. information posing threats to security, integrity
and sovereignty of Bangladesh; 2. matters relating to foreign policy by which relations
with foreign countries or international, regional organizations can be developed;

3. secret information received from the foreign governments; 4. any information

that might harm third party's intellectual property; 5. any information that might

harm any individual or organization; 6. any information that might increase crimes g

Citizens and Citizenship 17
hampering the enforcement of existing laws; 7. any information that might hamper
the judgement of criminals or endanger the security of the people; 8. any information
that might encroach upon privacy of individuals; 9. any information that might
threaten one's life or physical security 10. any secret information provided by any
individual that helps law enforcing agencies; 11. information on any sub-judice matter
and on which the court imposed restrictions or exposing the matter will be deemed
as contempt of court; 12. any information about the matter under investigation which
can hamper investigation if revealed; 13.any information that might hamper the
process of investigation, influence the arrest and punishment of the criminals;
14. any information regarding compulsion of publishing anything within a definite
time-limit; 15. Technical or scientific research outputs that need to be kept secret
for strategic and commercial reasons; 16. any information relating to the purchase
related activities before completing the purchase activities; 17. any information that
might violate the special rights of Members of Parliament (MPs); 18. any secret
information on any individual protected by laws; 19. any advanced information
concerning exam question papers and marks given.
Process of receiving information
Any person may ask the concerned authority to provide information in writing or by
sending an e-mail. In that request, the points that need to be included are:
1. Requester's name, address, fax and e-mail numbers if applicable, 2. Correct
and clear statement of the information asked for; 3. to locate the information
asked for, it is important to add other related information; 4. describe how the
requester wants to get it. In other words, requester must mention how he/she wants
to get information such as by a visit, receiving a xerox copy of a note, taking notes or
by any other approved methods.
Methods to provide information
After receiving the request placed by a requester, the concerned officer will have to
provide it in not more than 20 days. If the information asked for involves one or more
than one units or authorities, in that case, information has to be provided in not
more than 30 days. If the assigned authority fails to provide information within
that stipulated time, he/she has to apprise the requester of the reasons for inability
to give information within 10 working days after the date of the submission of
application.

Forma-3, Civics and Citizenship- Class-9-10

18 Civics and Citizenship

Duties of a citizen

As citizens have rights to the state, so they have duties. Without discharging duties,

enjoying rights cannot be expected. By giving different rights to the citizens, states

make citizens become loyal and responsible. Citizens! lives grow by state-given rights.

In exchange, the duties of citizens are to be loyal to the state, to pay taxes on regular

basis, to obey laws, to exercise their right to vote with honesty and to perform other

state-given duties.

Classification of duties

Citizens perform responsibilities in order to enjoy rights. These responsibilities are

called duties. Citizens' duties are divided into two categories: moral duties and legal

duties.

a. Moral duties: Moral duties stem from people's conscience and social morality or
justice. For example, to be educated, casting vote with honesty, serving the state
and coming forward to assist world humanity. As these duties come from citizens’
conscience and social morality and justice, these are called moral duties.

b. Legal duties: Duties sponsored by the state-laws are called legal duties. To be loyal
to the state, law abidance and paying tax are legal duties. These duties are
recognized by state-laws. Every citizen must obey legal duties. Failing to do so,
one must be punished. Legal duties are inevitable for the welfare of the state
and citizens. Some of the duties are discussed below.

1. Allegiance to the state: Allegiance to the state is expressed to protection of
independence and sovereignty of the state, respect for the constitution and
fundamental principles of the state. In other words, allegiance to the state means
the sacrifice of life, if necessary, for the existence, integrity and development of
the state.

2. Abiding by laws: Law protects our life, property and liberty. Law is equally
applicable to all. In absence of law, social life becomes anarchic. Citizens' life
without law cannot be imagined in the spheres of society and state. State enacts
laws to ensure rights and freedom of the citizens. So it is the duty of citizens to
abide by laws.

3. Pay tax: To operate the state, government needs resources. For this reason,
government imposes direct and indirect tax on the citizens. Therefore, it is the duty
of every citizen to pay tax regularly and properly.

Civics and Citizenship 19
Relations between rights and duties
Though rights and duties are two separate words, they have close mutual relationships.
The relationships between these two concepts are described below:
First, to enjoy rights depends on the performance of duties. For example, voting
is an important right of the citizens. It is the duty of a citizen to cast his/her vote. Rights
and duties are correlated. So it can be said that discharging duties lie in enjoying rights.
Second, one's rights refer to another person's duties. For example, I have the right to
walk on the road, it means that I shall walk and let others do so. Again, when I shall
walk on the path, others would let me do so. Thus the relations between rights and
duties are intimately related.
Third, we enjoy social, economic and political rights given by the state. In return, we
have to perform duties. For example, to be allegiant to the state, abiding by laws,
paying tax - all these are duties. By performing duties we enjoy rights given by
the state.
Fourth, as members of the society we enjoy the right to education. By using such
education we develop the society. To receive education is our right, but to apply it is
our duty. In sum, we may say that rights and duties arise from social consciousness.
One cannot take effect without the other. Thus it can be said that rights are embedded
in duties.
Work (Debate): Rights cannot be enjoyed without performing duties.
EXERCISE

Multiple choice questions
1. Which one of the rights is included in social rights?

a. right to enjoy property b. voting rights

c. right to wage d. right to be elected
2. Which one of the rights varies from society to society?

a. social b. political

c.economic d. moral
3. To enjoy rights requires

i. rightly applying voting rights

- ii.to assist government works
& iii. to assist others to walk on the street

20 Civics and Citizenship

Which one is correct ?
a.iand ii b. ii and iti
c. i and iii d. i, ii and iii

Answer questions 4 and 5 after reading the following paragraph:

Mr. Hafiz has a match factory in Manikganj. He pays tax to the government
on his income from his factory every year.

4. What is Mr. Hafiz's responsibility called?

a. moral rights b. legal rights
c. moral duties d. legal duties

5. Which one of the following is related to Mr. Hafiz's responsibility stated above?
a. Economic prosperity of the state
b. Protection of independence of the state
c. Protection of citizens' social rights
d. Establishment of citizens political rights

Creative questions

1, In the A Union, 80% of the total population are literate. In an election of that
Union, people elected the person X chairman as an honest and competent candidate.
They chose him out of the candidates X and Y. After being elected, chairman
preferred a competent applicant as a teacher in a school of his locality to his brother's
son.

a. How many years ago did the concept of citizen originate in ancient Greece?
b. What is dual citizenship? Explain.

c. Which type of duties is noticed amongst the people in the Union A?

d. X is a good citizen. Justify the statement.

2. Mr. Pijush Chakravarty passed computer engineering and went to Canada. He
learned Canadian language, he joined the government service in Canada and
showed honesty in service. Upon his application, Canadian government granted
his citizenship. On their way to Canada by plane from Bangladesh, his wife gave
birth to a child named Rahw on board
a. On which date did the President give assent to the law on the Right to Information

after the law was adopted earlier on?
b. What is understood by citizen rights? Explain.
c. Which country's citizen is Rahw ? Explain.
d. Is Mr. Pijush Chakravarty only a citizen of Canada? Give reasons in favour of
S
your answer. “

Chapter Three
Law, Liberty and Equality

A state enacts laws so that its citizens can live in peace and independently. It is
impossible to establish equality without law. The essence of law is that all are equal
in the eye of law. As citizens of the state, it is important for all of us to know
about the characteristics, classification and sources of law. Also important is to
know about the nature of liberty, classification, means of protection of liberty,
concept of equality, relationships among law, liberty and equality and to know the
importance of the rule of law in our civic life.

At the end of this chapter we would be able to
¢ explain law, liberty and equality;
¢ describe the sources of law;

* analyze the relationships among law, liberty and equality;
* analyze the importance of rule of law;
* be loyal to and abide by laws.

Law
Law is understood as rules and regulations recognized and approved by society and the
state; it regulates external human behaviour. Laws are made for the welfare of the
people. Law determines the relationship between one with other individuals, between
individuals and the state and between states. Laws are enacted and applied by the
state or sovereign authority. Violation of law is liable to punishment. Some
fundamental characteristics are noticed in law. They are discussed below:

1. Statutes: Laws are a collection of customs, rules and regulations.

2. Related to external behaviour: Laws regulate people's external behaviour and
activities. For example, illegal activities are punished. People refrain from
committing crimes for fear of punishment.

3. State approval and recognition: The norms of society which are approved by
the state become law. State authority acts behind the making of laws. Without
the approval and recognition of state, no rules and regulations become laws.

4. Savior of individual liberty: Law acts as a savior of individual liberty. For this
reason, laws are said to be the basis of individual liberty.

5. Universal: Laws are universal. These are equally applicable to all regardless

6 of their nationality, religion, race, commuity, sex and economic status. All people
BS in the society are deemed as equal in the eyes of law.

22 Civics and Citizenship

Classification of Laws

Generally laws are classified into three types: a) government law; b) private law

and c) international law.

1. Government law: The laws that are enacted and applied to keep individuals’
relations with the state are called government laws. They are again divided into the
following parts:

a. Criminal laws and penal code: To carry out the role of judiciary, these kinds of
laws are enacted. If an individual's rights are violated, his or her rights are protected
by this law.

b. Administrative laws: These laws are enacted to control the activities of the
executive and personnels related to it. Different administrative functions are
performed according to these laws.

c. Constitutional laws: These laws are mentioned in the constitution. The state is
governed by the constitution.

2. Private laws: The laws that are made and implemented to maintain relations
of individuals with other individuals are called private laws. For example,
contracts and deeds. These kinds of laws play a supportive role in maintaining
social order.

3. International laws: The laws that are made to maintain relations of states with
other states are called international laws. International laws deal with how states
will behave with others, how one state deals with a citizen of another state
and finally how international crisis can be solved.

Sources of Laws

There are a number of sources of laws. These sources are described below:

1. Customs: Rules that have been in vogue in a society for a long time are called
customs. Before the emergence of state, people's behaviour was controlled by
customs. After the emergence of state, customs that received state approval, turned
into laws. Many laws in the United Kingdom have been created based on customs.

2. Religion: Religious edicts and scriptures are sources of laws. Every religion has
its own rules to be followed by their adherents. These edicts help to administer
the social life beautifully and in a disciplined way. As a result, many aspects of
these religious edicts have become laws by state approval. For example, Muslim
laws, Hindu laws etc. In our country, family laws and laws related to property
have been issued from the said two religions. R

Law, Liberty and Equality 23

3. Books of legal experts: When we read English stories, novels or newspapers, we
consult with English dictionaries or encyclopedia to find out the meaning of an
unknown word. Similarly, when judges found difficulty in giving their judgements,
they had sought help from the commentaries of other legal experts. These
judgements later became laws. For example, 'Law of the Constitution’ by Professor
Dicey and ‘Commentaries on the Laws of England, by Blackstone.

4. Judgements: When judges find it difficult to give their judgements by using a
prevailing law, they depend on their intellect and conscience to interpret the
prevailing law and thus give a new judgement. These judgements are later followed
by other judges as laws. So judgements are sources of laws.

5. Sense of Justice: In the court, sometimes no law exists to give judgement on a
case. In that case, judges resolve these cases by using their sense of justice.
Later on, these become laws.

6. Legislature: In modern times, legislature is the main source of laws. In keeping
with public opinion, legislatures of different countries enact laws, amend old laws
suitable to the changing context.

Rule of Law in Civic Life
Rule of law means nobody is above law, everybody is subjected to law. In other
words, everybody is deemed equal in the eyes of law. The opportunity to get equal
treatment for all the people in the eyes of law is said to be rule of law. Supremacy of
law means everybody is subordinate to law. Equality by law is understood as people
get the opportunity to be treated by law as equal regardless of their identities such
as nationality, religion, gender and profession. As a result, the rich and poor, the
weak and the strong get equal rights. If the primacy of rule of law persists,
government shall refrain from the abuse of laws and the people shall abide by legal
regulations.

The importance of rule of law is unlimited. Anarchy arises in the society from the

absence of laws. Civic freedom, democracy, social values, equality do not exist in the

society where rule of law is absent. Rule of law is a must for establishing equality, freedom
and fundamental rights.

Good relationship between rulers and the ruled is created by rule of law. Government

becomes stable and peace is established in the state. Suspicions, movements and

S revolutions become inevitable in its absence. Disorder and conflict weaken the strong

24 Civics and Citizenship
basis of the society. The differences between the rich and the poor, the weak and
the strong take deeper root in the society.
Therefore, rule of law is necessary for social equality, civic rights, democratic society
and stable state system. Rule of law is an indicator for a civilized society.
Liberty
Generally, liberty is understood as whatever one does at his own will. In real sense,
liberty does not mean this sort of unlimited freedom. Because, unlimited freedom
creates anarchy in the society. For example, if somebody is allowed to do anything
at his own will, it might harm others resulting in conflicting environment. So liberty
in civics is used in a different sense. In this sense, liberty is to act at one's will
within the limit without interfering or creating obstacles to others’ activities.

Liberty refers to such opportunities and environment where no one harms others,

everybody enjoys their rights. Liberty helps individuals to grow their personality and

eliminate all the obstacles to the enjoyment of rights.

Forms of Liberty

Liberty has different forms: 1. Personal liberty; 2. Social liberty; 3. Political liberty;

4. Economic liberty and 5. National liberty.

1. Personal Liberty: Personal liberty is understood as liberty which does not harm
others if it is enjoyed. For instance, to practice religion and maintain family
secrecy. This sort of liberty is of individual's personal matter.

2. Social Liberty: Social liberty includes the right to protect life, to enjoy property
and to take on a legitimate profession. This sort of liberty leads to the growth of
civic life. To protect rights for the people living in the society, social liberty is
required. This liberty has to be enjoyed in such a manner so that it does not harm
others.

3. Political Liberty : Political liberty includes voting, the right to be elected, the
right to obtain security abroad. This sort of liberty creates opportunities for
individuals to participate in governing the state. Political liberty is very much
important in the democratic system.

4. Economic Liberty: Economic liberty refers to taking on a profession according
to one's competence and also to get due wage. Citizens enjoy economic freedom
to get financial benefits. Other liberty cannot be enjoyed without this liberty.
Economic liberty is necessary for staying free from exploitation by other social classes. S

Law, Liberty and Equality 25

5. National Liberty : Bangladesh is an independent state and free from interference
by other states. This status of Bangladesh is known as national liberty. As a
result of this freedom, a state remains free from control of other states. Every
independent state enjoys national liberty .

Law and Liberty

Political scientists differ in their opinions about the relationships between law and

liberty. Many of them say that the relationships between law and liberty are intimate.

Again some of the political scientists say that law and liberty are mutually antagonistic.

As a matter of fact, this relationship is not mutually antagonistic, rather intimate. It is

discussed below:

1. Law protects freedom: Law acts as a protector of freedom. For example, we
have the right to live. We enjoy the right to live because of law. John Locke
rightly said, 'where there is no law, there is no freedom.’

2. Law is the guardian of freedom: Law acts as a guardian of freedom. Just as
parents keep their children safe from dangers, so laws protect freedom from all
kinds of opposing forces.

3. Law is a condition of liberty: A single law is a single piece of freedom. All can
enjoy freedom as there exists the control of law. According to Willouby, freedom
is protected as their exists the control of law.

4. Law enlarges freedom: Law enlarges freedom of the citizens. Law creates the
necessary conditions for a peaceful and orderly life. In the process, though laws
control freedom, actually laws enlarge freedom.

So it can be said that the relationship between law and liberty is very close. Not all

laws protect liberty. For example, the laws of Hitler of Germany. Because, his laws

were against humanity. But laws that are based on people's consent are deemed as a

protector, guardian, condition and basis of freedom.

Equality

Etymologically, ‘equality' is understood as equal status of all in the society. But not

all the people in the society are equal and they are not born with equal competence.

In real terms, equality is understood as such a social environment in which

irrespective of their ethnic, religious, racial identities, all people according to their

qualities receive equal opportunities and by utilizing these opportunities they can
develop their own skill. Essentially, equality implies three things. First: abolishing
Forma-4, Civics and Citizenship- Class-9-10

26 Civics and Citizenship
privileges for a particular individual or a class. Second: to manage adequate
privileges for all. Third: to enjoy equal opportunities according to competence.
Forms of Equality

Human beings require multiple opportunities for multifaceted development. To enjoy

these multiple opportunities equality can be divided into different types. For example,

1. Social equality; 2. Political equality; 3. Economic equality; 4. Legal equality;

5. Natural equality and 6. Personal equality.

1. Social Equality: Social equality means social opportunities equally enjoyed by
all the members in the society regardless of their ethnic, religious, racial and
gender identities. No individual or a particular class is allowed to enjoy special
privileges.

2. Political equality: It refers to the opportunities in taking part in activities of the
state by all. For political equality, citizens enjoy the right to express opinion,
the right to be elected and the right to vote.

3. Economic equality: It means the opportunities for a job according to one's
competence and to get just wage. Economic equality includes getting rid of
unemployment and getting legitimate profession.

4. Legal equality: To keep everybody equal in the eyes of law despite their varying
identities like ethnic, religious, racial is legal equality. Legal equality ensures that
nobody should be arrested without offence and imprisoned without due process of trial.

5. Natural Equality: Every human being is born free and equal. But in reality every
human being cannot be equal physically and mentally. For this reason, the
concept of natural equality is almost out of order these days.

6. Personal Equality: Personal equality implies the elimination of barriers such as
ethnic identity, religion, race, lineage and status among human beings.

Relations between Equality and Freedom

There are two opinions in political science regarding the relations between equality

and freedom.

These are: 1. equality and freedom are complementary to each other and 2. equality

and freedom are mutually antagonistic. The genuine relationships between these

two will be revealed if we explain these opinions.

1. Mutually dependent: Equality and freedom are mutually dependent. Just as 2
freedom cannot be imagined without equality, so equality also cannot be &

Law, Liberty and Equality 27
thought of without freedom. So it can be said that the more a state would be
based on equality, the more freedom will be ensured.

2. Basis of democracy: Equality and freedom act as the basis of democracy. Just as
equality is required to establish rights of the people, so freedom is required.
If equality and freedom do not co-exist, democratic rights would not be
possible to enjoy. Equality eliminates differences between the top and the bottom,
freedom offers the right to enjoy all the opportunities.

Finally, it can be said that equality and freedom are alternative and complementary

to each other. Equality based society cannot be possible unless we enjoy political,

social and economic freedom. With these freedom, people participate in state functions
and enjoy the right to movement and freedom of right to life. Freedom is required
for enjoying all the opportunities equally by all living in the society. So it can
be said that equality means freedom and freedom means equality.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. How many types of law are there?
a.2 b. 5
c.3 d. 6
2. What is the main idea of law?
a. all are equal in the eyes of law b. it regulates external behaviour
c. it is the saviour of individual freedom dd. itis related to rules and policies.
3. The purpose of enacting government laws is-
1) to save relationship between individuals
ii) to save relationship between individual and state
iii) to run the judiciary
Which one is correct ?
a. iand ii b. ii and iii
c. iand iii d. i, ii and iii
2
S
N

28 Civics and Citizenship
Read the following paragraph and answer questions 4 and 5:
Recently, the Ka court resolved the dispute with Myanmar over the maritime
boundary through their mutual understanding.
4. By which law did Bangladesh resolve this dispute?
a. Government b. Private
b. Constitutional c. International
5. The resultant effect of the said law is that-
a. A state behaves well with another state
b. The relationships between state and individual continue
c. Different states will run their administration properly
d. Independence of judiciary shall be protected
Creative Questions
1. Mr. Shamol Mitra is a member of parliament. In order to stop eve teasing
in his constituency he placed a bill in parliament which was passed by the voice
vote. Mr. Arca Barua is the chief of the higher court in that country. While giving
judgment to a case of an accused, he finds no evidence from the prevailing law.
Depending on his wisdom and sense of judgment, he then determines the punishment.
a. Who is the book "Commentaries on the Laws of England” by?
b. What is international law? Explain.
c. What kind of source is that where Shamol Mitra placed the bill? Explain.
d. The method of judgment given by Mr. Arca Barua is one of the important sources
of law -analyze.
2
Ss
AQ

Chapter Four
State and System of Government

State is a political institution. And government is one of the important elements of state.
As tepresentative of the state, government administers the country. There are different
types of states and governments. Different countries choose different types of
governments for the differences in their social and political needs. In this chapter, we
will know about different types of states and systems of government.
At the end of this chapter, we would be able to

* describe various types of states and forms of government;

* explain the position of citizens and their relationship with their government;

* determine the differences between democracy and dictatorship;

* be inspired to learn and apply democratic behaviour in real life.
State and Government
Many a time the terms 'state' and 'government' are synonymously used. But there are
fundamental differences between these two. A state is a complete and stable institution.
It possesses sovereignty or absolute power. Government is one of the four
elements (population, territory, government and sovereignty) of a state. Although all
states are formed with the same elements, all states and governments are not the
same. With the change of time, the nature of government and state may also change.
Forms of State
There are different forms of states in the world. In the chart below, we see the different
forms of state.

State
Based on source of power eae eae ee
Capitalist Socialist Democratic | | Dictatorial State ||| Unitary State || Federal State
State State State
Based on Inheritance Formula
Welfare State
2 A
5 Absolute Monarchy

State and System of Government 30
State based on Economic System
Based on economic system, states are classified into capitalist and socialist states.
Capitalist State
In the capitalist state, private ownership of property is recognized. In this form of
state, capital, labour and management are vested in private ownership. Government
does not have control over those factors. Production and supply system is
administered by open competition. In this form of state, citizens are free to own
assets and to consume them. Most of the states in the present world are capitalist.
Socialist State
Socialist states are the states which do not recognize private ownership of property.
In this kind of state, means of production are owned by the states. Steps are
taken for the management of production and distribution under the state's supervision.
This is opposed to capitalism. Socialism does not recognize individualism. There
exists only one party in this type of state. State controls the mass media. There is
no opportunity for the expression of opposition views. For example, China and Cuba
are socialist states.
Pair Work: Students will prepare a chart on the differences between capitalist
and socialist states
State on the basis of Sources of Power
Who is the owner of power? People, a single individual or a group? On this basis,
states are classified into democratic and dictatorial states.
Democratic State
Democratic state is that in which the power to rule is vested in all members of the state
or in the hands of the people. People participate in this form of governance, and they
form this government. This is a form of governance which is run for the welfare of the
people by direct participation of the people. In the democratic state, people enjoy the
right to express opinion and to criticize the government. In this form of state,
government is changed through elections held in a constitutional way. In a democratic
state there are more than one political party.
This form of governance ensures interests for all and recognizes citizens, rights and
tule of law. Bangladesh, India, the United States, UK etc are democratic states.
Work in a pair: Make a chart on characteristics of democracy. s
N

31 Civics and Citizenship

Qualities of the Democratic State System

There are many good sides of democracy. Some qualities of democracy are described below.

1. Safeguard of Individual Liberty: In democratic states, people can express their
opinions independently. They can criticize the government. People participate
in running the government. As a result, individual liberty expands. Citizens’
rights are protected in a democratic state.

2. Responsible Governance: In this governance, people's representatives are accountable
to the people. They try to work for the welfare of the people so that they could be
elected in the next election. As a result, responsible governance is established.

3. Increase of Government Efficiency: In democracy, government's _ stability
depends on the trust of the people. As a result, government attempts to
perform its duties with honesty to gain trust of the people. This results in the
increase of government efficiency.

4. Symbol of equality and equal rights: All are equal in democracy. In this
form of governance, all enjoy equal rights and opportunities regardless of ethnic,
religious and racial identities. All participate in the activities of the state equally.

5. Increase of citizen's status: People's elected representatives run the democratic
state. As the people can participate in governance, they can realise their own
importance. This is how patriotism is created in them. Personality and status grow
and enhance.

6. Established on logic and consent: Democratic system is based on consent of the
people. There is no scope for the use of force in democracy. In the end, people's
will and logic get priority.

7. Gain of Political Education: In this form of state, citizens avail thamselves
of the opportunity to think of complicated political matters. People's political
consciousness increases by taking part in elections and by hearing the statements
of political parties.

8. Less probability of Revolution: Democracy is a system of flexible governance. If
people wish, they could change the government through systematic procedure.
There is no need of revolution.

Demerits of Democratic System

In spite of its many positive qualities, there are some demerits in democracy. These

are discussed below:

1. Priority of number over qualities or competence: Loss and win in democracy

% are determined by election, so the number enjoys more importance than qualities.
8 In other words, it counts heads, but undermines merit.

State and System of Government 32

2. Party Governance: Democratic governance is party governance. The party that
wins the majority in elections forms the government. Elected party runs
the government considering their own interests. As a result, people's resentment
piles up.

3. Expensive and Wastage of Money: Government is formed by elections. To
conduct elections, a huge amount of money is required. During elections, candidates
spend a lot of money. Every political party spends a huge amount of money on
leaflets, posters and public meetings to secure public support in the election.
Consequently, wastage of time and resources occurs.

4. Frequent Changes of Policy: In democracy, government changes periodically.
Elected party in democracy forms the government for a fixed period of time and
every political party adopts their programs based on their policies. On some
occasions, government's term ends before the implementation of its programs.
With the change of government, its policies change too. It obstructs developments
in the state.

Steps for successful democracy and democratic behaviour
In the present world, democracy is the best and most acceptable system of
governance. But there are many obstacles on the way to its successful exercise or
implementation. To remove these obstacles and make democracy successful, many
factors are required tobe fulfilled. The success of democracy requires educated
and conscious population, economic equality and social system established
on justice, efficient administration and appropriate leadership.In addition to these,
there are other factors that can make democracy successful. These are: tolerance,
rule of law, free and independent media, more than one political parties and political
tolerance. The most important element that is also required is: citizens have to be
democratic in their mentalities. They have to behave democratically in personal,
social and political spheres. For this reason, achieving the following qualities
is necessary:

* Citizens have to be tolerant to others' opinions. All have to be allowed to express
their opinions. Others opinions must be respected and the mentality is to be
shown to accept majority opinion as opinion for all. One's own or party opinion
cannot be imposed upon others by force.

¢ Self and partisan interests must be avoided. This is applicable to all citizens and
political parties. Opposition should not work for opposition only. All have to work
for the welfare of the country. Ss

33 Civics and Citizenship

¢ Besides securing own rights, respect should to be shown to the rights of
others. Consciousness is needed so that securing one's own rights does not
violate rights of others.

* Cooperation, tolerance and mutual understanding are to be maintained by
different communities and groups.

¢ Respect is to be shown to individuality. Along with this, qualities of a good citizen
have to be achieved. Citizens have to be intelligent, self-restrained and conscientious.

¢ Election is the medium of democracy. Citizens must cooperate so that free and
neutral elections can be held. Citizens have to cast their votes with
consciousness so that incompetent persons cannot be elected. This is how democracy
becomes stronger.

¢ Rule of law is the heart of democracy. For this reason all have to obey laws. All are
equal in the eyes of law. So all have to be treated equally. In other words, to
provide equal rights and opportunities is essential.

Every citizen has to be careful to learn and practice these democratic norms to

make the democracy successful.

Dictatorial State System:

Dictatorship is an arbitrary system of governance. In this form of state, the

power of governance lies not in the hands of the people but in the hands of an arbitrary

ruler. Here, the leader possesses all powers. He is said to be a dictator. Dictatorial

rule is assisted by ministers or advisors. But they abide by the orders of the ruler.

The dictator's orders are laws. In this system, rulers are accountable to none. Only one

political party exists. The chief of the party holds the position of the head of the

government. The party is run according to his wish and the party comprises of his blind

followers.

In dictatorship, mass media (radio, television and newspapers etc) are controlled

by the leader and his party. These are not allowed to be used neutrally. Rather these

are only used to praise the government. In this form of government, legislature and

judiciary do not have freedom. Law making and judicial functions are performed

according to the wish of the dictator. One nation, one country and one leader are

the ideals of dictatorship. The main principle of a dictatorial state is that everything

is for the state and nothing is beyond or against it.

Forma-5, Civics and Citizenship- Class-9-10

State and System of Government 34

Demerits of a Dictatorial State

Dictatorship is an arbitrary system. The following are its defects:

1. Anti-democratic: Dictatorship is anti-democratic. It does not recognize individual
liberty which is the essence of democracy. It violates fundamental rights.
Thus it hampers personality development.

2. Arbitrary rule: Dictatorship establishes an arbitrary rule. Because, dictators
not accountable to any authority. His words are laws, which leave no room for
individual's freedom of thought and exchange of free ideas. Dictatorship, as a
matter of fact, is a system of arbitrary governance.

3. An obstacle to the creation of leadership and political consciousness: One
man is dominant in this form of governance leaving no room for the development
of alternative leadership. As people cannot participate in such governance, so
political consciousness is not created.

4. Possibility for revolution: The fear of revolution arises from the lack of
participation in this system of dictatorial governance. Dictatorship cannot last
long due to internal opposition and the rise of mass uprising against this form
of government.

5. Against World Peace: Dictatorship holds and fosters aggressive nationalism.
Power and greed for power instill war-mongering mentality in to the dictator.
Hitler created havoc all over the world by having such a war-mongering mentality.

In dictatorial state, an individual is sacrificed at the altar of the state. Here, individuals

are for the state, the state is not for individuals. Therefore, no state supports

dictatorship in the present world.
Group Work: Determine differences between democracy and dictatorship.

State based on the principles of the distribution of power

Based on the principle of the distribution of power, states can be classified into

two categories : unitary state and federal state.

Unitary State

In a unitary state, all powers are vested in the central government. Thus the country

is run from the centre. For the benefits of governance, the country is divided

into different provinces and regions and some powers are transferred to their
hands. But central government, if needed, could retain such powers. In this form -

of government provincial or regional governments act as agents of the central S

35 Civics and Citizenship
government and run governance according to the directives of the central government
Bangladesh, UK are examples of unitary states.
Federal State
In this state system, more than one region or province merge together and create a state.
This is called federal state.
For the convenience of central government's rule, power is distributed between centre
and. province or region through constitution. In a federal state, small states stay side
by side to form a large state. The state becomes much stronger. In addition,
federal government mobilizes resources from its smaller states. Thus a large
economy is formed. This large economy can contribute to the development of the
state. Federal states in the world are more or less developed. Our neighbouring country
India is a federation.
State based on the inheritance:
In many states, heads of states assume power through inheritance. These kinds of
states are called monarchy. In the monarchy, the son or daughter of the King becomes
either King or Queen. There are two types of monarchy, absolute monarchy and
constitutional monarchy.
Absolute Monarchy:
In absolute monarchy, King or Queen assumes absolute power. In this form of
governance, there is no opportunity for people's participation. This form of
government is negligible in number. In the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia monarchy
assumes absolute power.
Constitutional Monarchy
In this form of state, King or Queen becomes head of state through inheritance or
constitutional procedure. But he/she enjoys limited power. The real power of state lies
with the elected representatives of the people. In the United Kingdom, constitutional
monarchy exists.
State based on Objectives
Welfare State
The state which works for the bare daily needs of the people is called a welfare state.
This kind of state creates opportunities for employment, gives unemployment
~ benefits and provides education and health to the people free of cost.
=|

State and System of Government 36
Canada, UK, Sweden and Norway are examples of welfare state. The features of
this state are:
¢ The state strengthens social security measures for the welfare of society. It fulfills
the basic needs of the people such as food, clothing, education, health and shelter.
The state provides road infrastructure, orphanages, temporary lodging, subsidy
on food and employment opportunities. It also provides people with
unemployment allowance, pension and allowances for the handicapped.
¢ The state imposes tax on solvent people at a higher rate and less tax on less solvent
people. It provides assistance and rehabilitation to the poor and the destitutes.
¢ It fixes minimum wages for the interest of farmers, labourers and workers so that
they can maintain their standard of living.
¢ The state allows farmers, workers and labourers to form cooperatives.
Work in pair: Discuss whether Bangladesh may be regarded as welfare state or not.
Classification of Governments
Since the emergence of the concept of government, different philosophers have
divided governments in different ways. Classification of modern governments is given
below.
Government
Based on the principle of Based on the relationships between
the distribution of power legislature and the executive
Unitary Federal Parliamentary form || Presidential form
Government Government of Government of Government
Classification based on the principle of the distribution of power
Based on the principle of the distribution of power, governments can be classified
into two types: unitary government and federal government.
Unitary Government
The system of governance in which all powers are vested in the hands of central
government and governance is run from the centre is called a unitary government. In ,,
this system, power is not distributed between centre and province. ES

37 Civics and Citizenship

In this type of government, regional government has no separate entity. The state

consists of provincial or administrative regions. But they act as agents or facilitators

of the centre. Bangladesh, Japan, UK are the examples of unitary government.

Merits of Unitary Government

Unitary government has the following merits:

1. Easy Organization System: The organization of a unitary government is simple.
In it, all powers are vested in the hands of the centre. There is no complexity of
sharing power between centre and province. If any decision is made at the
centre, it can be easily implemented all over the country. Besides, unified laws,
policies and plans are put into effect in this form of governance. Organizational
consistency is maintained.

2. Symbol of National Unity: In this form of government there is no autonomous
regions or province. As a result the same administrative principles and laws are
made for the whole country, which helps to keep national and territorial integrity.

3. Economical: In unitary government, administrative cost is low. Because, government
only remains at the centre in this form of government. Here, central government
takes all the decisions and implements them gradually. High officials are not
necessary at every level, so the cost decreases.

4. Quick decision-making: Unitary government can take quick decision as it does
not have to take regional interest into consideration or it does not have to consult
with the regional government. No complexity arises in decision making.

5. Suitable for Small States: Unitary state is suitable for a state which is
geographically relatively small and has a homogenous culture. For example,
Bangladesh and Sri Lanka.

Demerits of Unitary Government:

Just as unitary government has its merits, it has demerits too. They are:

1. Work load: As all the powers are vested in the hands of the central government,
the central government has too much load of work. As administrators of
the central government, they have to perform all functions and so they cannot
pay attention to the welfare functions for the people due to heavy work load.

2. Unfavorable for the development of local leadership: In this system, power is
exercised and decisions are taken at the centre. No scope is left for political

6 participation at the provincial or regional level. As a result, local leadership cannot
3 develop.

State and System of Government 38

3. Negligence of local development and problems: Unitary government adopts
unified plans or decisions for the whole country. But different localities may
have different problems, and central government cannot take notice of all these
problems. Moreover, as the regions are far away from the centre, central
government can not understand and solve the local problems.

4. Unsuitable for large states: Unitary government is unsuitable for large states.
In large states, language, culture and tradition differ from one region to another.
These differences altogether cannot be tackled alone by the central government.
In running the state, government has to face multifaceted problems. People
become suspicious of the government. For this reason, separation may develop
in the regions.

5. Center's arbitrariness: As all powers tend to be centered in the central
government, it might lead to the rise of arbitrary behaviour of the central government.

Federal Government:

Federal government consists of more than one region or province. This type of

government is based on the principle of the distribution of power. In this form of

government, a part of state power and authority, according to the constitution is vested
in the hands of the provincial government and the national matters are vested in
the hands of the central government. Provincial and central government thus
possess fundamental powers. Both run the governments separately and independently.

In other words, there exists a dual form of government. India, the USA, Canada are

examples of federal forms of government.

Work in pair: Prepare a list of the characteristics of federal government.

Merits of the federal government

There are several merits of the federal government. For example:

1, It coordinates national unity and regional individuality: This kind of
government creates national unity by maintaining regional individuality and
differences. By recognizing regional characteristics and differences, these are
fostered in this form of government. Thus unity in diversity develops.

2. It decreases the work load of the central government: In this form of
government, power is distributed through constitution between the centre and
provinces, relieving the burden of central government. The centre can perform its
functions with ease. SI

N

39 Civics and Citizenship

3. It is conducive to solving regional problems: In federal system, regional
government can easily comprehend and identify the problems of regions and solve
these problems.

4. It increases political consciousness and helps the growth of local leadership: In
the federal system, people are loyal to two governments and abide by two kinds
of laws. Thereby, people become politically more conscious. This system helps
to grow local leadership.

5. It helps to reduce arbitrary behaviour of the centre: Due to distribution of
power between the centre and provinces, the centre cannot assume absolute power.
As a result the centre has no chance to have any arbitrary attitude.

Demerits of federal government

Demerits mentioned below may be seen in federal government:

1. Complicated nature of rule: The organization of federal government is of
complicated nature. It is like a government within a government. Consequently,
complexities arise regarding the determination of relationship between the centre
and province, distribution of power, law making and application.

2. Conflicts of power : In this system, conflicts may be created between centre and
province or between provinces over the jurisdiction of power.

3. Weak government: Due to sharing of power, both national and regional
governments remain weak. Quick and strong decisions cannot be taken during
emergency. Decisions are delayed if opinions of the regional governments are
required.

4, Fear of secession: Provinces are separate and autonomous in federal
governments. Taking the advantage of this opportunity, any region or province
may attempt to be separate.

5. Costly: As dual structures of government exist, the cost of administration increases.
Group work: Compare the merits and demerits of unitary and federal governments.
Classification of governments based on the relationship between

legislature and executive:

Legislature and executive are two important branches of government. Based

on the relationship between these or on the principle of accountability,

« governments can be classified into two forms: parliamentary and presidential forms
3
&_ of governments.

State and System of Government 40
Parliamentary Government
The form of government where the relationship between legislature and executive are
close and the stability and functional capacity of the executive depend on the legislature
is called a parliamentary form of government or cabinet form of government. In this
system, executive powers are vested in the hands of the ministers. The party which
wins the general election forms the cabinet. The trusted person in the party becomes
the prime minister. He appoints ministers from the important members in the party
and distributes portfolios among them.
Usually ministers are selected from among the legislators or members of parliament.
That is why, this form of government is called the parliamentary form of government.
Bangladesh, India, UK, Canada, Sweden and Australia have parliamentary form of
government.
This kind of government has a constitutional president. But the cabinet of ministers under
the leadership of the prime minister hold the real administrative power. In this
system, the importance of the prime minister is the highest. In fact, the president
does not do anything without the advice of the prime minister.
In the parliamentary form of government, the legislative council holds the absolute
power. The cabinet including the prime minister are accountable to the legislative
council for their activities. The cabinet falls if they lose the confidence of the
legislative council. Besides a member has to resign if parliament brings a motion
of no confidence aginist him/her. In this system the same person holds both legislative
and administrative power, because ministers are selected from among the parliament
members.

Merits of parliamentary government

Merits of parliamentary government are the following:

1. Responsible governance: Parliamentary government is a responsible government.

Here, ruling and opposition parties are both accountable to the people for their deeds.

2. Relations between legislature and the executive: As members of the executive
are the members of the legislature, the relationship between these two remains
cordial and friendly.

3. Status of opposition: In this form of government, the opposition is said to
be an alternative government. In times of national crisis, both the ruling and
opposition parties can solve problems through discussion. Opposition is an ge
integral part of the parliamentary system. &

41 Civics and Citizenship
4. Opportunity for criticism: In this system, the Members of the Parliament (MPs)
both from the ruling or the opposition sides criticise the government. The
government maintains self-restraint in its activities and tries to do good activities.

5. It gives a political lesson : Parliamentary government is run by public opinion.
To keep public opinion in their favour, both ruling and opposition parties remain
active. They engage themselves in debates in the parliament. Thereby, the people
become politically conscious.

Demerits of parliamentary government

Parliamentary government has some demerits. They are:

1. Absence of stability: Parliamentary government may suffer from instability.
If the cabinet loses its confidence to the legislature or loses its majority in
legislature, the government collapses. This sort of situation might destabilize
the country. For this reason, the parliamentary government is called tyranny of
the majority.

2. Indivisibility of power: Legislative and executive powers are vested in one centre
i.e. in the hands of the cabinet leading the ministers to be autocratic.

3. Too much partisan mentality: Parliamentary government is primarily a party
government. In this system, the formation and stability of the government depend
on the majority of party in parliament. Naturally the parties are given much
importance. Both ruling and opposition parties work with extreme partisan mentality.
As this government is a party government, many ministers are appointed in the
cabinet without considering their competence and merit. National interest therefore
is hampered.

4. Delay in decision making: In this form of government, after a lot of discussions
and suggestions, decisions are made. Many activities are not possible to perform in
time.

Presidential form of government

Presidential forrn of government is understood as that form of government in which

the executive is not accountable to the legislature. The president forms the cabinet

comprising persons to his liking. The president and members of the cabinet are not

the members of the legislature. Ministers are accountable to the president for their

deeds. The tenure of ministers depends upon the satisfaction of the president. In

the presidential form of government, president holds all powers. He is the real
Forma-6, Civics and Citizenship- Class-9-10

State and System of Government 42
ruler and head of the government. He might either seek the advice of ministers or not.
The USA has the presidential form of government.

Merits of presidential form of government

The following are the merits of the presidential form of government:

a. Stable governance: In the presidential form of government the president is elected
for a definite tenure. During this time, he can not be removed without
impeachment (impeachment is a process for removal of the president with two
third majority in the parliament if he is accused of specific charge). As a result,
governance stays stable.

b. Quick decision making: In this system, the president can take quick decisions
without consulting with legislative council. In times of war, emergency or in any
other crisis the president shows his efficiency in taking quick decisions.

c. Efficient governance: In this system, president and ministers do not have to engage
too much in law making and they are not accountable to the legislature. So they
can spend more time in matters of administration which makes the administration
more efficient.

d. Separation of powers: In this governance, three branches of government
(executive, legislative and judiciary) separately work and simultaneously keep
relations among them. Separation of powers thus maintains check and balance.

e. Less reflection of partisan attitude: The voting of the members of legislature in
passing the bill does not have any influence on the stability of the government.
Partisan influence is less evident in this system of governance. The president
places more importance on national interests than that on party interests.

Demerits of the presidential form of government

1. Arbitrary rule: All powers are vested in the hands of the president and the
executive is not accountable to the legislature. Thus the president may turn into
a tyrant. Since he is not obliged to seek advice from anybody, he can become
whimsical and irresponsible.

2. Absence of good relationships between different departments: As the executive,
legislature and the judiciary hold powers separately, they lack cooperation
and antagonism arises among them. This kind of situation might throw the
government into a fragile condition.

3. Rigid governance: In the presidential form of government, constitution cannot be
easily amended. It makes this governance rigid. If any change is needed, it cannot x
be done easily. Again the president cannot be removed easily. Expected changes “

43 Civics and Citizenship
do not occur easily.
By studying this chapter, we have learnt about the state and different forms of
governments along with their merits and demerits. Rather a mix of more than one
system has created different forms of statesand governments. The USA is a
democratic state. It is a federal form of government under the rule of president.
The UK is a parliamentary form of government with constitutional monarchy.
Differences in the forms of state and government result from socio-economic
conditions of the state, people's aspirations and practical conditions.
Group work: Discuss which form of government is better: parliamentary or presidential?
Group work: Discuss which form of government matches with the system of
government in Bangladesh.
Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. Which system is formed on the basis of the sources of power?
a. Socialist b. Capitalist
c. Monarchy d. Democratic
2. Which state system protects individual liberty?
a. Democratic b. Capitalist
c. Dictatorship d. Socialist
3. Democracy is called a responsible governance. Because rulers here-
i. are accountable to the people;
ii. attempt to preserve people's interests;
iii. Perform duties with honesty.
Which one is correct?
a. i and ii b. ii and iii
c. i and iii d. i, ii and iti
Observe the table below and answer questions 4 and 5:
The government system of A
1. Possesses all constitutional powers 1. Acts as an agent of X Unit
2. Gives directives for running the country| 2. Implements the task as directed
20 3. Distribution of powers in different regions | 3. Remains controlled under X Unit
S
“ X-Unit Y-Unit

State and System of Government 44
4. Which form of government exists in the state 'A'?

a. Federal b. Unitary

c. Socialist d. Monarchy
5. In the said form of government -—

i. X-unit acts as regional government;

ii.X-unit can take powers back from Y-unit;

iii. X-unit is the source of all powers of the state 'A'.

Which one is correct ?
a.iand ii b. iand iii
c. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii

Creative questions

1. Trends of government powers in two states

(in the A state system, the functions of two units)
tuler of the state A. He is not the member | majority in parliament by people's vote
of legislature. In his government system, | and forms the government in the state B.
national interests are superior to party | The person Y and his party pass different
interests. laws by giving importance to different
opinions in the parliament.

a. What is the name of the government formed by inheritance?

b. What is a capitalist state? Explain.

c. What kind of government system is there in the state A? Explain.

d. 'The government system in the state B is more responsible than that of the state
A’- give reasons in your favour.

2. As the state A is small in size, the central government quickly develops its
education, electricity, communication and agriculture. In the said state, high
officials at every level are not many in number and this keeps economic cost
marginal. On the contrary, the regions in B are internally independent. In these
regions, regional leaders solve problems by local councils. The high-ups of this
state have to do less work load.

a. In which state system is the dictatorship established?

b. Explain the state system formed by inheritance.

c. Explain the type of government in state A.

d. Government system in the state B is conducive to the growth of local leadership- ge
analyze. S

Chapter Five
Constitution
We live in a state. There are some rules and regulations to run the state. These are
recorded in written and unwritten form. A collection of a set of laws is called the
constitution. The state is run according to the constitution. The constitution is like a
looking glass or a mirror of the state. The rights and responsibilities of a citizen,
the power of the ruler and how the relationship between a citizen and a ruler
will be are clearly recorded in the constitution. Therefore, it is necessary for every
citizen of the state to have a clear concept about the constitution. In this chapter,
we will learn about the concept of the constitution, the importance of the
constitution, the process of making the constitution, characteristics of various
kinds of constitution, the history of making the Bangladesh constitution and its
salient features and the various amendments.
At the end of this chapter, we will be able to -
* explain the concept and importance of the constitution;
* explain the system of making the constitution;
* describe the characteristics of the best constitution;
* describe the history of making the constitution of Bangladesh;
¢ explain the characteristics of the Bangladesh constitution;
¢ describe the various amendments of the Bangladesh Constitution.
Concept of the constitution and its importance
Constitution is the fundamental document of running a state. The collection of the
rules by which a state is conducted is called constitution. How the government will
be elected, how the legislative, executive and judiciary will be formed, what
their form and power will be, what state conferred rights the citizens will enjoy and what
the relation will be between the citizens and the government all these are stated in the
constitution. The state cannot take any decisions regarding these things which go
against the constitution. So constitution is called the driving force of the state.
Aristotle, the father of political science, says, constitution is such a system of life
x that the state itself has chosen.
=
S
AQ

Constitution 46

Process of making the constitution

There are different processes of making the constitution. The significant processes

are discussed below:

1. By approval: In the past, almost every autocratic ruler used to govern the state
according to his whims by depriving the people of their social, political and
economic rights. This created anger and dissatisfaction among the people. To pacify
the people and to recognize their rights, the ruler, at one stage made a constitution.
For instance - in 1215 King John of England decreed a charter of rights called the
Magna Carta. It has occupied a significant place in the British constitution.

2. Through discussion: The constitution can be drafted through discussion among
the members of the constituent assembly formed with the object of drafting the
constitution. The constitutions of India, Pakistan and the United States have
been compiled in this way. The Bangladesh constitution was also drafted through
discussion in the Constituent Assembly in 1972.

3. Through revolution: When the ruler does any work contrary to the interest and
welfare of the people, a change of the autocratic ruler is brought about through a
revolution and a new regime assumes power and makes a new constitution. The
constitutions of Russia, Cuba and China have been made in this process.

4. Through evolution: In some cases, the constitution appears to exist through
evolution. For instance, the constitution of Britain evolved gradually on the
basis of custom and tradition. In this case, the constitution is not made by
any person or organization, it develops gradually. That is why it is said that
the British constitution has not been created, it has developed.

Pair work : Which is the best method of making a constitution? Explain your reasons.
Constitutions based on recording or writing Constitutions based on amendment

1. Classification of constitution on the basis of writing: Constitution based on writing 6

can be of two types. Namely: A. Written constitution, B. Unwritten constitution. &

47 Civics and Citizenship

a. Written constitution: Most of the subject matters of a written constitution are
recorded in a document. For example, the constitutions of Bangladesh, India,
Pakistan and the United States are written.

b. Unwritten Constitution: Most of the rules in an unwritten constitution are not
compiled in any document. This type of constitution is based on constitutional
usage and manners and customs, traditional rules and conventions. For example,
Britain's constitution is unwritten.

However, it is a fact that no constitution is completely written or unwritten. Some

are more written and some are less written. That constitution which is mostly written

is called a written constitution. And the constitution whose subject-matter is mostly
unwritten is called unwritten constitution.

2. Constitutions based on amendment: There are two types of constitution based
on amendment. For example: A. Flexible constitution, and B. Rigid constitution.

a. Flexible Constitution: The articles of a flexible constitution can easily be
changed or amended. In this case, there is no need for any complication to
change or amend the constitution. Parliament can amend any part of the constitution
by a simple majority. The British constitution is a flexible constitution.

b. Rigid Constitution: The articles of a rigid constitution cannot easily be changed
or amended. In case of changing or amending the constitution in this circumstance,
a complicated process has to be undertaken. This type of constitution cannot be
changed through a simple majority. Absolute majority, conference and voting
are required. The US constitution is rigid.

Characteristics of a written constitution

The significant characteristics of a written constitution are described below:

1. Clarity: Because most of the sections in a written constitution are in a written
form, it is clear and understandable to the people. Generally, the process of
amendment is stated in the constitution and because of this it is not easy to change
or amend it. However, society is constantly changing. A written constitution cannot
keep pace with a changed society. That is why, it works as an obstacle to progress
at times. Besides, at times, the people have to revolt in favor of amending the
constitution.

2 2. Stability: As everything is written in this constitution a ruler cannot change or
S amend it according to his whims. Therefore, a written constitution can remain

Constitution 48
stable under any circumstance. The people and the ruler are obliged to follow the
written constitution.

3. Suitable for federal government: A written constitution is suitable for federal
form of government. Through this constitution, the power sharing between states
and central government is made in the federal system. It would not have been
possible for such power sharing in the federal system if the constitution was
not a written one. For example, power has been distributed between the states
and the central government in India and the United States through a written
constitution. It is worth mentioning that the written constitution is a precondition
to the success of the federal system of government.

4. Relations between the ruler and the people: What the power of the ruler will
be, what rights the citizens will enjoy are stated in a written constitution. As a
result, the ruler and the people can have a clear idea about their own power and rights.

Group work: Describe one main quality of a written constitution.

Characteristics of an unwritten constitution

1. It supports progress: Society always strives for progress. On the other hand, an
unwritten constitution can easily be changed by keeping pace with social progress.
That is, it can easily adjust with the changed conditions in society. Therefore, an
unwritten constitution supports progress. However, too much change can again
create an obstacle to progress.

2. It assists in urgent need: Because an unwritten constitution is easily changeable,
it can play an effective role in meeting urgent needs. However, a permanent
policy and programme cannot be taken as a result of frequent change in the
unwritten constitution. As a result, the system of government can become unstable.

3. Little scope of revolution: This constitution can easily be changed. Since an
unwritten constitution can be changed, there is less scope of a revolution.

4. Miscellaneous: An unwritten constitution is not suitable in federal system of
government. As most of the subject-matter of this constitution is not written, most
people do not have a clear idea on matters of state governance.

Pair work: Highlight the notable differences between a written and an
unwritten constitution.
3
AQ

49 Civics and Citizenship

Characteristics of an ideal constitution: All countries in the world have their

own constitutions. The more developed constitution a country has, the more

developed is its governance. The following are the characteristics of an ideal constitution:

1) Clear: In an ideal constitution, most of the subject matters are written. The
language of this constitution is easy, simple and lucid. That is why, an ideal
constitution is clear and understandable to all.

2) Concise: An ideal constitution is concise. There is no place for unnecessary and
irrelevant matters in an ideal constitution. The notable rules and regulations of
governing the state are stated in this constitution.

3) Fundamental rights: The fundamental rights of a citizen are stated in an
ideal constitution. As a result, the people become conscious about their rights.

4) Reflection of public opinion: An ideal constitution is created on the basis of
public opinion. The demands and expectations of the people are reflected in this
constitution. Besides, social manners, customs and traditions are reflected in this
constitution.

5) Balanced nature: An ideal constitution is of balanced nature. It means, an
ideal constitution lies between a flexible and a rigid constitution. That is, it is
neither very flexible nor very rigid. As a result of this, an ideal constitution can
keep pace with the social and political changes.

6) Amendment process: The amendment or change of any section in an ideal
constitution is brought about in a constitutional process. That is, the amendment
process is stated in this constitution. It is stated in an ideal constitution how a
section of it should be amended.

7) Basic principles of governance: The basic principles of governance are stated
in the ideal constitution. For example- in the Bangladesh constitution, Nationalism,
Socialism, Democracy and Secularism have been inserted as basic principles of
governance.

8) Welfare oriented : Philosopher Rousseau says, the laws which cannot bring
welfare to people is not regarded as an ideal constitution. So, an ideal constitution
should be welfare oriented.

Any constitution that has the above characteristics may be called an ideal constitution.

The Constitution of Bangladesh

After the independence of Bangladesh, a 34-member constitution drafting committee

was formed in 1972 for drafting the constitution. Dr. Kamal Hossain was the

chairman of that committee. The first session of this draft committee was held
Forma-7, Civics and Citizenship- Class-9-10

Constitution 50

on 17 April 1972. Working hard this committee prepared a draft constitution and it was

presented at the Constituent Assembly. The draft of the constitution was placed and
reviewed in the Constitution Assembly from 14th October to 4th November. After
the conclusion of debate for and against by different members of the Constituent

Assembly, the revised constitution was finally adopted by the Constituent Assembly

on 4th November 1972 and it came into effect from 16 December 1972.

Characteristics of Bangladesh Constitution

Notable characteristics of the present constitution of Bangladesh are described below:

1. Written document: The constitution of Bangladesh is a written document. It
has 153 Sections. It is divided into 11 parts. It has a preamble with seven schedules.

2. Rigid: The constitution of Bangladesh is rigid. This is because consent of a
two-third majority of parliament members is required for making any changes or
amendment to it.

3. Basic principles of governance: Nationalism, Socialism, Democracy and
Secularism have been determined as basic principles of governance. In
matters of governance, different authorities run their activities on the basis of the
said principles.

4. Fundamental right: Constitution is the highest law of a state. As the rights we can
enjoy as a Bangladeshi citizen are clearly stated in the constitution, their
importance has increased. For example- right to live, right to move more, right
to freedom of speech, freedom of thought and conscience, right to religion, right
to property etc.

5. Universal voting right: In the constitution of Bangladesh, universal voting right
is approved. Therefore, all citizens who are 18 years old have voting rights,
whatever their caste, religion, race, gender, occupation may be.

6. Republic : According to the constitution, Bangladesh is a republican state. Here
people are the owners of all the properties. Elected representatives of the people
will administer the country.

7. Parliamentary government: The constitution of Bangladesh introduces
parliamentary or cabinet form of government. The responsibitity of running the
executive is vested in the hands of the cabinet, led by the prime minister.In this
system the cabinet is accountable to the legislature.

8. Unicentric state: Bangladesh is a unicentric state. Unlike the federal state, there
is no provincial government here. The whole country is run by one central ,
government . S

51 Civics and Citizenship

9. Legislature: The legislature of Bangladesh is a uni-cameral legislature. It is a
sovereign lawmaking institution. Its name is "Jatiya Shangshad". At present it has
350 members and its duration is 5 years.

10. Highest law: The constitution of Bangladesh is the highest or supreme law
of the country. Because in any case of a conflict between a regular law and the
constitution, the constitution prevails. Therefore if a law is conflicting with
the constitution, it is inappropriate and out of order.

11. Freedom of Judiciary: There is an independent and impartial judiciary
in the constitution of Bangladesh.

Group Work: Is the constitution of Bangladesh an ideal one? Give reasons.

Amendments of the Constitution of Bangladesh:

After its making in 1972, the constitution of Bangladesh has been changed 16 times.

The main characteristics of these amendments are as follows :

First Amendment ® Provision was made for trial of people accused of crime against
July 1973 humanity in the War of Liberation in 1971 and war crimes.
Second Amendment | e Empowerment of president to declare ‘State of Emergency’
September 1973 on the advice of the prime minister in times of internal trouble,
fear of war or in times of humanitarian crisis.
Third Amendment @ It ratifies the Land Boundary Agreement signed between
November 1974 Bangladesh and India. The signatories from both sides were
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi.
Fourth Amendment | @ Presidential form of government was introduced in place
January 1975 of parliamentary form of government.
e Creation of the post of Vice President and formation of only
one party through dissolution of all political parties.
Fifth Amendment © The Fifth amendment legalised all orders, promulgations
. and amendments to the constitution made by the military
Apel 1902 government after august 15, 1975.
© The basic state principles were changed.
2 © Bangladesh nationality was changed from Bangali to Bangladeshi.
So
N

Constitution 52
Sixth Amendment e By introducing the Provision that the office of the Vice President
July 1981 is not an office of profit, election of Justice Abdus Sattar to the

President was ensured.
e@ This amendment ratifies all acts, laws and martial law orders
Seventh Amenement from 24th March 1982 to November 1986 since imposition of
November 1986 martial law by General Ershad.
Eighth Amendment | © Islam was declared as the state religion and six benches of the
July 1988 High Court Division were set up outside Dhaka.
Ninth Amendment | @ Provision for electing the Vice President through direct voting
July 1989 of the people was made.
@ Rules were made under which no person can hold office of
President for more than two consecutive terms.
Tenth Amendment | ® The period of 30 reserved seats for women in parliament
June 1990 was increased to 10 years.

Eleventh Amendment| @ All measures taken by chief Justice Shahabuddin Ahmed as
August 1991 acting president were legalised and provision for his return to
his post of chief justice was made.

Twelfth Amendment | ® Parliamentary system of governrnent was restored in place

September 1991 of Presidential system of government. :
e Post of Vice President was abolished.
Thirteenth Amendment | e Non-party Caretaker government was incorporated to hold free
March 1996 and fair elections.
Fourteenth Amendment | @ 45 reserved seats for women. Provision was made to display
May 2004 portraits of the President and the Prime Minister in all
government offices including designated institutions.
e Retirement age limit of judges of the Supreme Court, PSC
Chairman and member has been increased.
Fifteenth Amendment | ® Dissolution of caretaker government system.
July 2011 © Restoration of the four basic state principles of Nationalism, Democracy,
Secularism and Socialism in the main Constitution of 1972.
e Alongside keeping Islam as the state religion, practice was
ensured for activities of all religions.
e Provisions were made to raise reserved seats in parliament to 50.
Sixteenth Amendment | e Removal of judges of the supreme court is restored to the parliament.
September 2014
Group Work: Compare in brief the power of the President and the Prime co
Minister according to the fourth and twelfth amendment of the constitution. s

53 Civics and Citizenship
Exercise

Multiple choice questions:

1. Who is the father of political science?
a. John Locke b. Jean Jacques Rousseau
c. Aristotle c. T.H. Green

2. What is the main characteristic of the Fourth amendment of the Bangladesh
Constitution?
a. Introduction of Presidential form of government
b. Change of state principles
c. Reiteration of parliamentary form of government
d. Abolishment of caretaker government system

3. The need to frame a constitution is
i. to pacify the people
ii. to recognize the rights of the people
iii. to protect the state from a despotic ruler.

Which one is correct ?
a. i and ii b. ii and iii
c. i and iii d. i, ii, iii

Read the paragraph below and answer questions 4 and 5.
Person A occupies a land belonging to his neighbour B, who seeks the help of
the law enforcing agency. The above agency, under the prevailing law, returns
possession of the land to the owner B.

4. Under which characteristic of the constitution did B get back his property?
a. fundamental rights b. reflection of public opinion
c. Parliamentary system d. balanced nature

5. Because the said characteristic is stated in the constitution,
i. People are conscious about enjoying their right.
ii. No one can infringe upon other people's rights.
iii. People can see the reflection of their demands, hopes and aspiration .

Which one is correct below?

co a. iand ii b. ii and iii
Sc. iand iii d. i, ii, iii

Constitution 54

Creative questions:

1. A social organization named 'A' is run according to traditional social customs and
these customs are not recorded anywhere. If any problem arises within the
organization, they resolve it through discussion as per existing rules. On the other
hand, the headmaster of a high School named 'B' runs the school adhering to
clearly written rules and regulations. He is able to take the right decision in
making any policy or appointing a teacher. At times, problems arise with regard
to interpretation of written rules and regulations.

a. What is the name of the charter of rights created by king John of England in 1215?

b. Why is it necessary to make a constitution?

c. With which characteristic of a constitution are the rules of running the
organization 'A' compatible? -Discuss.

d. Of the rules and regulations of the organizations 'A' and 'B' which one do you
prefer and why?

2. The constitution of State 'A' is based on common language, culture, economic
power and secularity. People's participation in all state activities has been ensured
in the constitution of this state. In the legislative assembly of that state, a bill can
not be passed due to lack of support of 140 members out of a total of 210.

a. When did the constitution of Bangladesh come into effect?
b. What is an unwritten constitution? Explain.
c. On the basis of amendment, which class does the constitution of State 'A' belong
to? Explain.
d. The characteristics of Bangladesh constitution are reflected in the constitution of
state 'A', Analyze.
es
ES

Chapter Six
Government System in Bangaldesh

The word 'govermnent' is very common in our everyday life. Every country of the
world has a government system. In chapter four we have learnt what government
is. Mainly, government maintains the administrative operation of a country. Though,
every country has a government, it is not similar in nature. In this chapter, we shall
learn about the government system in our country.
After studying this chapter, we would be able to -

* describe the nature of Bangladesh government.

* describe the power and activities of President, Prime Minister and Cabinet of

Bangladesh .

* describe the administrative structure of Bangladesh .

* describe the structure, power and activities of Legislative Assembly of Bangladesh .

* describe the structure, power and activities of Judicial Division of Bangladesh.
Nature of Bangladesh Government
The first Government of Bangladesh was formed on 10th April 1971. Bangladesh
is a People's Republic. People are the source of all power in this country. Besides,
Bangladesh is also a centralized state too. It has no province or state. In our country,
we have parliamentary government system. In this system of government president is
the highest person of the state. But, the actual administrative power is vested in the
hands of the prime minister and his/her cabinet.
The cabinet holds the administrative power and prime minister is the head of the
government. The administration is run by the cabinet under his/her leadership.

Group Work: Prepare a chart of the main features of Bangladesh Government.
Various Divisions of Bangladesh Government
Like governments of other countries, Bangladesh government also has three divisions.
These are 1) Administrative Division, 2) Legislative Division and 3) Judicial
Division. We shall learn about their structure, power and activities below:
Administrative Division
« he administrative Division is also known as Executive Division. It is normally
S formed by the President, Prime Minister and the cabinet.

Government System in Bangaldesh 56

President

President is the highest person in the administrative division of Bangladesh. He is the

head of actually a ceremonial post. He runs the administration of the state with advice

from the prime minister with a few exceptions. President is elected by the majority
vote of the parliament members. He holds office for five years. He can be re-elected.

But, an individual cannot be in the position for more than ten years in two terms.

During the tenure of the presidentship, none can take any legal action against him

in the court. But, in case of a severe complaint and breach of the constitution, he

can be released from the office before the expiry of his term through impeachment
system in the legislative assembly. The president must be a citizen of Bangladesh

and minimum 35 years old. Besides, he must have the competence to be elected as a

parliament member. If any person is removed from the post of president, in that case

he will never be eligible to become president again.
Pair Work: Discuss the appointment process of the president and make a list of
his main qualifications.

Power and Activities of President

A president has to carry out many responsibilities. His power and responsibilities

are as follows:

1 . He is the head of the state. All the administrative activities of the government are
run in his name. He appoints the prime minister. He also appoints other ministers,
deputy ministers etc. He appoints the leading executives (Director General of
Auditors, ambassadors and other top level executives) of the country too. He is
the chief of the armed forces. He appoints the chief of the army, navy and air
force. But, he makes the appointments with the suggestions of the prime minister
except those of chief justice and the prime minister.

2. President performs some legislative duties. He calls the session of the parliament
and with the advice of prime minister he can adjourn it. He can make a speech
and send messages to the parliament. A bill is accepted as law if he has given
consent to it or if it is considered that he has given consent.

3. Without the permission of the president, money bills cannot be presented
in the parliament. President can grant permission for releasing money from the
particular fund for sixty days, if the parliament fails to do so in any circumstances.

4. President appoints the chief justice and upon his advice he appoints other
judges at appellate & high court divisions. He can reduce or condone the o
punishment of a condemned person given by a court, or any other authority. S

57 Civics and Citizenship

5. President is the source of all the honor of the state. Without his permission no
citizen of the country can receive any reward or honor from any foreign country.

6. He can declare a state of emergency in the country if the safety and peace of the
society is endangered by war, attack by external enemy or internal clash. But, in
this case he must take prior approval from the prime minister.

7. President performs many other duties as well. He chairs the national programs. He
confers the titles, medals and honor to eligible persons of the state. Various state
level contracts and deeds are drafted and signed upon his instruction. He receives
the appointment letter of the foreign ambassadors. He conducts the oath of the
prime minister, other ministers and the chief justice.

Pair Work : Write down the main power and activities of a president
and activities
fd
Sectors of
power & [|
[Lo

Prime Minister
Prime minister is the centre of the cabinet and head of the government. The
administration of Bangladesh revolves around him. Prime minister and his ministers
are the real administrators of the state. President appoints the reliable person of the
majority party in the parliament as the prime minister. For example - in the election
(2008) Awami League won the majority number of seats in the parliament. As a result,
the president has appointed Sheikh Hasina as the prime minister because she was the
leader of the majority party and supported by the majority number of the
parliamentarians. Similarly, Begurn Khaleda Zia was also appointed as a prime minister
in 2001. President can use his own discretion to select the prime minister if there is no
majority winner in the parliament.

Prime Minister holds office for five years. But, for any reason if the parliament

members bring any charge against him and they are accepted by the parliament, he is

Forma-8, Civics and Citizenship- Class-9-10

Government System in Bangaldesh 58

to resign from his position before the term of his office. Prime minister can submit

resignation willingly too. The cabinet dissolves too with the resignation of the

prime minister. For this reason, the prime minister is called the pillar of the

government. He is the leader of the parliament and cabinet and head of government.
Pair Work: Discuss the differences between the appointing systems of President
and Prime Minister.

Power and Activities of Prime Minister

Prime minister has to perform various duties:

1. Though the administration of the country is run in the name of the president
as per constitution, prime minister holds the ruling power of the state. He/She
performs all the administrative duties with the help of the cabinet. According to
his/her advice, president appoints the ministers, top level executives of the
country and ambassadors to foreign countries.

2. Prime minister is the head of the cabinet. He/She fixes the number of the
ministers and distributes portfolio among them. He/she supervises the activities of
the ministers and co- ordinates the jobs among various ministries. The ministers
take suggestion and approval for all the important jobs. He/She can consult with
president to terminate any minister if he/she wants. In brief, the cabinet of ministers
is formed, operated and dissolved by him.

3. With the instructions and suggestions by the prime minister, the finance minister
drafts and places the budget in the parliament.

4. Prime minister is a member and leader of the parliament. He/she plays a vital role
in the parliament. Laws are outlined in the assembly under his leadership. He/She
advises the president to call the session of the parliament, postpone and dissolve
it. In this way, he/she performs important legislative task.

5. He/she plays an important role regarding foreign affairs. No International treaty
can be signed without his/her permission. He/she represents the country in
international summits.

6. Ina state of emergency, he/she can give any instruction without the decision of the
cabinet.

7. Prime minister is the preserver of the national interest. He/She makes speeches
and statements on state activities to maintain harmony among the people for
the national interest. S

59 Civics and Citizenship
Pair work: Write down the main areas of Prime minister's power and activities.
Prime Ministers Power & Functions
As parliamentary government system is prevailing in Bangladesh, the country, nation
and the government revolve round to the prime minster. He is the centre of the
administration system of the country.
Panel Discussion: "Prime minister is the centre of the administration system
of the country". A panel of 4/5 students of the class shall discuss this topic and
other students will participate in the discussion.
Group Work: The students will make a comparative chart of the power and
responsibilities of the President and the Prime Minister and will present in the class.
Council of Ministers
To run the government, there is a cabinet or council of ministers. Prime minister
is their leader. He selects the number of ministers, deputy and state ministers and forms
the council.
The ministers are selected from among the parliament members. A person who is
eligible to be elected as a parliament member can be selected as a minister though he
is not a member of the parliament. But, their number cannot be more than one tenth
of the total number of the ministers in the council.
Prime minister distributes the duties and responsibilities of the ministers. The
ministers perform their duty being accountable to the parliament individually and
collectively. The council of ministers is dissolved if the prime minister resigns or
parliament is dissolved for any reason. Prime minister can change the office of any
minister if he wants. A minister can resign from his office too.
Power and Functions of the Council of Ministers (Cabinet)
The cabinet is entitled to hold the power to run the administrative functions of the
country. It controls the administration in the country. We shall learn about their power and
functions below:
1 . The members of the cabinet share the power and functions of the administrative
x power and run the administration as colleagues of the prime minister. They
N

Government System in Bangaldesh 60
perform duties of their individual ministries. The prime minister has to be
accountable to the parliament for the failure of the minister.

2. Cabinet meetings are held regularly under the leadership of the prime minister.
All the administrative issues (such as law and order, economic development,
foreign affairs, commerce, defense, cost of products and controlling food situation
etc.) are discussed in these meetings and necessary policy and decisions are adopted
in the meetings.

3. The cabinet of ministers co-ordinates the task of various ministries:

4. Issuance of new laws, amendment of existing laws, leading the parliament are the
major tasks of the council of ministers. Besides, they draft new laws, place
them in the parliament for approval and take necessary measures to pass them.

5. Every year the government prepares a budget to run the state. The finance
minister prepares the draft. Other ministers of the cabinet help to prepare it. One
of the major tasks of the cabinet is to get approval of the draft budget in the
parliament.

6. To safeguard the sovereignty and ensure security of the state is an important task
of the cabinet. It has the responsibility to form the armed forces of the country.
Mainly, the president appoints the chief of the armed forces on the basis of the
recommendation of the cabinet. To ensure the law and order in the country
and safeguard the people is another task of the ministers.

7. The cabinet prepares the foreign policy under the leadership of the prime minister.
The cabinet has the responsibility to sign treaty with other countries, establish
diplomatic relationship and operate international trade. The cabinet performs these
tasks keeping the national interest and honor intact.

8. Ministers’ cabinet works as a bridge between government and the people. They
convey the government policy to the public and ensures their support in this regard.

Pair work: Write down the main aspects power and activities of the cabinet.

Power & Activities of the Cabinet
Group Work: Students in separate groups will arrange a quiz/competition on the
powers and activities of the President, Prime Minister and Cabinet. S

61 Civics and Citizenship
The Administrative Structure of Bangladesh
The administration is responsible to carry out the administrative activities of the
state. A good administration has no other alternative than to maintain the law and
order situation in the country and development of the state. For this reason,
administration is called the heart of the country. Administration is run under a proper
structure. A chart is shown below for the administrative structure of Bangladesh:
Administrative Structure of Bangladesh
Central Administration
(Secretariat)
Related Office / Field Administration
Directorate — —
Divisional Administration
District Administration
v

Upazilla Administration
From the above chart, we can observe that the administrative structure of Bangladesh
is layer based. It has two main levels. The first level is the central administration. The
second level of Bangladesh state administration is the field level administration. The
first step of the field administration is divisional administration. District administration
is on the second level and the upazilla administration is spread to the root level.
All the administrative policies and decisions are made in the central level of
administration. And these policies are executed all over the country with the help of
the field level administration. Field level administration is controlled by the central
administration.
Besides, various offices and directorates are attached to different ministries. The
director general is the head of this office or directorate. Ministries also have under
them various autonomous, semi-autonomous organization, boards and corporations.
The activities of these office/directorates are extended to the division, district
and upazilla level. These organizations act as a line organization to execute various
government activities.

Group Work: Students will analyze the graph of the administrative structure
x of Bangladesh and identify the mentionable features.
8

Government System in Bangaldesh 62
Central Administration
Secretariat is the central point of the Central Administration. All the administrative
decisions are taken here. Secretariat is formed under some ministries. A ministry
is placed under a minister. There is a secretary in every ministry. He is the
administrative head of the ministry and advisor to the minister. All the administrative
power of the ministry is controlled by the secretary. The main job of the minister is
to design projects and outline policies. Secretary is responsible to help the minister to
implement policy and support administration.
Administrative Structure of the Secretariat
. Additional Joint Depu
Secretary Secretary General
Additional secretary is the second main administrative officer. He helps the secretary
to carry out various responsibilities. In absence of the secretary he performs the
duties of the secretary. For every subdivision of the ministry, there is a joint secretary.
He also helps the secretary in different issues. He performs the duties to maintain the
staff and office of the ministry. The deputy secretary performs the duties to maintain
one or more departments of the ministry. He helps the joint secretary and additional
secretary to initiate a policy through suggestions and cooperation.
Every department has a senior assistant secretary and an assistant secretary. They
carry out responsibilities in serious issues consulting the deputy secretary. There are
many officers and general staff in the ministry. They also play important role in the
activities of the ministry.
It is mentionable that there is no limit to ministries in the government and number
of additional secretaries, joint secretaries, deputy secretaries and senior assistant
secretaries, assistant secretaries ina ministry . Their number is fixed on the basis of
the work volume of the ministry.
Divisional Administration
There are eight divisions in Bangladesh. Divisional Commissioner is the head
of the administration of each division. He works as the divisional administrative
head as a representative of the central administration. He is accountable to the center
for his activities.
The divisional commissioner looks after the activities of the district commissioners.
He implements and oversees the developmental work of the division. He also arranges %
to collect land tax and looks after the government land. He looks after the transfers 8

63 Civics and Citizenship

of the District Commissioner. He works for the development of sports, arts, literature

and cultural activities of the division. He looks after the public welfare and
service-oriented activities. In case of a natural disaster, he ensures relief and
rehabilitation for the victims.

District Administration

District administration is an important stage of the field level administration.

District commissioner is the main executive. He is an experienced member of

Bangladesh Public Service Commission. All the activities of the district are operated

revolving him. We shall learn about the activities of the District Commissioner below:

1. Administrative work: District commissioner executes and implements all the
decisions and orders from the center. He looks after various activities of the
district and co-ordinates them. He recruits people for the vacant positions of district
level administration.

2. Revenue Related and Monetary Activities: District commissioner is the treasurer
and director of the district treasury. He is responsible for collecting all the
revenues of the district; that is why he is also known as the collector. Besides,
he also resolves the disputes related to land development, registration and revenue.

3. Law and order related job: To maintain the law and order situation in the district
and to ensure the security of the people is his responsibility. He carries out the
responsibility with the help of the police administration.

4. Developmental work: District commissioner is the key to all development of the
district. He is responsible for the implementation of the developmental
works (education, agriculture, industry, roads and communication system etc.).
He has to look after the victims of natural disasters and rehabilitate them.

5. Local administrative jobs: District commissioner looks after the local
autonomous organizations (upazilla parishad, municipality, union council). He
co-ordinates the work of all the departments and organizations in the district.

As the highest person in the district administration, he performs some additional

jobs. He controls the newspaper and publication despartments of the district. He

provides the business license in the district. He collects various information in
the district and informs the government accordingly.

Because of his vast area of activities, he is termed as the main pillar of administration

in the district level. He is not only the administrator of the district but also a servant,

director and friend.

Upazilla Administration

co Bangladesh has 490 administrative upazillas. Upazilla Executive Officer is the head
& of the upazilla administration. His main responsibility is to supervise the administrative

Government System in Bangaldesh 64
work of the upazilla. Besides, he looks after all the development work of the upazilla
and the expenditure of the govermnent fund. He is the head of the Upazilla
Development Committee. He arranges relief and rehabilitation for the victims of
natural disasters. He takes initiative to face and prevent the disasters. He is the
treasurer of the Upazilla Treasury. He also performs various duties as imposed by the
government.

Group work: Prepare a chart of administrative structure of Bangladesh in groups

and hang it on the wall or board of the class. Then, discuss each stage in group.
The Legislative Assembly of Bangladesh
Legislative assembly is one of the three departments of the government. Legislative
assembly is known as National Parliament. It is a single-house parliament. The
Number of members 350. Among these, 300 members are directly elected by public
vote. Rest of the seats are reserved for the women. The locality based women
members are selected by the 300 elected members of the parliament. But, the women
can be elected through direct contest in the three hundred seats of the parliament.
There is a speaker and a deputy speaker in the parliament. They are elected by the
Members of the Parliament. Their duty is to conduct the sessions of the parliament.
The tenure of the parliament is five years. But, the president can dissolve the
parliament with the advice of the prime minister at any time. The two sessions of
the parliament should be held within sixty days. A parliamentary session can be
operated in presence of a quorum of 60 members. Prime minister is the leader of the
parliament. The leader of the party winning second position as per number of seats
holding in the election acts as the leader of the opposition. The parliamentary jobs are
performed through forming various committees. The parliament membership is
cancelled if a member remains absent from the parliament session for 90 days in a row.
The parliamentary election is held every five years. Any citizen of Bangladesh aged
25 or above can be elected as the member of the parliament. But, a person becomes
ineligible to be a member of the parliament, if he is declared bankrupt or insane
by the court, takes citizenship of any other country, or if he has been sentenced
to imprisonment by the court.

Work: Students shall make a concept map on the board about the structure of the

national parliament.
Power and Functions of National Parliament:
The power and functions of national parliament are as follows:

cD

1. National parliament of Bangladesh has all the rights to draft and approve laws &

Government System in Bangaldesh 65
in the country. The parliament can make any new law, amend the existing laws.
To pass a new law it has to be brought to the parliament as a draft bill. It becomes
a law if approved by the majority of the parliament members.

2. The parliament controls the administrative division. Prime minister and the
members of the cabinet are accountable to the parliament. The cabinet dissolves
if the parliament brings a no-confidence proposal on the prime minister. The
national assembly takes control over the administrative department through
questions, censure adjournment motion, no-confidence motion and discussion. In
this respect, the opposition party plays a very important role.

3. National parliament is the protector of the fund of the state. No tax is imposable
and receivable without the approval of the parliament. Parliament approves the
budget every year. Finance Minister places the draft budget to the parliament.
The members of the parliament approve that on the basis of long discussions and
amendment.

4. The national parliament has judiciary power. If any members behave against the
code of conducts of the parliament, the speaker can send him out of the session.
The parliament can also draw a no-confidence bill in the parliament against the
speaker, deputy speaker, prime minister, cabinet and the president for their breach
of constitution of the state and remove them from the concerned office.

5. The parliament can amend the constitution on the basis of the rules mentioned
in the constitution. In this case it requires votes of at least two-thirds of
the parliament members.

6. The members of the parliament elect the speaker, deputy speaker and members of
various parliamentary committees. They also elect the women members against
the reserved seats. They elect the president of the country too.

Bangladesh has a parliamentarian government. Parliament is the center of all the

national activities of the country. Honest and eligible members are desired for making

the parliament successful and effective. It is also necessary to have a strong and
responsible opposition party. We should be conscious to elect honest and eligible
candidates. It is a holy duty of every citizen in the country to elect eligible members
of the parliament for the welfare of the nation.
Task-Acting : A parliament session is to be arranged with the participation of
students regarding the process of passing a bill in the national assembly.
Group work: Students will discuss and make a chart on the power and activities
of the national assembly.
Forma-9, Civics and Citizenship- Class-9-10

66 Civics and Citizenship

The Judicial Division of Bangladesh

The judicial division is one of the three divisions of the government. The importance

of a neutral judicial division is immense to ensure basic rights of the citizens, justice,

punishment of the criminal and to protect the weak from the torture of the strong.

The judicial division confirms the practice of law and protects the constitution of the

country.

Structure of the Judicial Division

The judicial division of Bangladesh comprises the Supreme court, Lower court

and the Administrative tribunal .

Supreme Court

The highest court of the judicial division is the Supreme Court. It has two

divisions: Appellate Division and High Court Division. The Supreme Court is

headed by a justice known as the Chief Justice of the country. President appoints

him upon advice of the prime minister. Supreme Court is formed with the required

number of justices for each department. President appoints the judges of the two

divisions consulting the Chief Justice. The Chief Justice and other Justices are fully

independent to perform their judicial activities. A person must be a citizen of

Bangladesh to become the judge of the Supreme Court; he must have an experience

of ten years of working as an advocate at the Supreme Court or in the judiciary

position of Bangladesh for at least ten years. The judges at the Supreme Court can

work up to the age of 67 years.

Power and Functions of the Supreme Court

The appellate division and the high court division have their own work periphery.

Supreme Court is formed with functions of these two courts. These are discussed below:

Power and Functions of the Appellate Division:

¢ Appellate division can arrange for hearing against the decision, decree or conviction
of the high court.

¢ Appellate division advises the president if he wants explanation of any law.

* It can order someone to be present before the court or present documents to the
court to ensure justice.

* Any law declared by the appellate division must be followed by the high court division.

In this way the appellate division plays a very important role in explaining

the law, preserving justice and advising the president. s

Government System in Bangaldesh 67
Power and Functions of the High Court Division
* Can impose ban to protect the basic rights of the citizens.
¢ Can restrain a person from doing harmful activities and can declare this type of
work as illegal.
* Can solve a case from the high court division if complexity arises in the lower
court because of the explanation of the constitution.
¢ Accepts appeal against the judgment of the lower courts.
* Provides the job description of lower courts and operates them.
Supreme Court with its high court and appellate division works as the highest court
of the country and protects the constitution and basic rights of the citizens and ensures
justice.
Lower Court: There is a lower court of judicial division in every district under the
Supreme Court. They operate the Criminal and Civil cases.
District Judge Court: District Judge is the head of the district court. The additional
district judges and sub-judges assist him in his activities. This court deals with civil
cases (land, loan agreement, etc) and criminal cases (fight, quarrels, etc.) at the district
level.
Sub-judge Court and Assistant Judge Court: There is Sub Judge Court and
Assistant Judge Court in every district under the District Judge Court. These courts help
the Judge Court in operation of the cases. Besides, they also operate cases by themselves.
Village Court: Village court is the lowest segment of the judicial system of Bangladesh.
It is situated at the Union council level. Five members including the chairman of
the Union council and two members each from the concerned parties of the case form
this court. Those cases which can be solved at local level are resolved in this court.
The criminal cases at a smaller scale are also resolved in this court.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions:
1. How many divisions are there in Bangladesh at present?
a. 6. b. 7
c.8 d. 9
2. What kind of government system in Bangladesh is in operations now?
+ a. Autocratic b. Fedarel
S c. Parliamentary d. Presidential

68 Civics and Citizenship
Read the following paragraph and answer questions 3 & 4
Little Reema was watching the news on television with her father. She/he saw two
people standing side by side. One was reading something from a book and the
other one was repeating. When Reema asked his father, he replied that the highest
honored person of the administration division was taking oath as the head of the
judicial division
3. Who is indicated as the'highest honored person in the administration division 'by
Reema's father?
a. The Prime Minister b. The President
c. Secretary d. Director General
4. The person who is the highest honored person of administration division
i. has been elected by the members of the parliament.
ii.has been assigned duty for five years
iii. is the main administrative person of the country
Which of the following is correct?
ai & ii b. ii & iii
c.i & iii d. i, ii & iii
Read the following paragraph and answer questions 5 & 6
Mr. Ripon, as a public representative was making a speech in a public meeting in the
locality of "A". He was assuring that he would place the demands and expectations
of the mass in the appropriate place in the form of a bill.
5. What kind of public representative is Mr. Ripon?
a. Union Council Chairman b. Upazilla Chairman
c. Municipal Chairman d. Member of the Parliament
6. What is the most important task of Mr. Ripon?
a. Enactment of Law b. Expressing No-confidence ©
c. Adjournment of the session d. Passing Budget 8

Government System in Bangaldesh 69
Creative Questions
AEnacts Law
Operates the Administrative Work B C Ensures Justice

a. What is the other name of the Administrative Division?

b. What do you understand by Divisional Administration?

c. Explain the task of the division of government denoted by 'A'

d.In Bangladesh the 'B' division is controlled by the 'A' division. Do you agree?

Give reasons.

2. Mr. A is the head of the administration in Chittagong division. He gave
government assistance to the construction of two buildings for the Shilpakola
Bhaban and preparation of a sports ground. On the other hand, Mr. B, as the head
of the Upazilla Administration distributed seeds, fertilizer, pesticides among
the ideal farmers of the district and collected the land tax properly. Mr. B is
accountable to Mr. A for all his deeds.

a. When was the first government of Bangladesh formed during the war?
b. ‘Administration is called the Heart of the state' Explain why.
c. As the head of which administration does Mr. A work? Explain.
d. Mr. B performs many other activities apart form those stated in the paragraph.
Give your opinion.
3}
S
N

Chapter Seven
Political Parties and Election in Democracy

Political parties are inevitable in a democratic system. A modern democratic government
system is primarily the rule of a political party. A government formed through people's
vote is a democratic government. Without political parties, it is not possible to form
this democratic government. In this chapter, we will discuss what a political party is,
relations between democracy and political party and elections and election commission,
and so on.
By the end of this chapter we would be able to -

* explain the concept and characteristics of a political party.

* analyze the role of a political party in the development of democracy.

¢ describe the main political parties of Bangladesh.

¢ determine the relations between democracy and election.

¢ describe the structure, power and proceedings of Bangladesh election commission.
Political party
A political party is that part of a country's populace which is organized to resolve the
national problems on the basis of an ideology or some principles or programs. The
main goal of a political party is to run the country according to its principles and
ideals and to implement election commitments. A political party works in the interests
of every one irrespective of all religions, races, men, women, classes and professions.
One of the characteristics of a democratic system is the presence of an ideology and
program- based political parties. There are some countries in the world where
political parties do not exist. For example, no party exists in Saudi Arabia. There
all political decisions are taken by the King's family and its council. Again, in some
places laws have been formulated to ban political parties. For example, in Uganda
in the African continent, all political parties were banned by the government until 2005
Characteristics of a politica] party
Organized group of people: A political party is an organized group of people
based on some principles and ideals.
Gaining power: The main goal of a political party is to form a government by gaining
power in a constitutional way.
Clearly defined ideals and programs: Every political party has an ideal and clearly
defined program. From the point of ideals, a party may be religion-based or secular.
On the other hand, a party may be different, considering the economic program. x
For example, Socialist party. 8

Political Parties and Election in Democracy 71
Institutional framework and leadership: Every political party has an institutional
framework. The party branch extends from the centre to the local body. Besides, there
are various committees in the central and local levels in each party. However, the party
is run by the central leadership.
Election-related activities: Election plays a pivotal role in a modern political system
and in a democratic or autocratic government system. The importance of election in
a democratic government system is more than that in an autocratic government system.
During all these elections, the party and its workers carry out various activities like
preparing for election, nominating candidates, drawing up the party program in an
election, election campaign and collecting votes.
Role of a political party
Creating leadership: The head of the political party is the leader of the party. Just
as the party has leadership in the central level, so there is leadership in the local level.
It is not that those who are leaders at the local level can not be leaders in the central
level in future. The Prime Minister of Bangladesh government is the leader of his/her
party. The political party and the people work to create leaders.
Formation of government: The main function of a political party is to form a
government. In a democratic system, the party that earns the majority in elections forms
the government.
Creating public opinions: One of the functions of a political party is to create
public opinions in favour of its ideals and programs. In creating this public opinion, a
political party adopts programs like meetings, processions and mass contacts.
Political education: The responsibility of a political party is to create public
awareness about matters related to its interest. During an election, political parties
explain their party programs and criticize the programs of other parties. People
come to know many matters related to the running of the state from the opinions,
discussions etc. The common people thus become politically educated.
Constructive opposition: Among the political parties, the winning party in an election
forms the government and the second majority party plays the role of the
opposition in the parliament. If the government makes any mistake, then the main task
of the opposition would be to point out the mistakes of the government through
constructive criticism.
Establishment of social unity: In a society, there are people of different religions,
races and classes. Their interest is different from each other. One of the roles of a
« political party is to bring together these different interests and convert them into a
3 program. A political party seeks people's support to be elected to go to power. A

72 Civics and Citizenship
party, after assuming power, adopts a policy to implement their program. Social unity
depends on implementation of this policy.

Individual work: Prepare a list of the activities of a political party that create hope
The main political parties of Bangladesh
The party system of a country does not only explain the presence of political parties
in that country. Rather, party system refers to the number, structure, their relation
with government etc. According to the country's constitution, every citizen has the
right to express his opinion freely and form organization or association. As a reflection
of this, we can see the existence of a multi-party system in Bangladesh. Presently,
there are many political parties in Bangladesh. Noteworthy among these are
Awami League, Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP), Jatiya Party (JP),
Jatiya Samajtantrik Dal (JSD), Worker's Party of Bangladesh, Jamaat- E- Islami.
A brief profile of these political parties is given below.
Bangladesh Awami League
Awami League is the oldest and largest political party. The Party was formed in Dhaka
under the name Awami Muslim League on June 23, 1949. Later, to make it more
acceptable to all, the word 'Muslim' was omitted from the label of the party in 1955.
Bangali nationalism, democracy, secularism and creation of an exploitation free society
are the main principles of Awami League. The Party secured majority seats in the
1970 General Elections in Pakistan under the leadership of the father of the nation
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. The 1971 War of Liberation was fought under the
leadership of the Awami League. Through this war, an independent, sovereign
Bangladesh was born.
Bangladesh Nationalist Party
Bangladesh Nationalist Party is another large political party. Major General Ziaur
Rahman founded the Party on September 1,1978. The ideals or principles of
the Bangladesh Nationalist Party are - belief in islamic values, Bangladeshi nationalism,
democracy and free market economy.
Jatiya Party:
Jatiya Party is the country's third largest Party. This Party was founded on Ist January
1986 under the leadership of Lt. General Hossain Mohammad Ershad. In the written
proclamation of Jatiya Party, five party ideologies ware adopted. They are:
1) Independence and sovereignty, 2) Islamic Ideals and freedom of all religions,
3) Bangladeshi Nationalism, 4) Democracy and 5) Social progress, that is, economic
emancipation. 8

Political Parties and Election in Democracy 73
Bangladesh Jamaat-e-Islami
Jamaat-e-Islami is a religion- based political party. This party was formed in 1941 in
British India under the leadership of Maulana Abul Ala Maududi. It was named
Jamaat-e-Islami Hind at that time. After the establishment of Pakistan, it was
named Jamaat-e-Islami Pakistan. In May 1979, Jamaat-e-Islami Bangladesh emerged
in independent Bangladesh.
Jatiya Samajtantrik Dal (JSD):
On 31 October 1972, Jatiya Samajtantrik Dal (JSD) was established in
independent Bangladesh. JSD believes in socialist ideology.
Communist Party of Bangladesh (CPB):
Bangladesh Communist Party was formed after the name of the Communist Party
of India and Pakistan. Comrade Moni Singh (died 1990), who was the pioneer of
the Communist movement in this country was the central leader of the Communist Party.
Bangladesh Workers Party:
Some fractions of the frequently divided pro-chinese communists united together
to form Bangladesh Workers Party. This Party came into existence in 1980.
Political Party in the development of democracy
Democracy means the presence of political parties. The importance of a political party
in the success of democracy is unlimited. This is because public opinion is
well-organized by a political party and it creates political awareness among the people.
A political Party teaches its members and leaders to get accustomed to democratic norms
and practices. For example, party leaders and workers are given opportunity to
give their opinions when taking a party decision and to be tolerant of others opinions.
A political party launches a movement to set up a democratic government through
the removal of a government that works against public interest. In 1990, the political
parties of Bangladesh established democratic rule by removing the anti-people
military government through unanimous opinions of all political parties. In a
democratic system, power is transferred after a certain fixed term. Government is
formed through a free and fair election in a democratic system. This election is not
possible without the participation of political parties.
Individual work: Students will highlight the role of political parties in a democratic
system.
Election:
Election is the method of selecting people's representatives. All citizens with voting
rights select representatives from local to national levels. The process of selecting
Forma-10, Civics and Citizenship- Class-9-10

74 Civics and Citizenship
representatives is called election. Those who cast votes are called electors or
voters. A number of voters collectively are called electorate. A credible election is
one of the conditions of a democratic system. Besides, at times, elections are also held
under martial law and authoritarian system. In a democratic system, the importance of
election is very high. Through election, the voters elect a deserving candidate from a
list of candidates. The party which gets maximum votes forms the government. The
electorate works as a bridge between the government and the people. Elections in
a democratic system compel the government to be answerable to the people.
Generally if a party, when elected, does not work properly for the people, then in the
next election, the people do not elect that party any more. As this is true in a
developed democratic country, so it is true too in case of under developed countries.
In Britain, in the 2010 election, the people of that country removed the labour party
from power and voted for the conservative party. Similarly in 2001 the
people of Bangladesh put the BNP in power in place of Awami League
and in 2008 the Awami League was voted to power replacing the BNP. In this
way, election works as a medium of communication between the people and. the
ruling class. Through election, the people continue its support for the ruling class for
a specific duration. Since the independence of Bangladesh, in a span of 40 years from
1973 to 2014, elections were held 15 times. Among them there were 2 referendums,
3 presidential elections and 10 parliamentary elections. These elections play an
important role in establishing democracy in the country.
Types of Elections
Elections are of two types . For Example, direct election and indirect election.
Direct election: When the people vote directly to elect representatives, it is called a
direct election. For example, the members of Bangladesh parliament are elected by
direct votes of the people.
Indirect election: People elect public representative or an electoral college through
votes and when these public representatives elect the president or members of the
reserved seats in parliament, it is called an indirect election. For instance, the
president of Bangladesh is elected by the parliament members Again, the president
of the United States is elected by an electoral college.
Individual Task: Give some reasons why the electorate is important in a
democratic system.
Voting methods
Voting method implies how a candidate is selected through voting. Presently, there -
are two methods of casting votes: (A) Open ballot method (B) secret ballot method. 3

Political Parties and Election in Democracy 75
In an open ballot method, the voters openly vote in favour of the person of their
choice. Here, the voters openly say "yes" or raise their hands to show their support.
On the other hand, in the secret ballot method, the voters either put a tick mark or
seal next to the name of the candidate of their choice. Currently, this system is
universally recognized.
One Man, One Vote
Another important method in the election system is the'one man, one vote, system.
"One man, one vote, is presently a universally accepted system. In this system, any
number of candidates can compete for one seat. A voter can cast only one vote for the
candidate of his choice. The competing candidate who gets the most votes is elected.
Individual work: Show the characteristics of the election system separately through
Election Commission
An effective election system is a pre-condition to build a democratic institution.
In other words, people's placing of trust on election. A good and neutral election
system is the safeguard for democracy. The responsibility of holding this credible
and neutral election lies in the hands of election commission.
Formation
The election commission is formed according to the Bangladesh constitution.
It is a constitutionally formed institution. The election commission will be formed
with one chief election commissioner and not more than four commissioners,
totaling five persons. The president appoints them. The chief election commissioner
presides over the meetings of the election commission. The tenure of the chief
election commissioner and the other commissioners is five years from the date
of their assuming responsibility. It is the duty of the government and other
authorities to assist the election commission in its work. In addition to the
directions given in the constitution, the election commission is run according to the
country's election rules.
The election commission has its own secretariat to carry out its work. The independence
and neutrality of the election commission is very much necessary for holding
a good and impartial election as well as for forming parliament with the elected
representatives. The election commission is dependent on the government for its
manpower and financial power. That is why in matters of manpower and finance,
x independence of the election commission is absolutely necessary
N

76 Civics and Citizenship
Power and activities
The responsibility of the election commission is described in Article 119 of the
constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh. The responsibility of the election
commission is to hold the elections of the president and the parliament, prepare
the voter list for election, provide identity cards to the voters, conduct other elections
determined by law (this includes all local government councils like union council,
municipality, city corporation, upazilla council, district council, Hill Tracts
Council) as well as complete other relevant tasks effectively. Besides, it is
the duty of the election commission to select the nomination papers of the
candidates in the election, make policies related to parties and election related policies.
Further, an important task of the election commission is to demarcate the boundary
of the constituency. For example- In the Bangladesh parliamentary elections,
there are 300 constituencies. There the parliament members are elected through
the direct votes of the people. A constituency is determined on the basis of its
geographical size and number of voters. In addition to the geographical area based
300 seats, there are 50 more reserved seats in the Bangladesh parliament. These are
fixed for women. They are indirectly elected by the 300 directly elected parliament
members.
Group work: The role of the election commission is key to holding a good and
impartial election. Arrange a class debate on this subject.
Exercise

Multiple Choice questions
1. How many reserved seats for women are there in parliament?

a. 13 b. 50

c. 300 d. 350
2. What is the main task of a political party?

a. To go to power through election.

b.To create public opinion in favour of party ideals and program.

c. To find faults with the government through constructive opposition.

[vey
d.To work out a political programme by uniting the interests of different parties. s

Political Parties and Election in Democracy 77
Answer questions 3 and 4 by observing the diagram
Role of Party 'A' in Democracy
Promotion of a Formation of Providing political Constructive
qualified leader to| | government through education to opposition
higher position | | constitutional means activists
3. Development of democracy requires
i. to give priority to the views of the workers in political decisions.
ii. constructive criticism of the different activities of the government by the opposition
party.
iii. change of state power through a neutral election.
Which one below is correct?
a. iand ii b. ii and iii
c. i and iii d. i, ii and iii
4. It will be easy to follow the roles of party 'A' in the diagram -
a. in monarchy b. in autocratic system
c. In a Socialist rule d. In a parliamentary government
Creative Questions
1. In the national election of Bangladesh candidates 'A' and 'B' contest from one
seat in Dhaka. They go from house to house to meet voters and exchange
pleasantries. In addition, they hold meetings and processions in different areas of
their constituency. The voters elect person 'A' thinking him to be honest and qualified.
a. Under which system of government is a political party indispensable?
b. What is the main goal of a political party? Explain.
c. Under which system is person 'B' elected? Explain.
d. In the election, one of the tasks of a political party has been reflected through
a the activities of person 'A' and person 'B'. Give arguments in favour of the answer.
Ss
N

Chapter Eight
Local Government System in Bangladesh

To run the state's governance properly, local government system developed alongside
the central administration. This kind of local government system is formed at the
grassroots level to solve local problems. This kind of local government system exists
in Bangladesh. People get opportunity to directly participate in governance of the state
through participation in local government. So local governance is one of the essential
parts of democratic government. In this chapter, we shall know about the structure,
powers and functions of the local government system.
At the end of this chapter, we would be able to-

* explain the structure, powers and functions of local government system;

* analyze the interrelationships of different stages of local government system;

* analyze the importance of local government in the development of citizenship;

* describe the importance of local government in providing civic opportunities.
Local Government
Local government is a system of government established in a small area within a state.
Based on the relationship with central government, the forms of local government
can be of two types. They are (i) local government (ii) local self government. In the
local administration, administrators are directly employed by the central government
and their main duty is to implement the instructions of the central government.
Administrative personnel at the division, district, sub-district and secretaries at the
union levels are employed by the central government. Local self-government system
is understood as formed by the elected local representatives empowered by law in
order to meet the local needs for smaller regions. In our country, Union Council,
District Council, Pourashava and City Corporation are examples of local
self-governments. Local administration acts as an associate of local self-government.
Importance of Local Government
In the opinions of British Political Philosopher John Stuart Mill, local government
creates the opportunities for people's participation in government and political
activities. This participation makes the people conscious about those matters. Local
government provides different kinds of services to the citizens at the local level.
It is not possible for central administrators to protect the interest of the local people,
to solve their problems, to acquire knowledge about local development. By providing
information to the central government related to these matters local government helps 2
central government to make policies and implement development work. g

Local Government System in Bangladesh 79
Nature of Local Government System in Bangladesh
Local government in Bangladesh has a long history. Beginning from the Mughal
period till the British rule, the structure of local government took shape through
a variety of legal reforms. During the Pakistani rule, the structure of local
government remained the same. After the emergence of independent Bangladesh,
everything in a new state was required to furnish anew. In the new state, special
importance of local government was one of the main features of 1972 Constitution.
At present a three-tier local government is noticed in Bangladesh. These are: Union
Parishad, Thana/Upazilla Parishad and Zilla Parishad. Apart from these, there are
Pourashavas in the cities, eleven City Corporations, Chittagong Regional Parishad
and three Hill District Parishad (Khagrachari, Bandarban and Rangamati). Of
the above-mentioned three-tier Local government, Union Pasrishad is the most
effective form of local government at the bottom level.
Union Parishad and Upazilla Parishad are close to the villages. In the city areas, there
are Paurashavas, Zilla Parishad and City Corporation. Besides, a special form
of local government exists in the hilly areas.
Local Government in Bangladesh
Under the Ministry of Under the Ministry of
Local Government Chittagong Hill Tracts
Village based Local | City based Local Chittagong Hill Tracts
Government Government Regional Parishad
Zilla Parishad (61) City Corporation (11)) 1. Bandarban Hill District Parishad
Upazilla Parishad (490) | Pourashava (325) —_| 2. Rangamati Hill District Parishad
Union Parishad (4453)| [3 Khagrachari Hill District Parishad
In each tier of the local government, representation of women has been emphasized.
Now, we shall know about different tiers of the local government.
Union Parishad
Structure
One Union consists of 10-15 villages. Every Union Parishad has one elected chairman,
nine elected members from nine wards and three elected women representatives
(reserved seats). One union is divided into nine wards.
One woman member for three wards is elected by the direct male and female votes.
% One salaried secretary is employed in the Union Parishad. It has a 5-year long tenure.
& But before the end of the tenure, chairman or any member of the parishad can be

80 Civics and Citizenship
removed by two-thirds votes of no-confidence of the members. In Bangladesh, there
are 4453 Union Parishads.

Functions

Union Parishad plays an important role in the village life. Union parishad performs

many functions in order to solve problems in the village, to enhance mass awareness

and to create responsible leadership. These are discussed below.

1. Union parishad builds roads, culverts, bridges and maintains them and plant trees
on the roadside;

2. Union parishad supplies high quality seeds, fertilizer and insecticides for
agriculture development and encourages more food production;

3. It takes necessary steps for animal husbandry and livestock development;

4. Union parishad keeps the environment neat and clean to ensure public health. It
keeps control over throwing wastages, slaughtering animals, bath of animals
and washing clothes and so on;

5. It sets up charitable hospitals for primary health care;

6. Union parishad makes people aware of population control and arranges the
supply of necessary material for population control at a cheaper rate;

7. In order to spread education and eliminate illiteracy, union parishad provides
scholarship to the poor and meritorious students and sets up libraries and adult
education centres etc.

8. It encourages people to set up cottage industries and run cooperative movement
for economic development of the people;

9. Union parishad imposes and collects different types of taxes to bear its official
expenses and helps the government to collect different types of revenues;

10. Union parishad maintains birth, death and marriage registers;

11. Union parishad helps and rehabilitates the destitute affected by floods or other
natural disasters;

12. Union parishad resolves the conflicts in the village life. It can adjudicate the
civil and criminal cases over the claim of maximum TK. 5,000.

Sources of Income
a. Taxes on houses and buildings;

b. Fees on birth, marriage and feasts;
c. Taxes on cinema, theatre, open-air drama, circus and fair; %
d. Taxes on transport; 8

Local Government System in Bangladesh 81
e. Fees on license and permit;
f. Charge imposed on any activities for public welfare;
g. Market, water-bodies, ferry station and toll collection;
h. Allocation/ grant by the government.
Team work: 1. Prepare a list of the city and village based local governments;
2. Make a list of the sources of union parishad's income.
Upazilla Parishad
In our country, upazilla or thana is an administrative tier.
Structure
Upazilla Parishad consists of one chairman, two vice chairmen (one of them is
female), chairmen of Union Parishad under the Upazilla, chairmen of Pourashava
(if exists) and three other women members. According to 2009 Upazilla Parishad
Act, the Members of the Parliament will act as advisers to the Council. The Chairman
and the two vice chairmen are elected by the direct votes of the people.
Chairmen of union parishads and Pourashavas (if any) will assume its
ex-officio membership. Elected women representatives of the union parishad and
Pourashavas (if any) will elect three women members from their cohort. Upazilla
Executive Officer will act as secretary to the Parishad. The tenure of the parishad
is 5 years. At present, there are 490 upazillas in Bangladesh.
Functions
The functions of an upazilla parishad are enumerated below.
1. To coordinate the functions of union parishad;
2. To build, repair and maintain the inter-union connecting roads for the development
of communication and infrastructure;
3. It assists women and child development; social welfare, youth, sports and
cultural development;
4. For agriculture development, it adopts a number of development activities such as
animal husbandry, fishing, forestry and irrigation project.
5. It forms public opinions to resist the torture on women and children. It takes
necessary steps to stop such repression;
6. It adopts social forestry programmes for the preservation of natural environment
and development;
Forma-11, Civics and Citizenship- Class-9-10

82 Civics and Citizenship
7. It adopts a lot of activities to set up and develop small and cottage industries;
8. It creates public opinions for the spread of education. It supervises the
activities of secondary and Madrasa education for their quality development;
9. It ensures the supply of safe drinking water and the development of sewerage;
10. It reviews the activities of the Police department maintaining law and order situation;
11. It adopts programmes for poverty reduction and self-employment;
12. It performs other responsibilities given by the government.
Sources of Income:
Upazilla Parishad fund includes tax, toll, fees and money received from the
government and other sources.
Individual task: Prepare a list of differences between union parishad and
upazilla parishad.
Group work: Prepare a list on the functions of Upazilla Parishad.
Zilla Parishad
The chairman of the Zilla Parishad is directly elected by the people of that district. He
enjoys the status of a state minister. Deputy Commissioner acts as the Chief Executive
under him. Member of the Parliament (MP) acts as an adviser to this Parishad.
But at present, the government has employed an administrator instead of a chairman.
The status of the district administrator has not yet been determined by the government
circular.
Structure
According to Zilla Parishad Act, 2000 it consists of a chairman, fifteen members
and five women representatives in the reserved seats. They all are elected by the
votes of mayors of city corporation, commissioners, union parishad chairmen and
members. The tenure of this parishad is five years.
Functions
In 2000, Zilla Parishad Act was passed. Under this Act, the Parishad is vested
with 12 compulsory and 68 optional functions. Planning and development,
development of industries and commerce, hospitals, family clinics and
of industries and commerce, hospitals, family clinics and development of
development of educational institutions are some of the functions of Zilla
Parishad. Also it constructs & maintains inter-district road projects, supervises polige
activities and helps them maintain law and order. Moreover, it gives recommendatiog§

Local Government System in Bangladesh 83
regarding the control of terrorism and supervises upazilla activities. Upazilla will
prepare 5-year long development plan and send it through Ministry of Local
Government and Rural Development to the Planning Commission for approval.
Sources of Income

The Zilla Parishad Act 1998 provides the parishad with 8 sources of income. Zilla

parishad gets money from tax, toll, fees, income or profit from property, grants

from individuals, government and other institutions, profit from investment and
money received from other sources. Apart from these sources, zilla parishad gets

1% of land transfer fees and 5% land tax. In addition, the zilla parishad will have

extended lease money from markets, ferry stations and water bodies. However, the zilla

parishad is inactive the way it is stated in the Act.

Pourashava

As the villages have union parishads, so the cities have Pourashavas. At present there

are 325 pourashavas.

Structure

According to Local Government (Pourashava) Act, 2009 Pourashava consists of one

mayor, and an number of councilors equal of the number of wards fixed by

the government gazette including the fixed number of councilors reserved for women.

All these positions are elected by the direct votes of the people.

Functions

Pourashava performs the responsibilities regarding the solutions of problems of the

local people and takes the responsibility of development functions. In discharging

this duty, Pourashava has to do a lot of work. These are discussed below.

1 . It establishes educational institutions and provides grants to these institutions. It
builds hostels and provides scholarships to the poor and meritorious students In
addition, it sets up adult education centers, night schools and libraries etc.

2. Pourashava performs public healthcare-related activities. It builds roads, ponds
and dustbins for public health care. It manages treatment for epidemic and infectious
diseases. It builds and takes necessary steps to run hospitals, maternity centres,
pediatrics centres and family planning centres.

3. Pourashava takes steps to build and maintain graveyards for burial of the dead-body.
Pourashava builds orphanages and shelters for the destitute and orphans.

2 4. Pourashava slupplies safe drinking water to the people and drainage for water logging;
&

84 Civics and Citizenship

5. Pourashava employs night guards for protecting life and property. It takes action to
control criminal and dangerous games and professions;

6. It plants trees on the roadside and preserves forestry in order to beautify and
develop the environment in the city areas. It preserves open spaces, builds
auditoriums, parks and gardens for entertainment of the people;

7. It manages treatments for poultry and animals, sets up farms and runs animal
husbandry and poultry in the city areas. It also sells animals and does their
registration, rounds up dangerous animals and kills them, removes dead-bodies of
animals etc.

8. It takes necessary steps to stop selling adulterated and stale foods. It also
imposes restrictions on the free sale of alcoholic foods and liquor. Similar
restrictions are imposed by Pourashavas on the making, buying-selling, and
supply of those foods. It punishes those who violate rules and regulations.

9. Pourashava permits the building of houses for the development of well-planned
cities. Unapproved and illegal structures are destroyed.

10. Purashava adopts and implements grand plans for well-planned beautiful cities
and preserves the balanced environment;

11. Pourashava controls the plying of vehicles and provides licenses for _otorcars;

12. Purashava arranges assistance, care and relief in times of natural disasters;

13. Pourashava takes actions against those who break law and order to maintain the
peaceful environment;

14. Pourashava can adjudicate the civil and criminal cases worth of maximum 5,000
takas. For this reason, a Court is set up consisting of Mayor and four Councilors;

Sources of Income

Pourashava maintains its expenditure by money received from different sources.

These are taxes imposed on the households, shops, electricity, water and other services

and on matters of entertainment. In addition, market rent, hat-bazar, and leasing of

ferry station, license- permit, transport registration fee and government allocation etc.

City Corporation

City Corporations in Bangladesh have grown up based on some main cities. There

are eleven City Corporations in Bangladesh. These include two in Dhaka (Dhaka

North and Dhaka South), Chittagong, Rajshahi, Khulna, Sylhet, Barisal, Rangpur,

Narayanganj, Comilla and Gazipur. x

N

Local Government System in Bangladesh 85
Structure
Each City Corporation is divided into a definite number of wards. City Corporation
consists of one mayor, equal number of councilors of the fixed number of wards
and one-third reserved seats for female councilors from the fixed number of wards.
Mayor and councilors are elected by the direct votes of the people and female
councilors for reserved seats are elected by the votes of councilors. The mayor of City
Corporation enjoys the status of a State Minister. The tenure of the City Corporation
is 5 years.
MS en
(7 BESrnnanAan SS anansnsnnang « }
(2s -pnononnseen = wns ea
(;amenoooncog @ feaanadaaaa &
(; ppenoonooen So 4 4
= he
Dhaka City Corporation Bhabon.
Functions
The main function of the city corporation is to maintain peace and order in city areas
and to solve various problems for the development. City Corporation has different
important functions. These are discussed below.
= 1. City Corporation builds and maintains roads. It gives licenses for motor cars,
s buses, trucks, vehicles and for other. It also controls the movement of vehicles.

86 Civics and Citizenship

2. For the protection of public health, City Corporation cleans canals and roads and
thereby keeps the residential areas clean and tidy. It builds dustbins for storing
filths and healthy toilets in different places. It also builds and runs hospitals,
maternity centres, pediatrics and family planning centres.

3. It manages safe drinking water by sinking tube-wells and releases water from
water- logging.

4. It takes steps to stop selling and supply of adulterated and stale foods in the
City Corporation areas. It controls food and water supply. It provides licenses
for food and water processing and import.

5. It sets up medical centres in metropolitan areas for animals and poultry. In
addition, it makes registrations for animals, rounds up dangerous animals and
kills them, removes the dead-bodies animals and founds poultry firm.

6. It helps the poor in metropolitan areas and founds centres for public welfare and
for the orphans. It manages to stop begging and rehabilitates beggars and
prostitutes. Furthermore, it takes necessary steps to resist gambling,
drug-addiction and unsocial activities.

7. To cope with natural disasters, City Corporations manage to support and
rehabilitate the victims;

8. It founds adult education centres and night schools in metropolitan areas.
Moreover, to spread education it establishes new educational institutions,
provides grants to educational institutions, along with building hostels, providing
scholarships, running and _ setting up of libraries.

9 City Corporations builds auditoriums, art galleries, information centres, museums,
open stages etc for cultural development.

10. In order to develop the environment and enhance the beautiy of metropolitan
areas, City Corporations plant trees on the roadside and preserve forestry in the
open places. They build gardens for people's enjoyment of leisure time.

11. City Corporation permits to build houses in metropolitan areas. It destroys
unapproved structures and manages to evict illegal occupiers.

12. City Corporation conducts birth and death registrations.

13. In order to keep peace and order in metropolitan areas it performs small types of |,
judicial functions. It employs peacekeepers in the localities to settle disputes. s

Local Government System in Bangladesh 87
14. It takes necessary steps to stop burglary, robbery and higjacking in metropolitan
areas.
15. On the whole, the City Corporation adopts and implements plans for overall
development of metropolitan areas.
Sources of income
a. Taxes imposed by City Corporation of any sorts such as tax, sub-tax, toll, fees etc
b. Income or profits received from all kinds of properties belonging to the City
Corporation ;

c. Grants from the government or any other authority;
d. Donation by any local institutions, individuals or authority;
e. Income received from all trusts belonging to the Corporation ;
f. Profit received from investments by the Corporation;
g. Money received from other sources;
h. Money received from fines under law.

Individual Work: Prepare a list of sources of taxes of the City Corporation.

Special Local Government System in the Chittagong Hill Tracts

The background of the formation of local government system in the Chittagong Hill
Tracts is different from that of other local government systems. Historically the culture
and life style of smaller ethnic groupsin the Chittagong Hill Tracts are completely
different from Bangali culture and lifestyle. To establish this separate identity, they
had long been struggling. As a result, a Peace Agreement was signed on 2 December
in 1997. Through this agreement, the structure of a different type of local government
has grown up in the region.

Hilly District Parishad

Smaller ethnic groups live in the Chittagong Hill Tracts. In addition, the
mainstream Bangalis also live there. There are different types of problems in this
region for which different steps are needed to solve those problems. As nature and
lifestyle of the region are different, a special type of system is needed. For this,
at Rangamati, Khagrachari and Bandarban, there are three district level local
government parishads in three hilly districts. The tenure of the parishad was 3

x years before. At present it has been extended up to 5 years.
AQ

88 Civics and Citizenship
Structure and Nature
Each district parishad comprises of 1 chairman, 30 general members and 3 female
members altogether 34 members. All are elected by the people's direct vote. Both
Bangalis and paharis are the members of the parishad. The number would be
determined according to the proportion of the population. On the contrary, apart
from the female members, reserved seats for paharis would be distributed among
smaller ethnic groups. Of the 3 female members, 2 would come from smaller ethnic
groups and | from Bangalis. The chairman must come from smaller ethnic groups.
Although the seats of memberships are divided between the two communities,
voting rights will be equal. Apart from the reserved seats for women, women can
contest in other seats. A government employee will act as secretary to the parishad.
The tenure of the parishad is 5 years.
Group Work: Make a poster on the differences between the local government
system in the Chittagong Hill Tracts and the local government system in other
areas of the country.
Functions
The functions of the Hilly district parishad are as follows:
1. To preserve, supervise and develop law and order in the district;
2. To assist in co-ordinating and implementing the development work of the district
level local authorities;
3. To spread and develop education and create necessary opportunities;
4. Health care and program implementation for public health development and
family planning;
5. Agriculture and forestry development and preservation;
6. Animal husbandry;
7. Fisheries development;
8. To encourage co-operative movement;
9. To spread local industries, trade and commerce;
10. Building shelter houses for orphans and the destitute and other social welfare
activities;
11. To develop and preserve the culture of smaller ethnic groups and development of ~
sports; =
N

Local Government System in Bangladesh 89

12. To improve the communication system;

13. Water supply and irrigation development;

14. Land and land management;

15. Environment protection and development ;

16. To develop local tourism ;

17. Dispute settlement among the Paharis according to their rules and customs.

Sources of Income

Sources of income of the parishad are enumerated below:

a. Part of imposed taxes on the transfer of immovable properties;

b. Holding tax on land and buildings

c. Tolls on roads, bridges and ferry

d. Registration fees for transport

e. Tax of commodities sales and purchases

f. Holding tax on industries

g. Fees on social adjudication

h. Tax on lottery ;

i. Tax on entertainment activities ;

j. Parts of royalty on the forestry ;

k. Part of royalty received from the permits given by the government in order to

extract mineral resources;

1. Any sorts of tax imposed by the parishad empowered by the government.

Chittagong Regional Parishad

To co-ordinate the activities of three hill districts regional parishad has come into

existence covering the whole region.

Formation

The regional parishad will be formed comprising a chairman, 12 members of ethnic

groups, 6 members outside the ethnic group or Bangali, 2 female members of ethnic
Forma-12, Civics and Citizenship- Class-9-10

90 Civics and Citizenship

groups, 1 female member from outside the ethnic group or Bangali and the 3

chairmen of 3 hill district councils. The chairman must be from an ethnic group

and will receive the status of a state minister. Among the 12 members of ethnic

groups there will be 5 from Chakma, 3 from Marma, 2 from Tripura, I from

Murong and Tonchainga and 1 each from Lusai, Bom, Pankho, Khumi, Chok,

Khiang ethnic groups. Of the 6 from outside the ethnic groups there will be 2 from

each hill district. Of the 2 female members of ethnic groups, one will be from the

Chakma group. The female Bangali member will be from any of the 3 hill districts.

Except the 3 chairmen of 3 hill districts parishads, the chairman of local parishad

and all other members will be elected by the members of district parishad indirectly.

The district chairmen of three hill tracts will be members of this parishad by virtue

of their office and they will have voting rights. A government official will act as

the executive officer of the parishad. The tenure of the parishad will be 5 years.

Function

The functions of the Chittagong Regional Parishad are as follows:

1. Co-ordination of all the development projects of the 3 Hill District Councils
and supervising all the matters vested in their hands.

2. Supervising the municipalities and co-ordinating their activities.

3. Supervision of the Chittagong Hill Tracts Development Board.

4. Supervising and co-ordinating the general administration, law and order and
development of hill districts.

5. Supervising and upholding the customs, conventions and social judgements.

6. Approving liscenses to establish heavy industry in the region in accordance
with the national industry policy.

7. Operating disaster management and relief programs and co-ordinating the
activities of NGO's.

Sources of income

Before the start of every fiscal year the council will draw up a budget or a description

of the possible income and expenses of the year. Its fund will be formed with the

money from the following sources-

a. Money from the hill district parishad fund, the amount of which will be fixed by 20
the government from time to time. &

Local Government System in Bangladesh 91

b. Profit from all assets of the council or the assets vested in the council.

c. Loan from government or other authorities.

d. Donation from any individual or institution.

e. Profit from investing the council's money.

f, Any money acquired by the council.

g. Money from other sources of income vested in the council's hands, ordered
by the government.

Relation of government with hill district and Regional Councils
According to the constitution of the people's republic of Bangladesh, Hill District
Councils and Regional Councils are formed as special arrangements. Both councils
are given specific power and authorities according to law. For example any types of
land, hill or forest owned by the council cannot be taken or transferred by the
government without the consent of the council. For issues relating law-making, it is
said that if the government takes steps to create or correct a law regarding the
council or the Chittagong Hill Tracts, it has to be done according to the
discussions and advice of the council. Only the laws that are not conflicting with the
laws of the councils can be formulated. However, the power of law making is in the
hands of the government. So, if it is necessary the government can direct the
council and even dissolve the council through a gazette.

Local Government in Nurturing Citizenship

From the period of the British rule there is a relation between the citizens and the

local government. The local government system is playing an important role

in nurturing citizenship. It is discussed below.

1. Local government in rendering citizen services: People of all sorts contact the
office of the local govermnment in any need. For example, students have to
go to the union parishad office to get attested their fathers income certificates
and birth certificates. Union parishads and municipalities guarantee the services
within a certain time. It is called "Citizen Charter".

At present, the initiative has been taken for introducing e-governance at local
government level to make the citizen service available. Thus citizens will get
the service sitting at home. It is a revolutionary phenomenon. This system will
be more helpful than ever before for the achivement of citizen rights.
« 2+ Participation of people in local administration : In villages, the local govt.
s unites the village people and the government. The union parishad plays a vital

92 Civics and Citizenship
role in settling rural disputes.

3. Settling Disputes : The system of "Shalish" or informal settlement of the union
parishad is very important in resolving any dispute. The government established
"village court" to play a greater role in this case. Thus the poor villagers
will be relieved from the harrassment of coming to town for Justice.

Case-1: Abul Kalam and his nephew of Dhonia union's ward no.- 4, get into a
dispute regarding land and the quarrel continues for a few years. The problem
is solved by the "Shalish" of the union parishad. If Abul Kalam had gone to the
district level, it would have cost him plenty of time and money. Because of the
union parishad, Abul Kalam is relieved of this wastage.

Pair Work : Explain the role of the local government in setting Abul Kalam's
land dispute.

4. Women Empowerment

Half of the total population of Bangladesh are women. No society can develop without

half of it. So, currently the whole world is preferring women empowerment.

Women empowerment means the power of women in taking part in expressing

opinions and decision making in family, society and national levels. For women

empowerment women's rights should be equalized with men economically, politically,
socially, culturally and even in all respects. Realising its importance in 1948, the

United Nations published the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and took some

steps in the development of women. In 1951 , International Labour Organization (ILO)

declared same wages for same work for both male and female workers. In 1952 it
declared the political rights of women enabling them to vote and contest for a post
in the election.

The charter for the removal of discrimination of women in employment and occupations

was declared in 1960 which was accepted by general assembly of United Nations

in December, 1979. A total of 132 countries including Bangladesh supported the charter.

The participation of women in local government has increased more than ever.

Women are now able to win the election and influence the decisions of the govt.

in upazilla parishad, zilla parishad, municipality, city corporation etc.

It is notable that according to the law implemented in 1979, 13,452 female member

posts are created in 4,498 union parishads. In each union parishad, 3 reserved seats

are arranged for women who can be elected in direct votes. Thus the empowerment ,,

of women has been made easy. Female participation is ensured in other spheres as well. s

Local Government System in Bangladesh 93
5. Establishing the rights of the minority
Now, regional or gender based dfferences and national identity is not an obstacle to
eaming citizen rights. In the Chittagong Hill Tracts, the way of achieving citizen
rights of the 13 ethnic groups has been strengthened.
Thus those people have earned the due status as Bangali citizens through education
and other social and cultural activities.
In the 15th amendment of the constitution (July 2011), the status of their citizen
rights was more strengthened by recognising their own identity.
6. Developing democratic attitude and leadership
The citizens enjoy voting rights in both national and local governments. The rate of
casting votes in the local election is higher than that of the national election. The people
get the local representatives closer to them than the national representatives. It is
because the local ones stay close to the local people. So, the citizens can force them
to be accountable to them. It is more true in the union parishad. Practice of voting
rights in local level makes the citizens democratic minded. Thus regional leadership
evolves later on which contributes to the national leadership.
Exercise

Multiple Choice Questions
1. How many Unions are there in Bangladesh?

a. 118 b. 460

c. 483 d. 4453
2. What kind of work is the building of dustbins of Pourashava?

a. Developmental

b. Protection of peaceful environment

c. Public health related.

d. To protect the beauty
3. To give service to the citizens, the local government

a. attests income certificates

b. provides birth registration certificates

oD
S c. provides citizenship certificate

94 Civics and Citizenship
Which one is correct?
a. i and ii b. ii and iii
c. i and iii d. i, ii and iii
Read the paragraph below and answer questions 4 and 5
Mr. Rashed is the head of a local government. He carries investigation into
hotels and restaurants in metropolitan areas and takes necessary steps against the
sale and supply of stale and adulterated foods.
4. Which local government's head is Mr. Rashed?
a. City Corporation b. Zilla Parishad
c. Upazilla Prishad d. Pourashava
5. The said government is important, because it mainly
a. creates opportunities for people's participation in politics;
b. enhances citizen's consciousness amongst the people;
c. ensures citizen's care at the local level
d. increases the rate of literacy.
Creative Questions
1. Mr. Ramzan Ali is the head of the local government in an upazilla level city.
As a representative of the central government, in order to meet the needs of
the people he collects money from households, shops, markets and transport etc.
Using this money, he builds dustbin at the junctions of roads, cleans canals,
ponds and arranges to sprinkle medicines to kill mosquitoes. Setting up a number
of maternity centres, he offers care to the children and pregnant mothers free of cost.
a. How many City Corporations are there in Bangladesh?
b. What type of work is the establishment of libraries?- Explain.
c. What is the main aim of Ramzan Ali's activities? Explain.
d. The functions mentioned in the above paragraph for the development of
Ramzan Ali's locality are sufficient. Give your opinion.
2. Begum Kamrun Nahar after being elected as Member of Parliament (MP) in ,,
Parliament election, first inspired other women to contest in the reserved seats &

Local Government System in Bangladesh 95
allocated at the local and parliament levels and then to contest in other seats.
Later she founded a women's education center. There she managed to teach
women about sewing, bamboo and cane work, poultry and computer literacy.
She inspired educated women to take on any profession alongside the
government and non-government jobs.
a. How many seats for women members were created in the union parishad
according to the act of 1997?
b. What is understood by women's empowerment? Explain.
c. What kind of women empowerment does the first task performed by Begurn
Kamrun Nahar indicate? Explain.
d. 'Steps taken at the women education centers will make women self-relaint'.
Give reasons in support of this statement.
o5
S
N

Chapter Nine
Problem of Citizens and What We Should Do

In the previous chapters- the relationship between citizenship and civics, concept
of citizenship, qualities of good citizens, relation between citizens, government
& state have been discussed. By using these ideas in this chapter we will
discuss various problems of civic life and means of solution of the same.
After studying this chapter we would be able to -

* identify the main problems of civic life.

* analyze the cause of population problem and its influence and means of solution.

* describe the cause of illiterecy, influence and means of solution.

* explain the cause of crisis of food security and means of redress.

* describe the idea of environmental disasters.

* describe the means of facing enviromnental disasters.

* explain the sources of terrorism, its influence on the social life and the

means of eliminating it.

* describe the cause of woman trafficking and the means of redress.

* describe the role of citizens to solve the problem of the citizens.
We all are citizens of Bangladesh. As citizens, we live in towns or villages. From
birth to death at first we remain in the family, then in the society and then in the
state. To live in these places, besides various kinds of facilities, we face various
disturbances or problems. Such kinds of problems and means of their solutions are
discussed below.
1. Population problem and its means of redress.
What is population problem?
If the birth rate of human beings exceeds the death rate and if the birth rate exceeds
the increase of assets, then the population becomes a problem in a country . Because,
the need of the additional population is not possible to fulfill with the limited
assets of the country. Population problem is one of the main problems for
Bangladesh and the world but some people consider the problem of growing
population less severe than the world's problems such as unrest, hunger poverty, racism and iS

&

Problem of citizens and what we should do 97
health. In several areas it is necessary to increase the population, because for
conducting the production activities labors are needed. As per another doctrine,
only the increasing population in all the places is not responsible for all problems.
Considering the interest of the future generation, it is necessary to decrease the
present increasing rate of population.
Picture of Population Problem in Bangladesh
Considering the population Bangladesh is the 8th largest country of the world and
the 5th largest country of Asia. The land area of this country is 1,47,570 square
kilometers. At present the population of Bangladesh is about 15 crore and the
rate of increasing the population is 1.37. In each square kilometer of land area 1100
people live in Bangladesh, but in China in spite of having 1.4 billion of population
only 140 people live in each square kilometer of land area and in India in spite of
having 1.2 billion of people only 362 people live in each square kilometer of land area.
Over population is one of the main problems of Bangladesh. Due to over population
living has become difficult in the towns and villages. As per demand of the population
in the towns it is not being possible to supply electricity, water and gas. Due to
load shedding of electricity for all the time, insufficient supply of water etc. the
citizens’ life is becoming painful. Because of the insufficient opportunity of
employment in the villages, the unemployed men of those places are moving to the
towns. In villages due to over population want of sufficient food is seen, opportunity
of proper education does not exist, malnutrition and want of medical treatment are
observed all the time. On the other hand, due to increasing population in our country
people are making their homes on the cultivable land and by cutting the forest.
Due to over population rivers and canals and beels are being filled-up. In spite of
having these problems, through gaining the huge foreign currency by exporting the
manpower to foreign countries, this problem has become a possibility in Bangladesh.
But in comparison with the total population it is not still sufficient.
Causes of population growth in Bangladesh
Influence of climate: Bangladesh is located in the tropical region. So the climate
of this country is hot. Due to influence of hot climate boys and girls become adults in
early age and become capable of reproduction. As a result, the rate of population
growth is high.
Child marriage and polygamy: In our country marriage is considered a religious duty.
Due to this responsibility especially parents become conscious to marry off their
boys and girls within the shortest possible time. As a result child marriage is
Forma-13, Civics and Citizenship- Class-9-10

98 Civies and Citizenship
widely customary in our society. Due to getting married at an early age the number
of their children is increasing. On the other hand, in several areas it is found that one
male has more than one spouse. Specially, in the low income families this
inclination is greater. Thus due to child marriage and polygamy population is
increasing rapidly in Bangladesh.
Poverty: Most of the people of our country are poor. The standard of life of the poor
people is also low. They do not think wisely about maintaining the life cost of their
family members.On the other hand thinking of the future they have more children.
As a result ill-health population is increasing fast.
Socio -economic Security : Most of the people of our country think that male
children are capable of ensuring the social and economical security of their old parents.
For more security they expect more than one male child. As a result population
increases.
Lack of Education: Due to illiteracy and ignorance, the people of our country have
many children without thinking of their food and clothing, education, medical
treatment etc. As a result, population is increasing rapidly.
Social viewpoint: Most of the parents of our country fear that their children may do
a social offence if married off at the adult age. For this reason and due to
possibility of being humiliated in the society, by arranging marriage quickly they
try to avoid menace. This is why population is increasing at a high rate.
Lack of Birth Administration: Small family is a happy family- such consciousness
is not seen in our country largely. On the other hand, due to lack of facility of family
planning and people not being conscious in this respect, population is increasing.
Means of solving the population problem: Govt. & Non-Govt. Effort
Due to the rapid increase of population various problems have been created in
Bangladesh. If the population is not changed into manpower, a terrible situation
will be created in the country. For solution of population problem the following
steps might be taken.
Realignment of population: The density of population in all places of Bangladesh is
not the same. So, the population has to be realigned. People should be moved from a
higher density region to a lower density region. Doing so,employment of the people
can be created and their life standard can be developed. =
8

Problem of citizens and what we should do 99
Export of Manpower: In our country the wages of the labors are low, because we
have a huge labor force. By providing training of technology to the huge
population and by providing training to the capable labors, steps are to be taken
to send them to the Middle East, Far East, Africa and Western countries. Thus,
income in foreign currency will increase and unemployment will be eradicated. The
ministry of manpower should take initiative in this respect.
Increase of employment and re-distribution of income: To solve overpopulation
problem the living standard of the people shall have to be increased. The standard
will increase if opportunity of employment is created. By imposing tax in a large
scale on the rich people and collecting the same from them, the development programs
shall have to be implemented. If it is possible to provide work to the people and if they
are made free from poverty they will be self-conscious and will realize their
responsibility.
Spread of Education : Education makes a man conscious. To develop the living
standard of the people, the educated people keep on trying. Being attracted to the
small family, the educated family reduces the rate of population growth.
Economic Development : Through agricultural and industrial development,
creating developed market and building a developed communication system, the
economic development should be made smooth. Cultivation of more crops in the same
land and hybrid crops are needed to grow more crops. By producing raw materials,
industries will have to be built. With the goods produced in the cottage industry,
large industry will have to be built. For easy marketing of the agricultural and
industrial products and for their easy sale development of bazars and
communication system should be ensured. If we are able to do these, the population
will be manpower instead of being a problem.
Controlling of population and family planning: By lowering the high birth rate,
population should be controlled.'One child is desirable,two are sufficient’. This slogan
shall have to be implemented. In this respect consciousness of citizen and responsibility
of the government are very important.The citizens will have to imagine that there is
no credit in having more children. So, they shall have to adopt the family planning
system. On the other hand, the family planning program of the government should
be strengthened.The ministry of family planning will have to appoint field workers
on a large scale.The family controlling medicines should be easily available and
for providing service to control the birth rate, sufficient clinics should be built-up.
cc On the other hand, mass awareness should be created through a huge campaign on
birth control and family planning.

100 Civics and Citizenship
Adaptation of population policy: In 2004 the government adopted the new
population policy by modifying the population policy of 1976.Under this policy
for controlling population government took various efforts. Among them the
mentionable objective is - ensuring family planning for all making the health service
easy and available. Besides, to increase awareness of the adolesecents steps should
be taken to provide information, advice and service regarding birth control; by using
the mass media peoples, awareness regarding the good effects of birth control should
be increased; equity of men and women and power of women should be ensured.
These population policies should be implemented.
Motivating the destitute people in birth control
Through various govt. and non-govt. initiatives for the activities of birth control the
standard of service should be improved in the unprivileged area. To implement the
activities of birth control,the government and non-government physicians will have to
work together. Through small loans and bringing the women outside of the house for
new professions, they will have to be given the opportunity of abstaining from
production of more children.
Individual Work : Identify one of your neighboring over populated family and
find out the nature of their problems and their impact.
What we should do for the solution of over population problem as citizens
For social and economic development in Bangladesh, it is urgent to control the
birth of population. It is our responsibility as conscious citizens to play a role in
population control.
At first, regarding bad effects of over population the citizens must be conscious and
make others conscious. Secondly, if any illiterate child or person exists in our
family or in the family of the neighboring persons- we can motivate them by
providing the facility of education. More population than assets is the curse for a
family. It is a burden for the nation. On the other hand, if it is possible to make the
people skilled by providing them education, it will be the asset for the nation.
2. Food Security
What is food security?
Food security does not mean only having food. It means availability of food,
purchasing capacity of food and nutrition of food. As the food grain is the main
food of the people of Bangladesh, especially rice, supply of rice and sustainability «
of price are the main things of gaining food security. s

Problem of citizens and what we should do 101
Nature of the lack of food security in Bangladesh
At present about half of the population of Bangladesh are prey to food-based poverty.
They do not have money to purchase sufficient food for receiving the required
amount of 2,122 kilo calorie per head. Besides shortage of calorie, the food of this
poor community is not balanced. In each meal of the day a priority of food grains
is seen. 80% of the calorie taken by them every day comes from food grain, mainly
rice. They take very little food containing fat, oil and protein. Women and children
are the main victims of such unbalanced food. Women and children need nutritious
food than the male.
Causes of Food Insecurity
The main causes of food insecurity are -
Production of less food: The production of vegetables, fruits, pulse, oil seed, fish, meat,
egg, milk etc. is low in the country.On the other hand, the small income of the people
and their dependence on the food grains have a negative influence on this small
production. As a result, there isa lack of food security.
Small income of the people: The per head income of our people is much less than that
of the people of other countries. When the per head income of the people decreases,
people cannot purchase the required amount of food. Asa result, food insecurity is seen.
Lack of knowledge on nutrition : A mentionable portion of the people have
lack of knowledge on nutrition. And for this reason they cannot select the proper food
for their health.
In recent time the availability of food has increased remarkably in Bangladesh.
Increase in production and import of food in Bangladesh both play an important
role in availability of food. But the additional food could not ensure security to the
people who have been leading their life under poverty for a long time and who are
suffering from the lack of food security.
Because, they do not have sufficient produced crops and sufficient money and
property for purchasing food. At the time of calamity, the relief is distributed which
ensures temporary food security to this community. But it can not give them any
long-term food security.
Govt. Effort for Gaining the Food Security
To gain food security, a proper food policy is required. Ensuring the food security
eo through poverty alleviation is the largest challenge of food policy of Bangladesh.
s Storage of food by the govt.ensures the minimum supply of food in emergency period.

102 Civics and Citizenship
If shortage of food is seen owing to any natural calamity such as flood and any other
cause- the poor community suffers most. And to face this crisis the govemnent takes
the program of providing social security. 95% of total expenditure of the social security
program is spent for food distribution which aims at providing relief and for giving
facility of education, health, income generating skill, infrastructure etc. By analyzing
the portion of total population who participate in food support program, it is found
that the three programs such as Vulnerable Group Development (VGD), Food For
Education and Vulnerable Group Feeding (VGF) are playing an important role in
improving the situation of the poor people.
Means of Gaining Food Security
To ensure food security, it is essential to increase food production, food availability
and purchasing capacity etc. Many countries of the world such as- China, India,
Singapore and various countries of Africa are planning to increase the production of
food by acquiring land, which can be done in our country too. At the national level
availability of food depends on effectiveness and structure of bazar, seasonal variety
in internal food production, market efficiency and the government system of
distribution of food. And the food security of the people depends on production,
availability of food and it also depends on the easy receivability of that food
in the market.The farmers will try to increase the production more if they can receive
loan with simple terms and conditions.

Team work: Going to market Karim Mia sees the high price of rice and

inadequate supply of it. Identify the causes of these problems and find out the ways

of solution.
Only supply and consumption of food cannot present a healthy and productive nation.
For this the quality and security of food should be ensured. On the other hand
adulteration is a large obstacle to security of food. It is also harmful for health. By
using the prevailing laws and amending them if necessary and by creating social
awareness, the government should very urgently control the adulteration of food.
What we should do to gain food security
In Bangladesh until the year 2000, 44% of people used to lead their life below the
absolute poverty line. In 2005 it was reduced to 40%. This hard core poor people
cannot fulfill their minimum demand of food. As citizens, we all have responsibility
to gain food security. We should learn well about food security and we can take good
steps to ensure it. We can cultivate various crops in empty lands around our homesteads
in homeyard and reduce the demand of crops. Being conscious of the food habit co
personally we can ensure our own food security. Ss

Problem of citizens and what we should do 103
3. Terrorism
What is terrorism?
Mainly, terrorism means to apply force or to threaten the application of force for
certain objectives or work. As miscreants or anti-social persons can do it, it can happen in
the whole state or even in the context of the whole world. Terrorism has been going
on in the society for ages. The main sources of terrorism are mentioned below.
¢ For gaining any aim, adoption of violent working procedure or threatening of
violence.
¢ To conduct the violent and other extremist procedure for preserving the human
rights of the destitute.
¢ In view of terrorism, doing harm to life and property of the civilized people or to
attack the state institutions.
* To use violent ways to exact demands in spite of having legal procedure and
peaceful solution.
Types of Terrorism
Terrorism done by the criminal gang
Terrorist activities are conducted by a gang of criminals. This criminal group conducts
the acts of terrorism in an organised way. They have a topleader. From the Behind
the eye of people his appointed men murder people, do smuggling activities. Besides,
they create horror in the mind of the people in various ways.
Political Terrorism
Some political parties, organizations or communities in the name of politics do the
activities of terrorism. Some of them are seen doing terrorism in the name of religion.
In the name of class struggle, some parties or organizations do terrorism. Under the
shelter of the established political party of the country also, at times terrorism is seen
to be conducted.
Ideology-based Terrorism
Some communities choose the path of terrorism with a view to establishing their
specific norm. In the name of killing the class enemy political killings in our country
have occurred. Religious jongibad/terrorism is not only seen among the Muslims, it
is also seen among the Hindus, Christians, Judas and all communities. The religious
jongis/terrorists in violent ways of terrorism kill the general people and harm the state
S institutions. These are absolutely anti- religious activities in the name of religion.
8

104 Civics and Citizenship
State Terrorism

By showing various pleas, the state often takes the path of terrorism and
launches suppressing and torturing activities on the institutions or mass communities.
This is called state terrorism. The state of Israel has done such terrorism on the people
of Palestine in various times. Such assaults are conducted on the minor groups of
people or various communities inside the state.

Causes of Terrorism: Terrorism occurs for two causes : a) General causes and b)
External causes.

General Cause

Economic Disparity

If there is inequitable distribution of wealth in any society,one class of people become
richer and another class of people become poorer. In this situation anger is created
in the mind of the deprived people. As a result, to overcome hunger, poverty and
unemployment some people of the low income families engage themselves in
criminal activities to earn more money within the shortest possible time. Besides,
unemployment is a social disease in our country. Its negative influence falls on the
active youth community of the society. As a result the youth community involves in
terrorism and become motivated to be financially self- reliant for building their fate.
Narrow political culture

If selfishness prevails in the political culture of a county and if politics becomes the
means of recovering the personal and party interest then the birth of terrorism is not
unnatural in that political culture. Because, for the personal interest, terrorists are to
be nourished.

Lack of good governance

To find out the criminal and to take steps to punish them is the responsibility of
the law enforcing agency and administration. But due to administrative weakness
and political pressure, some times the administrators play a silent role. The law
enforcing agency has the structural weakness such as weak training, old arms,
imbalanced ratio of police and people. This weakens the role of the law enforcing
agency to prevent terrorism. For these reasons, many weak terrorists become capable
of showing their strength. Moreover, without having the standard training sometimes
the prevailing detective agencies cannot face the prevailing terrorism at present.
External Reasons

In terrorism, as there is the internal motivation, there might be external motivation as
well. It is assumed that supply of illegal arms, easy availability of illegal arms &
work behind the terrorism. s

Problem of citizens and what we should do 105
Prevention of terrorism and means of remedy
Terrorism is a social disease in Bangladesh. It might be prevented as well as defended.
If the steps below are taken, terrorism might not be born and the terrorists might
not hamper the security of the life and property of the citizens.
Making laws against terrorism: In view of prevention of terrorism, it is necessary
to make hard laws against the terrorists. Those who violate the law and discipline
openly and do harm to the lives and assets of the people cannot be pardoned in any
way. If severe punishment is meted out for the prevention of terrorism, it is hoped
that terrorism will be reduced.
Reformation of Police Administration: To prevent terrorism the police force shall
have to be reformed with modern arms and tools and they should be given
modern training. Moreover, there is a big difference in police and people ratio in
our country. Here for 1400 people one police officer is engaged. This situation
should be changed. It is essential to increase the number of police, police boxes and
police stations.
Increasing employment and providing allowance to the unemployed: By
establishing cottage industries, large mills and factories, vacant posts in all sectors
should be filled and new employment should be created. If it is possible to eradicate
unemployment, terrorism will be reduced. To eradicate unemployment, it is
necessary to provide the minimum allowance to the unemployed for them to lead
the minimum standard of life, if not like the advanced countries. As social security,
allowance to the unemployed is a good step.
Education for all and arousal of values: Through creating the opportunity for
education for all, the social and moral values should be aroused. In this view in
schools and in various educational programs moral education might be introduced.
In this way terrorism might be possible to control.
Giving no shelter to terrorists in the political party: In political parties no terrorists
should be given shelter. If any political party helps the terrorists or gives them shelter,
the registration of that party shall have to be cancelled. No member of such a
political party will get opportunity to participate in election; in this regard the national
parliament can prepare a law.
Rigid Administration : To stop terrorism, bribery and corruption, hard administrative
steps shall have to be taken. If the police administration and general administration
might do work freely and neutrally that should be ensured.

Forma-14, Civics and Citizenship- Class-9-10

106 Civics and Citizenship
Mass Awareness: Mass awareness might play an effective role to prevent terrorism.
If the mass people become conscious and organized, terrorism will be reduced. We
should obey social and religious values.
What should we do as citizens
As citizens we should be conscious about terrorism. We will learn the bad sides of
terrorism. To prevent the terrorism we will help/support the law enforcing agencies.
We should obey social and religious values.
Individual work:Identify a terrorist activity published in a daily newspaper recently
and write your recommendation to solution.
Team work: make a list of the ways terrorism might be faced and hang the same
in the class room.
4, Environmental mishap
Our environment is built up by everything surrounding us including rivers, canals,
hills, mountains and trees. The sound natural environment is the main basis of
sustainable development and healthy life. When the activities of human beings
destroy this normal situation of the environment, environmental mishap is created.
Causes of environmental mishap
Human beings grow surrounding the environment. Again, because of human
beings, environment is polluted all the time. For economic progress through
the industrial development men are building mills and factories by cutting trees and
thus deforesting the forests. As a result various ingredients of the enviromenent such
as soil, air, water are being polluted.
The mills and factories in the towns are built-up centering some water bodies. The
crude wastage of the mills and factories are thrown in the water of drains. It mixes
with the water of rivers and water is polluted. Moreover, due to using fertilizer and
pesticides on the land, water is polluted. Due to pollution, now the Burigonga river
of Dhaka is becoming dead. The rivers Shitolokkha, Turag and Balu are proceeding
to the same situation gradually. Beyond Dhaka the situation of rivers is the same.
The Karnaphuly river of Chittagong is also faced with dangerous pollution. By the
established cement factories beside the Dholeshori river of Munshigonj the water,
land and air are getting poisonous due to pollution.
Another example of environmental destruction is that the destruction of forests for the Se
large scale use of wood for fuelling of brick fields, cooking in the houses,construction Ss

Problem of citizens and what we should do 107
of building and making furniture. Besides, in the hilly areas the forests and tress are
being destroyed for cultivating zoom. It has become risky for the natural
environment. For sustaining the ecological balance of a country 25 percent forest
area of the total land area of a country is needed. But the area of forest in our
country has been reduced to 6% from 20% of the total land area. The remaining
portion is now at the point of destruction.
Harmful Sides
Due to the reduction of forest, capturing water bodies and pollution, the animals
of the country are being reduced seriously. The local variety of crops, fishes, trees
etc. are facing the threat of destruction. Under the pressure of environment
campaign, government has forbidden the use of polythene bags. But it is not being
followed fully. In addition to that, as packets of various goods the use of plastic is
increasing gradually. As a result, in towns even in villages the amount of plastic and
organic non-decomposable waste is increasing day by day. For the increase of it
only - for - one-time - useable elements, the clinical waste is increasing swiftly and
poisonous and radioactive ingredients are left in it. Without having separate and
proper recycling system, these wastes are being mixed with the general waste and
making the environment poisonous.
On the other hand, change of climate has become risky for the existence of
Bangladesh. Change of climate is attacking Bangladesh in various ways and will
continue to do the same. Among those the most notables are increase of salinity due
to sea level raising, strong velocity of the river, natural calamity and epidemic/disease
etc. Due to the dense population, such influences of changing the climate increase
the possibility of crores of people being homeless and unemployed. This situation
might make Bangladesh unstable on the whole. It also might be the cause of danger
in the future not only for neighbouring countries but also for the whole world.
For that reason from the long term perspective the change of climate has become the
biggest challenge for Bangladesh today. To face this challenge, all should be
conscious collectively.
Government and non-government effort to face the environmental mishap
Really, for development of Bangladesh preservation of environment is urgent. Due
to over population, the number of people affected by the environmental pollution
& has increased largely. Because of small area and highly dense population these
= problems have taken a serious tum for Bangladesh. To get rid of these terrible

108 Civics and Citizenship
situations, the steps to be taken are mentioned below:
¢ The mills and factories which have been built-up in an unplanned way should be
declared closed.
* Not to permit establishment of mills or factories in the residential area.
* To identify the harmful industries that are absolutely responsible for environment
pollution and declare them closed.
¢ To take steps for teaching and training the labourers of the industry.
¢ Not to throw the garbage everywhere.
¢ To increase forestation and in this respect all people should be motivated.
¢ To take the social forestation programs on a large scale and to strengthen the
campaign of plantation.
¢ To control cutting of hills.
* To prohibit the use of polythene bags and implement laws in this regard properly.
* To stop the use of plastic.
* To take effective steps to stop burning wood in the brick fields.
* To make the people aware regarding health rules, so that they may become
conscious regarding the adverse influence of the environment.
¢ To stop the huge use of fertilizer and pesticide and to motivate people to use the
organic fertilizer.
¢ To motivate the people in campaign of preserving the environment and to
persuade to participate in that campaign.
* To form specialist teams for measurement of the harmful ingredients, to take the
required steps through them.
What we should do as the citizens
As citizens, we are responsible for preserving the environment. We should not cut
any tree illogically. In respect of environment preservation we should plant trees in
our yards and on the road sides. We sould not throw polythene bags into the
drains. We should observe environmental rules. Being organized we should make
the people of the society conscious regarding bad effects of environmental pollution.
Team work: Write down the steps you will take to keep the surrounding places
of your residence and rivers, canals and beels free from pollution and present the same x
in the class room. “

Problem of citizens and what we should do 109
5. Illiteracy
Illiteracy is one of the main problems of the citizens of Bangladesh. Due to illiteracy an
illiterate person cannot bring any benefit for the state and society rather he/she becomes
a burden for the society. Most of the people of Bangladesh live in villages. An illiterate
person is that person who does not have any alphabetical knowledge and who even
cannot write his name. Many people in rural areas are illiterate. There are also many
illiterate people in urban areas.
In 1997 the 'Ministry of Primary and Mass Education' of Govt. commenced the
‘Total Literacy Movement’. Through the campaign of ‘Total Literacy Movement’ the
‘Ministry of Primary and Mass Education' has taken a political decision to eradicate
illiteracy from the country within 2014.
The rate of illiteracy among the poor people is very high. The main cause is their
economic condition. In spite of being meritorious the children of the poor families
cannot study. Many poor students due to want of money cannot achieve higher
education. In the meantime at present, many rich persons, non-govt. banks and
organizations are giving opportunity to the poor but meritorious students to continue
their study.
Eradicating illiteracy: What to be done by the government & citizen
Illiteracy is a national problem. It is the responsibility of all to face it. To save the
country from the curse of illiteracy the role of the govt. and citizens is equally
significant. About half of the population of the country are illiterate. It is not possible
for the govt. alone to educate this huge population. The entire educated community
shall have to take this responsibility. And those who are illiterate should be interested
in education. If all the people can solve this problem jointly it will be possible to
achieve the national development.
To make the huge people of the country literate, the steps that should be taken
by the government and citizens are as below:
Collection of Information
The accurate number and location of the illiterate people shall have to be ascertained.
In this regard the problems and causes of traditional occupation shall have to be
indentified based on various localities and situations. Government does this work by
taking projects and forming a taskforce. To provide the accurate information
& the citizens have to come forward spontaneously.
N

110 Civics and Citizenship
Adult Education
The govt. shall have to take special programs in the villages for adult education and
food for education or non-government organizations (NGO) should be engaged in
this work. In this respect the educated unemployed persons might be involved.
Vocational Education
Books are required to be written for occupational education instead of formal
education.Only formal education is not helpful enough for the adults. A few days later
they may forget their education. By providing them vocational education the illiterate
persons shall have to be introduced with every profession. Then they will not forget
the acquired education and their alphabetical knowledge.
Launching loan & donation for education
For eradicating illiteracy,steps are to be taken for providing donation and scholarship
at the government and non-government level. Though the education of the illiterate
persons is not formal yet, if they are provided with scholarship and stipend,
they will be interested in education. It is not possible for the govt. alone to
provide such loan, donation, scholarship and stipend. In this respect our educated
and rich persons should come forward. For the development of the people and the
state all should come forward with a spirit of generosity.
To launch the education bank
For eradicating illiteracy education bank might be initiated. Such a bank not only
provides loan to the illiterate persons but, it will also provide loan to the primary,
secondary and high education level. To stop dropping out of students it is
necessary to provide them with financial support. In this respect education bank
might be a mentionable step. If the govt. becomes sincere, it is possible to establish
and launch such banks.
Participation of citizens
For eradicating illiteracy the people of all levels of the society shall have to be
utilized. For providing educational equipment and establishing the educational
institutions the participation of citizens should be inspired. In this respect several
NGOs of the country such as Ahsania Mission, BRAC, Sonirbhor Bangladesh,
CARE, SIDA, UCEP ete are working restlessly. If it is possible to remove illiteracy
through participation of the govt. and citizens, a strong foundation of national
advancement will be made. Through gaining the vocational education the literate
people might be changed into manpower. x
8

Problem of citizens and what we should do 111
If any illiterate person exists in our family we may provide them with alphabetical
knowledge personally to eradicate illiteracy. Together with friends we may build-up
clubs to eradicate illiteracy. On the basis of voluntary labor primarily we can
provide them with knowledge of the alphabet. As citizens, our work of this kind
will play an important role in building the nation. Because, education is the backbone
of a nation.
6. Torture on Women : Cause and remedy
What is Torture on women ?
As per Beizing Declaration, torturing women means such work or behavior, which
is done against women and which harms women physically and mentally. On the
other hand, threat of doing harm and snatching freedom of women socially or
personally by applying force or whimsically are also included in women tourture.
Two cases on women torture are depicted here.
Neglecting female children
Case-1: Mina is a student of Economics department of Jagannath University. Even
in her childhood she was meritorious. Her elder brother older than her by one year
used to read with her in the same class. Though the elder brother of Mina used to be
coached by teachers in various classes, she never got such opportunity. After passing
HSC Mina got opportunity to study in Sylhet Medical College and her brother got
opportunity to study in Mymensingh Medical College.Though the father of Mina
admitted his son in Mymensingh Medical College, he compelled Mina to study in
Jagannath University on the ground of high expenses for medical education. Mina's
dream of being a physician was destroyed at the initial stage.
Dowry
Case-2 : Morjina who is a student of class ten lives in a village. Her father
bears the family cost from the crops of his paternal land property. Morjina has four
brothers in her family; in spite of being meritorious, her father married her off to a
owner of a grocery shop. But her husband did not do this business attentively. So he
incurred loss in his shop. After some days of marriage, the husband of Morjina told
her to bring money from her father.
He told that after two years he would go abroad and created pressure on Morjina to
bring two lac taka from her father by selling land property. In this respect all the people
of the family of her father-in-law also told her to bring money from her father. For
c this she quarrelled with the people of her husband's family very often. After that
& suddenly one day Morjina was found dead in herbedroom.

112 Civics and Citizenship
Main cause of women torture in Bangladesh

Domination of males over females is a culture, which has been going on for ages. Due
to this tradition, the males think that the females are helpless and they are not
able to protect themselves. The place of women is within the surrounding of
the family. Due to this perspective the males neglect the dignity of the females as
human being. Capitalizing on the physical structure of females, the males conduct
physical torture . Though the situation of the educated females of Bangladesh is
a little developed, overall the females are still neglected and suppressed socially.
Due to lack of self-reliance many women are being tortured still.

Lack of ecomomic freedom

Financial self-dependence makes the status of women strong in the society and family.
But in our country most of the women are still dependent on the income of their
husbands. As a result, for any shopping or fulfillment of any of this desires, females
are to depend on their fathers, brothers and husbands in most of the cases.

Lack of consciousness

Most of the families of our country are poor. The females of a poor family are
deprived of education. As a result they remain unaware of their rights. And taking
this opportunity, husbands, relatives even the society torture them physically and
mentally.

What we should do to Prevent women torture

It is necessary to stop women torture for the development of women in the society.
It is possible to prevent the causes of women torture. For this, women have to be
literate, educated and financially self-reliant. Women empowerment can play an
important role by establishing women rights. Beside, the measures below are important
to prevent women torture.

Rigid application of law

To prevent women torture, rigid implementation of the prevailing law is necessary.
If any weakness exists in law in this case, it should be amended and made
stronger by the government. It is a very important responsibility of the govt. If
necessary, to prevent women torture, the torturers should be punished by establishing
the special court.

Raising awareness through text books

Awareness should be increased by presenting significant speeches against women
torture in the text books of schools and colleges. The punishment and consequence of
a women torturer should be presented through dramas, recitations, poems, songs and
discussion meetings. We have to understand that women torture is a heinous
offence and hindrance to social development. Women and men have to be united S
and protest against women torture. N

Problem of citizens and what we should do 113
Legal Aid
In many respects women do not get justice in court. Specially, poor women cannot
go to court for want of money. So, the state and non government organizations will
have to come forward with legal aid.
Team work : Mention your responsibilities as citizens to prevent women torture
and preserve their rights.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions:
1. Which is the main basis of sustainable development and healthy livelihood?
a. Administrative hardness b. Reducing the rate of illiteracy
c. Steps for vocational education d. Sound natural enviromnent.
2. To motivate the destitute people for controlling over population-
i. The standard of service in the destitute area shall have to be increased.
ii. By taking new profession they should abstain from production of children.
iii. Food security should be ensured.
Which one is correct?
a. i & iii b. ii & iii
ci &ii d. i, ii & iii
Read the paragraph below and answer questions 3 & 4.
Arifa has a family of eight brothers and sisters. Sithi has only one brother. In the
family of Arifa shortage of food is seen very often and disturbance is a regular
phenomenon in her family. The brothers and sisters of Arifa do not get good
opportunity of study.On the other hand Sithi and her brother are getting the
opportunity of study properly and solvency exists in their family all the time.
3. Which problem does the condition of Arifa basically indicate ?
a. Population b. Illiteracy
c. Poverty d. Lack of consciousness.
Forma-15, Civics and Citizenship- Class-9-10

114 Civics and Citizenship
4. Which step should be taken at first to solve the said problem?

a. Prevention of high birth rate b. Realignment of population

c. Export of manpower d. Re-distribution of income

Creative questions

1. Sumi is a very affectionate child of her parents. She could not study due to
poverty and she was married at the age of 16. At first at the time of marriage
it was fixed that her parents would give money to her husband but they could not
pay. So the members of the family of her father-in-law behaved roughly with
her. In this situation Sumi brought solvency to her family by doing sewing
work. As a result, her husband showed positive attitude to her.

a. What is the current growth rate of population in Bangladesh?

b. What is food security? Explain.

c. What social problem does the first problem in Sumi’s life indicate? Explain.

d.To save the women like Sumi from such problems the aforesaid work might
have sufficient influence. Explain.

2. Mr. Jalil purchased 10 Bighas of land on the bank of the river Turag of Tongi
and on some portion of that he established a brick field and on the rest he cultivated
rice. Expecting huge crops, he used a lot of fertilizer and pesticides. The waste
of brick field and with the rain water the fertilizer and pesticide are washed away
into the Turag river.

a. In which year was the new population policy of Bangladesh adopted?
b. What is political terrorism? Explain.
c. What kind of mishap is being created in the environment due to the activities
done by Mr. Jalil?
d. Do you think that the effort of the govt. is sufficient to solve this problem?
Give reasons for your answer. KS
S
N

Chapter Ten
Civic Consciousness in the Emergence of Bangladesh
In the previous chapters we have learnt about society, government and citizens!
rights and duties in the state. In addition, we have learnt about various problems and
solutions to these problems in the civic life. In this chapter, we shall learn about
the role of citizens in the establishment of the independent Bangladesh.
After studying this chapter, we would be able to-
¢ know and explain the independence struggle of Bangladesh, Language Movement,
the ideologies of the Liberation War and its essence and non-communal values;
* comprehend and explain the importance of patriotism.
Background to Independence Struggle of Bangladesh
Today we are all Bangladeshi citizens. Before the independence in 1971, we were
citizens of Pakistan. Despite being the majority (56%) at that time the people in
East Bengal (now Bangladesh) had been deprived of their political, economic and
cultural rights as citizens. After the independence of Bangladesh, Bangalis have
now been enjoying their citizenship rights independently.
Before the Pakistani rule (1947-1971), the region of Bangladesh had been under the
control of Turkey, Afghan, Mughal and lastly the British Rule (1757-1947).
During the British rule,a class of Western-educated leadership emerged in this country.
This leadership developed in the spheres of politics, organizations, social reforms,
jobs, language- literature and culture and education and so on. Another aspect
of British rule is its constitutional reforms beginning from 1861. In course of this
development, people achieved their voting rights. All these were mentionable steps
in promoting and enhancing citizen rights and consciousness.
1940 Lahore resolution
During the British rule, in the undivided Indian sub-continent alongside the Hindus,
consciousness about self-rights arose amongst the Muslims. In this respect, to
se represent the interests of Muslims, Muslim League was established in 1906. Muslim
& League leader, Muhammad Ali Jinnah following a theory of his own declared

116 Civics and Citizenship

Muslims a separate nation. The name of this theory is 'Two Nation Theory! As a

result, the thought of a separate homeland emerged amongst the Muslims.

In the light of this thinking, in the Muslim League Council's annual conference held

on 23 March 1940, the Chief Minister of Bengal Sher-e-Bangla A K Fazlul Haq

put forward a proposal related to the interests of Muslims in this sub-continent.

The proposal was adopted, with Muhammad Ali Jinnah as chair. That proposal is

known as historic 'Lahore resolution' or ‘Pakistan proposal’.

The main features of Lahore Resolution were:

1 The geographically contiguous areas should be regarded as separate regions;

2. These areas should be formed in such a way as to facilitate to constitute
‘independent states’ in the North-Western and Eastern zones for the Muslim majority;

3. The constituent ‘units' or the regions of these states should be autonomous as
well as sovereign;

4. Effective steps shall be taken to protect the cultural, political, administrative and
other rights of the minorities in the newly independent muslim states;

5. The framing of the future constitution shall be based on the above principles.

The word 'Pakistan' was not mentioned in the proposal, although the proposal appeared

to be known as ‘Pakistan Proposal’. In the Lahore Resolution, the formation of two

sovereign states of comprising two majority Muslim regions was thought of. In

view of the geographical location, it should have been like that.

In 1946, in the 'Delhi Muslim Legislators Convention’, with Mr. Jinnah as chair, the

plan of more than one states was dropped and One Pakistan plan was adopted.

According to this plan, India was divided on August 14,1947 and two independent

states emerged. North- Western and Eastern Muslim majority regions of British

India formed Pakistan and the rest formed Indian Union.

The 1940 Lahore Resolution and Jinnah's 'Two Nation Theory’ were the basis of the

creation of Pakistan. Though Pakistan was created on the basis of the said resolution,

its structure was incongruous. The distance between East and West Pakistan was S

Civic Consciousness in the Emergence of Bangladesh 117
more than one thousand miles with Indian territory in between.The language-culture,
history-tradition, clothings, food habits of the majority Bangalis in the state were
different from those of West Pakistanis. West Pakistanis particularly the Punjabis
thought that their ancestors came from outside India and aristocratic blood flowed
into their nerves. Because of this mentality, West Pakistanis looked down upon
Bangalis as an inferior nation.
As a matter of fact, West Pakistani rulers established a kind of internal colonial rule
from the birth of Pakistan. During this rule, the status of Bangalis was tantamount to
somewhat aliens in their own countries. The first discriminatory attitude by the
West Pakistani rulers manifested towards Bangalis in the question of language.
Instead of the Bangla language of the majority Bangalis, West Pakistani rulers tried
to impose Urdu as the only state language upon Bangalis.
Language Movement (1948-1952)
Right to mother language is one of the important citizen rights. The mother language
of the 56% majority people was Bangla; Urdu was not the mother language of
any regions in Pakistan. But the attempt was made to impose Urdu as state language.
The attempt to impose Urdu as state language in an undemocratic manner was
resisted by the Bangalis. The movement was thus initiated by the Bangalis which
has been known as Language Movement. In an Education Conference in Karachi held
in December 1947, Urdu was proposed as state language. The student leaders,
intelligentsia and political leaders of East Bengal formed Rashtrabhasha Sangram
Parishad on the struggle for State Language. They demanded that Bangla be one of
the state languages of Pakistan. Consequently, we saw that in the first session of
the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan held on 23 February, 1948
Mr. Dhirendranath Dutta from Comilla, an Assembly Member, tabled a bill of
introducing Bangla as the language of assembly along with Urdu and English.
~ But from the beginning the Pakistani rulers were not willing to accept this demand.
s

118 Civics and Citizenship
Central Shahid Minar

In the first stage of Language Movement, the students observed 11 march, 1948 as
the day for the demand of Bangla language. A general strike was declared on that
day.Student leaders of East Pakistan Muslim Students' League (established on January

4, 1948) who had been studying in the University of Dhaka were leading this
movement. In the Morning on 11 march, police arrested Bangabandim Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman, Shamsul Hag, Oli Ahad and many others while they were picketing in front

of the Secretariat.

In this stage of Language Movement,on 21 March of 1948, the founder and the
then Governor General of Pakistan Muhammad Ali Jinnah upon his visit to Dhaka
declared at Race Course Maidan (currently Suhrawardy Uddyan) that ° Urdu and only
Urdu shall be the state language of Pakistan” .This declaration was instantly protested.
One of the prominent protesters was Bangabandhn. To initiate and organize the
movement, he played a leading role. Because of this he was arrested several times.
Before Jinnah's visit to Dhaka, an 8-pomt agreement was signed between the Chief
Minister of East Bengal Khawja Nazimuddin and the student leaders. In that »
agreement, the decision was taken to take initiative for according Bangla the status 8

Civic Consciousness in the Emergence of Bangladesh 119

of one of the state languages. Jinnah repeated his prior declaration while addressing

the Convocation of students in Curzon Hall on 24 March. The protests were also

staged there. Breaking the agreement with the students, Khawja Nazimuddin declared

Urdu as the only state language on January 26, 1952 at Paltan Maidan. From this

declaration started the second phase of the language movement. The All party

Rashtrabhasha Sangram Parishad was formed with Kazi Gulam Mahbub as the

Convenor. Before this, Dhaka University Rashtrabhasha Sangram Committee was

formed in the Dhaka University with Abdul Matin as the Convenor. The renewed

declaration of Urdu as the state language by Khawja Nazimuddin led the

students in East Bengal to rise in anger. In prison, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur

Rahman and Mohiuddin Ahmed went on hunger strike from 16 January to demand

for release of state prisoners and ‘State language Bangla’. This added a new

dimension to the movement. On behalf of the students, general strikes and protest

demonstrations were called all over East Bengal on 21st February.

On the day before 21st February, the F ng

government declared a state of emergency _ >

banning all meetings under section 144. | . ; *

In pursuance of the previously declared é oe

program students organized meetings and ‘ ei * iy

took out procession defying the section '

144 imposed by the government. Police ‘

shot at the procession. Consequently, } ud

Salam, Barkat, Jabbar and many others

who were at the forefront of the

procession were shot dead instantly :

by police. The Pakistani ruling elites -

were compelled to accept Bangla as one

of the state languages of Pakistan. It was

recognized in 1956 Constitution. Bangali ae = :

is the only nation in the world which bs: iPS oa ——

sacrificed their lives for the cause of

language. According to the decision of UNESCO, the UN recognized 21 February

as the day of International Mother language (17 November, 1999). At present, our
= martyr day is celebrated as ‘International Mother Language Day’ all over the world.

120 Civics and Citizenship
Though Pakistan was founded upon the religious identity, Bangalis - beyond this
religious identity- established their identity based on language. So Language
Movement made the Bangalis aware of their self rights. It thus expedited their
aspirations for national liberation.

1954 Election

Election to the East Bengal provincial council was held in March 1954.The total seats
in the provincial council were 309. In 1953, Jukta Front alliance was formed by
Awami League with like-minded political parties so as to counter the ruling Muslim
League. After Language movement in 1952, the Jukta Front victory in 1954
elections enhanced the political consciousness of the citizens of East Bengal.

Prior to the election the Jukta Front had adopted a 21-point program to attract the
voters with things like the political, economic, social and cultural rights of Bangali
citizens, recognition of Bangla as one of the state languages of Pakistan, building
the Shahid Minar so as to commemorate the language martyrs, surplus land
distribution among the landless, nationalization of Jute business and complete
autonomy for East Bengal according to Lahore Resolution. These demands were
directly related to the establishment of citizen rights of the people of East Bengal. In
this election, the Jukta Front won 223 seats out of 237. On the other side, Muslim
League, the spokesman of the Pakistan, movement won only 9 seats.

After the 1954 elections the Jukta Front Ministry was formed with Sher-e-Bangla
Fazlul Haq as the Chief Minister.The Pakistani ruling elites could not accept the
defeat of Muslim League to the Jukta Front. The Jukta Front Ministry was
sacked in just 56 days and Governor's rule was established in East Bengal.

After nine years of liberation in 1956, the first constitution of pakistan was framed.
In it some of the demands of Bangalis were met along with recognition of Bangla
as one of the state languages. But it did not work for long. It was annulled by General
Iskander Mirza on 7 October in 1958. He declared Martial Law all over the country.
In the next three weeks, General Ayub Khan took over power by removing Iskander
Mirza. He introduced ‘Basic Democracy' rejecting Western democracy based on
universal adult franchise.

General Ayub Khan declared 'Basic Democracy Order' on 26 October in 1959.
According to this provision, 40,000 from each part of Pakistan altogether 80,000
Union Council members formed Electoral College for the country. This Electoral S

Civic Consciousness in the Emergence of Bangladesh 121
College was to elect President, members of the Provincial and National Assemblies.
By this system, indirect method of election deprived the citizens of the direct voting
rights.
The indirect method of election deprived the popular politicians of East Bengal of
being elected under basic democracy. Moreover, black acts adopted by Ayub
government made popular politicians abstain from participation in elections.During
Ayub regime, separate Bangali identity became consolidated.
In 1962, General Ayub gave a self-styled constitution. In this constitution, instead
of the provisions for parliamentary form of government and regional autonomy,
presidential form of government was introduced. President was made the centre of
this system and one man's rule with unlimited powers was established. From the
take-over of Pakistan's state power in 1958, General Ayub continued military rule
until June 1962. He ruled the country for 44 months at a stretch by Martial law.
Political parties and their activities, meetings and gatherings were completely
banned. He kept 78 popular politicians including Hussa in Shaheed Suhrawardy
away from taking part in elections under a black law.
In 1962 Sharif Education Commission Report included the recommendations for
compulsory study of English from class VI to the Degree level, making Urdu as
language of people and attempt to introduce the roman alphabet for national
language. In this case the Report considered the acceptability of Arabic, writing
Pakistani languages with the help of Roman letters, bearing the cost of education
by the students, upgrading Degree course into three year. Students rejected this
report and started movement.
During Ayub's military regime, political activities were completely banned. At that
time, some newspapers like the Daily Ittefaq played a laudable and strong role against
the military rule. As a result, steps were taken to gag the voice of these newspapers.
In September, 1959,the editor and owner of the most popular newspaper in East
Bengal, The Daily Ittefaq, Tofazzal Hossain (Manik Mia) was arrested. In 1962 and
1966 also, he was arrested twice.
In the beginning of Pakistan, East Bengal was economically much better than the
Western part. But it did not last long. Gradually the differences between the two
wings began to increase.

Forma-16, Civics and Citizenship- Class-9-10

122 Civics and Citizenship
For rapid economic development of Pakistan, General Ayub adopted many policies.
These policies increased the regional disparity instead of reducing it. In April
1968, the Chief Economist of Pakistan Planning Commission Mr. Mahbubul Haque
released information that 66% industries, 79% insurance and 80% bank assets were
concentrated only in the hands of 22 families (all these families were West Pakistanis
except one). During Ayub's decade-long rule,a huge amount of foreign aid was
received. The lion's share of this aid was spent in West Pakistan. The capital was
siphoned off from Eastern part of Pakistan to the Western part.

6-Points Program

On 5-6 February 1966, a Convention of opposition parties was held in Lahore, West

Pakistan. In this Convention, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman placed his

6-point program on behalf of Awami League.The points of this program are mentioned

below in brief-

1. On the basis of the Lahore Resolution, Pakistan would be a federal state with a
cabinet form of government on the basis of universal franchise.

2. Only the defence and foreign affairs would remain in the hands of the federal
government. The provincial government would deal with other affairs.

3. Two separate and easily exchangeable (convertible) currencies would be introduced
in both the wings.Or there would be same currency in all the regions of Pakistan
provided that there would be two Reserve Banks in the two regions under the
supervision of a federal bank so that the currencies might not be smuggled from
one region into the other region.

4. The power of the imposition and collection of revenues and taxes would lie with
the regional (provincial) governments. But a fixed amount of money would be
deposited to the federal bank for meeting the expenditures of the federal government.

5. There will be two separate accounts for the foreign currency earned by the two
regions of Pakistan.The regional governments would have the power and control
over the foreign trade and foreign currencies.The provincial governments would
accomplish all sorts of foreign agreements and deal in consistence with the
foreign policy of the federal government.

6. The regional governments would have the power to set up, run and maintain the
para- military force for regional security. ES

Civic Consciousness in the Emergence of Bangladesh 123
The 6-point program placed by Bangabandu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was the
charter for Bangalis' national liberation or'Magna Carta'.The target of this charter
was to achieve independence or national liberation for Bangalis. General Ayub
labeled this program as 'secessionist' or program for ‘establishing greater Bengal’
and threatened to apply any sort of force to spoil it.
In order to foil the struggle for the 6-point program, Ayub government filed a sedition
case against Bangabandhu as number one accused along with 35 civil and military
personnel. This case is known as historic Agartala Case. Its formal name was 'State
versus Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and others'. Under this case Bangabandhu and
6-point followers along with other Awami League leaders had to spend a long time
in prison. Consequently, the leadership of the movement for autonomy fell on the
students. In early January 1969, East Pakistan Students League, East Pakistan
Students Union (Menon and Matia Group) and pro- government students' wing,
Dolon group of National Students Federation and Dhaka University Central
Students Union (DUCSU) together formed Central Students Action Committee
(CSAC).The then Vice-President of DUCSU, student leader and fiery speaker Tofael
Ahmed was elected as its president. With all-out support to Bangabandhu's 6-point
program, Central Students Action Committee announced their 1 1-point program.
CSAC adopted 11-point program highlighting the issues of national importance.
This program played a historic role in further advancing the national liberation or
movement to withdraw independence for the people of East Pakistan. CSAC
launched a countrywide movement to withdraw Agartala Case and to free all political
prisoners along with Bangabandhu. As a matter of fact, from November 1968 to March
1969, mass upsurge broke out in the whole East Bengal. At the same time, anti-Ayub
students' movement grew up in West Pakistan too.
Based on 6 and 11 point program a solid citizens' unity was forged amongst all
classes of citizens of East Pakistan. In demanding the withdrawal of Agartala
case, the student movement became much more intense. In the final stage of mass
uprising on 25 March 1969, General Ayub was forced to step down from power.
Mass uprising against Agartala case played a historic role in the emergence of
independent Bangladesh.

=

&

124 Civies and Citizenship
1969's Mass Uprising

In 1969, in both parts of Pakistan, a strong mass movement began against Basic
Democracy, Agartala Case and Ayub's oppression. In the 11 -point programme of
the students many issues were included such as increase of opportunity for education,
regional autonomy, adult franchise, freedom of speech, nationalization of large-scale
industries, increase of advantages for labourers and farmers, impartial foreign policy,
withdrawal of emergency and freeing of political prisoners. All opposition parties
were united for the demand of cancelling One Unit in West Pakistan and the
establishment for autonomy in East Pakistan. At this time, many students were killed
by the firing of the police. To protest this killing, mass movement started all over the
country. The opposition parties formed Democratic Action Committee (DAC). The
intense mass-student movement then started all over the country.

The country-wide movement that arose on the demands of Ayub's resignation,
cancellation of the Constitution of 1962, establishment of parliamentary democracy,
withdrawal of Agartala case turned into a mass movement. Fearing the movement,
Ayub Khan withdrew Agartala case. After his release from imprisonment, on 23
February 1969, in a huge gathering of students and people the unparalleled leader
of the Bangalis, Sheikh Mujib was given the title of Bangabandhu at the Race Course
Maidan (currently Suhrawardy Uddyan). On 25 March in 1969, Ayub Khan stepped
down from politics transferring power to General Yahyia Khan.

On assuming power, Yahyia Khan took several important steps to solve the prevailing
crisis. He lifted ban from the activities of political parties. In order to hold the first
general elections in Pakistan, he took some constitutional measures.Of these measures,
the notable ones were 'one man, one vote', and distribution of seats in the National
Assembly based on the principle of population for each province. He arranged 313
seats in the National Assembly of which 13 were reserved for women. The provision
was made to grant maximum autonomy for each province. Maximum 120 days
were fixed for drafting constitution by the elected representatives. Draft of the
constitution was to be approved by the President.

1970 Election and Its Results

1970 general election was the first in Pakistan state. The Election was held on the
basis of adult and universal franchise.This election was held in two rounds: first on -
December 7 in 1970 and then on 17 January in 1971. The political parties which s

Civic Consciousness in the Emergence of Bangladesh 125
took part in that election were: Awami League, Pakistan People's Party (PPP),
National Awami Party- NAP (Wali Khan), different groups of Muslim League,
Jammat-e-Islami,Jamiate Ulama-e-Islam, Jamiate Ulama-e-Pakistan, Nizam-e-Islam,
Pakistan Democratic Party (PDP) etc. Of these parties, two main parties were
Awami League under the leadership of Bangabandhu, and Pakistan People's Party
under the leadership of Julfikar Ali Bhutto.
The main issue of Awami League's election manifesto was its 6-point program. The
slogans of Pakistan People's Party were: ‘Islam is our belief, democracy is our
state system and socialism is our economy’. The themes of the People's Party's
publicity were: ‘strong centre’, ‘Islamic socialism’ and continued opposition to India.
On the other hand, Muslim League and other Islamic parties like PPP highlighted
Islamic constitution, strong centre and opposition to India.
Election Results
The results of 1970 general elections are presented in the tables below.
Party-wise results in 1970 General Elections
Name of parties Seats Seats | Seats
Pakistan | Pakistan
a
Peoeerry | SO
Muslim League Quam [=
Mstim League (Come) [= TT
[NarCwam | eT
| Muslin‘GeaguetGomventiony/ =~ | 2 | ~ | ~ | @ |
Tmivebam [A |
Taniave-Uamae Paks [= [7 |
VamiateUimeelam —[- | 7 | = | = | 7
a
independent S| tT | 6) |

126 Civics and Citizenship
Election Results to the East Pakistan Provincial Legislature
| Awami League | 288 | 10 | 8
ppope |
ENAP(Wall) |
[Jamiatetslami | |
[Nejmetsiam | EF
[Independent TPT
The general election of 1970 was held in a fair, peaceful and disciplined environment.
In the result of the election, Awami League won 160 out of 162 regional seats
of the national assembly. Along with the 7 reserved seats for women, Awami League
won a total 167 seats out of 313. In the provincial assembly of East Pakistan, Awami
League won 288 regional seats out of 300.In the rest of the 12 seats, independent
candidates won 9, Pakistan Democratic Party won 2 and Jamat-E- Islami won 1
seat. Including the 10 reserved seats for women, Awami League won 298 seats in the
provincial assembly.
On the other hand, Julfiquar Ali Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party won 83 out of the
allotted 138 seats. Muslim League (Kaium Khan) won 9, Muslim League (council)
won 7, Jamiat-e- Ulama-e Islam won 7, National Awami Party-NAP (Wali Khan)
won 6, Jamaiat-e-Ulama-e Pakistan won 7, Jamat-E-Islami won 4, Muslim League
(Convention) won 2 and non-party candidates won 13 out of the remaining 55 seats.
In the reserved 6 seats for women in West Pakistan PPP won 5 and NAP (Wali
Khan) won the remaining one, including the reserved seats for women PPP won a
total of 88 seats.
As Awami League won the absolute majority in 1970 general elections, it made the
Pakistani ruling elites apprehensive about losing power. Through the winning
of AL's absolute majority in the elections, Bangali got the rights to attaining
the state authority and the assurance of drafting constitution based on 6-points. Both
were unacceptable to the Pakistani ruling elites. Asa result, right after the publication
of the election results, palace conspiracy began. Julfiqar Ali Bhutto, the leader of
Pakistan People's Party got actively implicated in the conspiracy being orchestrated
by civil-military bureaucracy elites. S

Civic Consciousness in the Emergence of Bangladesh 127
Pakistani military janta continued to negotiate with the majority party leader,
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, while troops and weapons were being
brought in from West Pakistan. The Pakistani ruling elites could not cordially
accept the victory of AL.They became perturbed at Bangabandhu's uncompromising
stand about 6-points. So having made up their mind for a military solution to the
rising problem, they took time for preparation until 25 March 1971.
President Yahyia Khan called the National Assembly session on 3 March, 1971.
After the elections, he had labeled Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the'future
Prime Minister' of Pakistan. But all this was an eye-wash. Inside, there was a strong
conspiracy to nullify the verdict of the election.
Non-Cooperation Movement
On | March, 1971 President Yahyia Khan suspended the Pakistan National Assembly
session for an indefinite period. In protest, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
called for a hartal all over East Bengal. Virtually, a non-cooperation movement was
launched against Pakistani rule from 1 March 1971. Curfew was declared at night on
2 March. Students and people broke the curfew. The military force shot at them.
In protest, the whole Bangladesh woke up in resistance. The rise of Bangali
nation occurred. Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was the ‘Father of the Nation’.
‘Joy Bangla’ was the slogan for liberation of this nation. Uprisings spread around with
sky-wrecking slogan: 'Valiant Bangalis, take up arms and liberate Bangladesh’.
On March 2, 1971 the flag of independent Bangladesh was hoisted at the Banyan
ground of Dhaka University in the gathering of students and people and on 3
March 'Declaration of Independent Bangladesh’ was read out at the mass-gathering
held at the Paltan ground, and ‘Formation of Independent Bangladesh Central
Students Action Committee' took place and on 23 March the flag of independent
Bangladesh was hoisted in all parts of East Pakistan instead of Pakistan flag on the

co occasion of the Pakistan's Republic day bearing the testimony of the rise of Bangali

S ~*

nation.

128 Civics and Citizenship
From March 2, 1971 to March 25, 1971 an all-out non-cooperation was observed
over the country at the call of Bangabandhu. During this period, all government and
non-government offices, secretariat, autonomous institutions, high court, police
administration, banks and insurance, business and transport defied government
orders and were run following the directions of Bangabandhu.
March 7, 1971 was an unforgettable day in the Bangali national life. On that day, at
the Race Course Maidan (presently Suhrawardy Uddyan) in a spontaneous gathering
of lacs of people, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman gave an important speech.
In this speech, he announced-
Vey = aS SON
2S iy yee x
a me te! as ee aeln ae a
4 2 \ as *. a i
4 aos ‘ 2 ca
r sam = G
The historical speech of Bangabandhu on 7 march, 1971
Racecourse Maidan, Dhaka.
"Make every house a fortress. Face the enemy with whatever you have. As we have
spilled blood,we shall spill more blood. We must liberate the people of this country,
if God wills. Our struggle is the struggle for liberation, our struggle is the struggle,
for independence. Joy Bangla (Long live Bangla)" s

Civic Consciousness in the Emergence of Bangladesh 129
1971. He requested Bangabandhu [eee ‘ ie 2 eg
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman to sit for 4a ee ee Py.
a dialogue. Negotiation began on | + om
16 March. Julfigar Ali Bhutto along Soe ey ae a ;
took part im the negotiation, But the [am eal \ae/ é
main objective of Pakistani rulers [> ey + ~ Aa Te
was to waste time in the name of pe eh, a hes
negotiations. However, their chief @R & So y
objective was to stop forever the ise @) mn, Deis
independence struggle of Bangalis fi Ee »% Ww / X25
by importing ‘roope and other Mga epee. ¢ “ithe
supplies from Pakistan, On 23 never arm "Baddha Bini (where tho iilecuals wee Kile)
March, at the call of Bangabandhu,
the flag of ’Shadhin Bangla' was hoisted at every house in East Pakistan while the day
was ‘Pakistan Republic Day’. The Awami League leaders made their last attempt to
resolve the crisis. But Yahiya Khan, making no announcement, left Dhaka with his
cohort and ordered Pakistani troops on thet night to swoop on the unarmed Bangalia.
other cities. This night is called the Black Night in the history of Bangladesh.
Declaration of Independence
On this black night (25 March) in the first part of 26 March, just before his
arrest, Bangabandhu declared independence. The declaration was made in English so
that the whole world could understand the message. He said: “This may be my last
message, from today Bangladesh is independent.I am calling the people of Bangladesh,
wherever you might be, with whatever you have, you will resist the army of
occupation with all your power. Your fight must go on until the last soldier of the
Pakistan occupation army is expelled from the land of Bangladesh and the final
victory ig achieved." (Bangladesh Gazette, 15th amendment to the Bangladesh
Constitution, 3 July 2011). This declaration was transmitted through the then EPR's
Transmitter, Telegram and Teleprinter.Bangabandhu's declaration of independence
waa atmounced at midday of 26 March by Chittagong's Awami Leagus leader M A
evening from Kalurghat Radio station. Bangabandhu's declaration of independence
received widespread support from Bangali military, paramilitary and civilian forces.
Thus, it inspired the freedom-loving people.
Forma-17, Civics and Citizenship- Class-9-10

130 Civics and Citizenship
1971's War of Liberation and Gaining Independence

On 10 April, 1971 the elected Peoples' Representatives of Awami League decreed the
Order of the Declaration of Independence at Mujibnagar (at the Mango garden of
Baiddanathtala in Meherpur district) and formed a government which is known as
Mujibnagar Government. The Mujibnagar government comprising the Peoples’
Representatives took oath on 17 April. After the formation of Mujibnagar
government, people in groups joined Muktibahini (Freedom fighters) and began to
join the war of liberation.

Internal Resistance and Guerrilla attack

At midnight of March 25, Pakistani troops attacked Dhaka city by firing and setting fire.
They killed the sleeping people in dark of night. They attacked Iqbal Hall (at present
Jahurul Haque Hall), Salimullah Muslim Hall and Jagannath Hall of Dhaka University.
There, they raided the teachers' quarters and killed many people. Yahyia's barbarian
troops were engaged in indiscriminate killing of the people, torturing women,
arsons, looting and in many other hateful crimes. To escape from their attacks, lacs
of male and female people took shelter in India. But Bangali students and youths
received training in secret in large numbers and started guerilla warfare from within
the country and beat the Pak army in frontal attacks. The people assisted them by
giving food, shelter and clothes. As a result, the Pak army became seized.
Organization and operation of the War of Liberation

In the primary stage of the War of Liberation, resistance movement was going on
unplanned and uncoordinated. With the formation of Mujibnagar government, the
War of Liberation began to operate in an organized way.

Regular military battalion was formed comprising the then Bangali members of
EPR, Bangali soldiers and officers in the Pakistan army. Three Brigades were later
formed with regular military battalions known as K-force, S-force and Z-force.
Military members and other freedom fighters gained recognition as Freedom Fighters.
At times they were known as Guerrilla. The members of this force played a significant
tole in the War of Liberation. They participated in the guerrilla war within the
country against the Pakistan occupation forces. Their detective branch conducted
surveillance over the movement and activities of Pakistan occupation forces
and supplied information to the freedom fighters. Among the guerrillas, students
and farmers were the greatest in number.

Mujibnagar government divided Bangladesh into eleven sectors and put a o
commander in charge of a sector. Under the sector commander, both regular forces s

Civic Consciousness in the Emergence of Bangladesh 131
and irregular guerrillas were engaged. Sector ten did not have a regional
boundary. This consisted of Navy Commanders.
Using a mix of conventional and guerilla warfare tactics Freedom fighters defeated
the Pakistan occupation forces. Non stop war lowered the morale of Pakistani
occupation forces and made them utterly frustrated and isolated from the people.
Pakistani military ruler President Yahyia Khan launched air strike on India in a bid to
show Bangladesh's independence war as a war between Pakistan and India. On
3rd December Pakistan government declared war against India. But their atternpts
ended in failure. On 4 December, Indian Loksabha (parliament) decided to give
recognition to the independence of Bangladesh. The Indian government accorded this
recognition on December 6. At this time, a Joint Command was established
comprising Freedom fighters (Mukti Bahini) and regular members of Indian army.
This joint command launched attacks from three sides such as naval, air and land.
Consequently, Pakistan occupation forces were completely destroyed and defeated
within a few days.
At last, on16 December, 1971 the Commander in Chief of the Pakistani forces General
Niazi along with 93,000 soldiers, a huge chunk of supplies and artillery formally
surrendered at the then Race Course Maidan. The name of Bangladesh was thus
written in letters of blood on the map of the world as an independent and sovereign
state.
fe
Y 4 rl
KAS io i a La
\\ ~. Va ak 7 Sai é %
i |G q 4 Wiese r
ae ae ia
ce 4 “fag: Te —. a — } , = & .
3 7 01 RSS | ae ee
5 Victory celebration of freedom fighters and masa people

132 Civies and Citizenship
In nine months War of Liberation, 3 millions of Bangalis irrespective of sex, religion
and age lost their lives. 2,76,000 women lost their dignity. Villages after villages
were set on fire. 1 crore people left the country and took shelter in India. Gaining
this liberation, Bangladesh emerged as an independent and sovereign country in
the world map.Prior to achieving independence, the local accomplices of Pakistan
occupation forces took the best intellectuals of the country to the Rayer Bazar and
Mirpur killing grounds and brutally killed them. On the whole, despite being the
majority in Pakistan Bangalis were treated as second class citizens. With independence,
they became independent citizens in independent Bangladesh.
Spirit of the Liberation War and Its Ideals
Bangladesh is the first country in the third world which gained independence through
an armed struggle. That war lasted for nine months. At the cost of much spilling of
blood and sacrifices, we gained independence. The first constitution enacted after
independence rightly embodied the sprit of the war of liberation and its ideals through
four principles of the state.These four principles are: democracy, socialism, secularism
and nationalism. The Bangalis have struggled for democracy for long. To make
Bangladesh a truly democratic state was their dream. The main objective was to
free themselves from all kinds of exploitation and discrimination. Since inception
of Pakistan state, Bangalis have struggled against the use of religion by the rulers.
In other words, they have struggled against communalism. ‘Religion is personal, state
is for all'- with this essence in mind they have taken part in the War of Liberation.
The essence of our independence was exclusive national identity, which we call
Bangali nationalism. For a separate nation, an independent state is required. Bangali
national identity includes our own territory, literature and language, non-communal
or tolerant culture and history and tradition. The spirit and ideals of the War of
Liberation lie in the ownership of state power. During Pakistan period, state was
the institution of civil and military bureaucracy and opportunist groups. People of
all walks of life in our country have taken part in the War of Liberation. They are the
owners of the state.Therefore, it has been declared in our constitution that 'People are
the sources of all power of the Republic! Article-7(1). Today, our duty is to make
Bangladesh a happy and prosperous state.

2

BS

Civic Consciousness in the Emergence of Bangladesh 133
Exercise

Multiple Choice Questions

1. Who declared the two nation theory?
a. A.K. Fazlul Haq b. Mahatma Gandhi
c. Mohammad Ali Zinnah d. H.S. Suhrawardy

2. Which one of the following promises by United Front attracted the Bangalis?
a. To make Pakistan a federation;
b. To empower the provinces fix to taxes;
c. To establish full autonomy of East Bengal;
d. To release all political prisoners;

3. The reason behind the formation of United Front was that Muslim League
i. could not be trustworthy to the Bangalis
ii. took away all kinds of rights from the people of these countries
iii. spoke of making Urdu the state language

Which one of the following is correct?
a. iand ii b. iand iii
c. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii

Read the following paragraph and answer the questions 4 and 5:
A has returned to his own village Ruppur after living for 20 years in a European
country. One day when he joined a social program in the village and started
talking in the language of where he came from, the villagers requested him to
speak in native language.

4. Which one of the movement's influence can be noticed in the peoples' lives of the
Ruppur village?
a. Language b. Non-Cooperation

s c. 6-point program d. 11-point program

134 Civics and Citizenship
5. The consequence of the movement primarily-
a. Created national consciousness b. Enhanced religious thoughts
b. Created political consciousness c. Deprived people of the direct voting
rights
1. Creative Questions
, Soon a= mia! > 2S oe ean Mr ees
ere, ‘ i a ot ae —o
& &> :~ = ese ama b+
" L , eat’.
x} PCTS a \ Se tad OL te 3
MA cae, “aes ig Beds
ie 3 ;
, Le Ro UTA) ot ile | ad
Smal CRUG
a, When is International Mother Language Day observed?
b. What is ‘Two Nation Theory'? Explain.
c. With which movement is the picture above related ? Explain.
d. The spirit of people in the above picture could give birth to the sovereign
and independent Bangladesh. Give reasons in favour of your answer.

2. Shishir worked in a factory. During the War of Liberation, many of his factory co-
workers joined the war. Following their path one day he left his house and received
armed training. He then joined the war. He lost one of his legs in a direct encounter
with Pakistan army at Brahminbaria. At the end of war, he returned bome but
did not get his family and job back.

a. Who raised the 6-point program?

b. What is Guerilla war? Explain.

c. Which force did Shishir belong to? Explain. 8,
d. Shishir and his partners are the best sons of this country. Evaluate. Rg

Chapter Eleven
Bangladesh and International Organization
There are many countries in the planet named earth. The countries are spread over
different regions of the world's seven continents. Despite being independent and
sovereign, it is not possible for the countries to exist alone.
Mutual cooperation, friendship and amity are indispensable for the development of
these countries. For this, various cooperative organizations have developed in the
world. For example: SAARC, Organization of Islamic Co-operation, Commonwealth,
the United Nations, etc. In this chapter, we will learn about these important
international and regional organizations and their relation with Bangladesh.
| :
oy “a
weet Sree __ searigeeee eB n
United Nations General Assembly Session
After studying this chapter, we will be able to -
* analyze the formation of SAARC, its objectives and its relation with Bangladesh.
* describe the formation and objectives of the United Nations.
* describe the relation between the United Nations and Bangladesh.
* explain the role of Bangladesh in the United Nations Peace Keeping Force.
* describe the formation of the Commonwealth, its objectives and its relation with
oo Bangladesh.
S * describe the formation and objectives of the OIC and its relations with Bangladesh.

136 Civics and Citizenship
SAARC
The full form of SAARC is "South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation”.
It was established initially with seven developing nations; later Afghanistan was
included as one of its member countries. This organization has been established to
achieve the political, social and caltral progress with the mutual cooperation of
member countries. It is a regional organization for development.
Formation
SAARC started its journey through holding its first conference in Dhaka on
the 8th December 1985. Presently, the number of member countries of this organization
is eight. The member countries are: Bangladesh, Bhutan, Maldives, Nepal, India,
Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Afghanistan.
There are five levels in its institutional structure 1. Summit meeting of heads of
states and governments 2. Conference of foreign Ministers 3. Standing
Committee 4. Technical Committee 5. SAARC Secretariat. Different activities of
SAARC are implemented through those organs. The SAARC Secretariat is situated
in the capital of Nepal. Its head is called Secretary General. A summit conference
of the heads of the SAARC member countries is held annually. SAARC symbolizes
the hopes and aspirations of almost 150 crore people of the south Asian countries.
SAARC symbol SAARC Secretariat, Kathmandn, Nepal
Goals and objectives of SAARC's formation
The developing countries in south Asia are beset with different kinds of problems.
Poverty, illiteracy, malnutrition, over population and natural disaster etc. have been
problems of these countries for ages. So SAARC has been established to get rid
of those problems through mutual cooperation and to accelerate the development
programs of SAARC countries. Apart from these, there are some other specific s

Bangladesh and International Organization 137
reasons behind the establishment of SAARC. These are as follows:
1. To improve the standard of living of the people of member countries of SAARC;
2. To ensure the economic, social and cultural development of this region;
3. To take necessary steps to make the south Asian countries self-reliant;
4. To increase understanding and cooperation between each other for the general
interest of the countries of this region;
5. To establish cooperative relationship with different international organizations;
6. To take initiatives for achieving SAARC's goals through improving the relations
with other regional organizations;
7. To create mutual understanding by resolving existing differences and problems
among SAARC members;
8. To abide by the policy of sovereignty and geographical integrity of the countries
and
9. Not to interfere in the internal affairs of other countries.
Group work: Explain the aims behind establishment of SAARC.
Relationship of SAARC with Bangladesh
There is a deep relationship between Bangladesh and SAARC. Late President of
Bangladesh General Ziaur Rahman took first initative to establish SAARC, but it
was not established in his lifetime. Later in 1985, SAARC officially started its
functions in Dhaka under the initiative of former president General Hossain
Mohammad Ershad.
As the initiator of SAARC, Bangladesh has been playing a significant and strong
role in its different activities. As one of the member countries it has also been making
every effort toexpand the trade between the member countries and to maintain the
balance, to solve the regional conflicts and existing crisis between the neighboring
countries. Apart from this, Bangladesh is committed to prevent human trafficking,
combat terrorism, protect the environment, development of communication and
technology and to eradicate diseases etc.
In this regard different programs have been taken for mutual cooperation.
Bangladesh is extending its all out cooperation to accelerate the progress of SAARC
through execution of these programs.
Group work: Discuss | or 2 notable events of SAARC and present them in
the class.
Forma-18, Civics and Citizenship- Class-9-10

138 Civics and Citizenship
United Nations
We are aware that m the span of only 25 years, there were two world wara. The firat
one was from 1914 to 1918 and the second one was from 1939 to 1945. Different
countries of the world were involved in the war. These two world wars were great
obstacles to the progress of human civilization. So, alongside the war there were
efforts also to establish peace. Therefore, after the Ist world war in 1920, The
League of Nations was established to achieve world peace. However, because of
the conflict between different countries this organization did not continue. As a
result m 1939 the 2nd world war engulfed the world. In this war different countries
suffered a tremendous loss. Two Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki were
completely destroyed and millions of people died.
After seeing the destruction in the 2nd warld war, people of the world panicked and
became speechless.So they were inspired to eatahlish peace m different countries. In
addition to fhis they felt that war must be avoided for the benefit of mankind. Mutual
cooperation among the countries can bring peace and progress in the world. Asa
result, in 1941 world leaders took initiatives to establish the United Nations.With the
initiatives taken by former British prime minister Winston Churchill and president
of United States Theodore Roosevelt there were long discussions with the leaders
of the different countries. Consequently an 24 October, 1945 m San Francisco city
of the United States, the United Nations was established. After the destruction of 2nd
world war with the hope of peace the United Nations came into being.
ee 5 ar
| ® 4 = {
fy tf ¢
Winston Churchill Theodore Roosevelt 8

Bangladesh and International Organization 139
Initially the number of members of the United Nations was 50.Now it has193 members.
Its headquarter is situated in New York in the United States. The Secretary General
of the United Nations is its chief administrator. Trygve Lie of Norway was the
first secretary general of United Nations. The name of the present secretary general
is Antonio Guterres, a portuguese citizen. The color of the flag of the United Nations
is light blue. In the middle of white background there is a round world map; two
sides are surrounded by olive branches. The United Nations have different institutions
for development.
These are as follows: UNICEF, UNESCO, World Health Organization, World
Food Program, World Human Rights Commission etc.
Y/KERY
[7a \)
Re Ny
” WY
UN Headquarters UN Symbol
Group work: Discuss the background of the establishment of United Nations and|
write in brief its necessity.
Aims of the United Nations
Established with the noble objective of world peace and cooperation the aims of the
United Nations are as follows.
1. To ensure world peace, discipline and security through preventing the threat to
peace and aggressive activities;
2. Through showing respect to equal rights to create fraternity and friendly
environment among all the countries of the world;
3. To establish international cooperation to solve economic, social, cultural and
human welfare problems;
4. To create respect and honor to the freedom and basic rights of all, irrespective
x of race, religion, color, language and gender;
& 5. To resolve all international conflicts through international law.

140 Civics and Citizenship
Formation of the United Nations
Now we will discuss the formation and activities of different organizations and
branches of the United Nations.
The United Nations has six organizations or branches which are as follows.
United Nation

General Security Economic Trustee International Secretariat

Assembly Council and Social Council court of Justice
Council

1. General Assembly
The General Assembly is the main policy making organ of the United Nations.
It has a significant role in protecting world peace and cooperation.
All member countries of the United Nations are members of the general assembly.
Generally, this council holds its session once a year. But on the request of the security
council a special session can be held. At the beginning of the session a chairman is
elected by the vote of the members. In the general assembly, each member country
has the right to cast only one vote.
Functions
The General Assembly discusses international peace, security and human rights. In
addition to this, it appoints the secretary general, collects new members, passes
budget, fixes the subscription of the member country, appoints members of the
different organizations and elects non-permanent members in the Security Council.
2. Security Council
It is the most important and powerful branch of the United Nations; it is considered
as the governing branch of the United Nations.
Formation
The Security Council is constituted with 15 member countries of which 5 are
permanent and the rest 10 are non-permanent members.Permanent members are
as follows: United Kingdom, United States, Russia, France and China. These are
known as five great powers. Nonpermanent members are elected for a two year period.
Functions
To protect world peace and security is the main responsibility of the security council. &6
This council makes efforts to solve international conflicts through discussions. It &

Bangladesh and International Organization 141
can enforce economic and diplomatic embargo on the aggressive countries. If its
efforts fail, it has the power to use the military power. Besides this, to establish peace
and stop a war somewhere, the security council can send UN peace keeping forces.
In short, to maintain international peace and amity, all necessary steps are taken by
this organization.

3. Economic and Social Council
This council has been established to advance the world economically and socially.
It has a significant role in the development of the world.

Formation
It was formed with 54 members. At least three sessions are held in a year. Every
member has the right to cast one vote. A decision is taken with the consent of majority
members.

Functions
This council performs various welfare activities to improve the living standards
of the countries, to solve the unemployment problem and to expand the facilities
of education, agriculture, food, treatment and rehabilitation and to ensure the
fundamental rights of the people. Apart from this, one of the tasks of this council
is to send its recommendations regarding the welfare of the people to the general
assembly.

4. Trustee council
The territory which has a separate entity but no freedom and sovereignty and is run
under the supervision of another country is called a trustee area. Responsibility of
this area is on the shoulder of the trustee council.

Formation
This council consists of the ruling country of the trustee area and the member country
of the United Nations, permanent members of the Security Council and other elected
members. It has no fixed number. The number of the members is fixed on the basis
of the number of the trustee areas.

Functions
United Nations takes the responsibility of the undeveloped area through this Trustee
Council. Its main responsibility is the development of the trustee area through
expanding education and creating awareness among the people of the area and
preparing them for self rule and freedom. In addition, its task is to ensure peace
and security in the area and review the complaints and requests of the people

vc of the trustee area and take steps and through inspection of the trustee area observe
5 the practical situation and to submit reports.

142 Civics and Citizenship
5. International court of justice

The International court of justice was formed to establish world peace and protect it
through solving the conflict between the different countries of the world. Its
headquarter is situated in the town of Hague in Netherlands.

Formation

It's the court of the United Nations and is formed with 15 justices for a period of
9 years. General assembly and the security council appoint the judges of this council.
Functions

Any member country of the United Nations can seek justice through submitting
the complaint against each other to solve the conflict. The court maintains world
peace through its judicial activity. The court also deals with the cases regarding
the subject included in United Nations charter and solves the conflict regarding the
agreements signed among the member countries. Furthermore it explains the laws in
response to the request of the general assembly and security council.

6. Secretariat

The secretariat is the administrative department of the United Nations. All activities
are performed for world peace, cooperation and communication through this department.
Formation

It is formed with the secretary general, some deputy secretaries, under secretaries,
other officials and employees. Head of this department is the Secretary General. He
is elected by the general assembly for a period of 5 years.

Functions

Administrative activities are performed by the secretariat. All the related activities are
carried out centering the secretary general. He also discharges his responsibility
as a secretary general of the general assembly, security council, economic and
social council and trustee council. He appoints employees of all departments except
the international court of justice. He convenes the sessions of all the departments.
Apart from this, his activities include preparation of budget, collection of
contributions from the member countries, convening meetings of different
departments, review of different development activities and preparation of report on
the trustee area. Execution of the decisions taken by general assembly and security
council is also his responsibility. He can also recommend any action against the
countries which violate the order of United Nations. The secretary general is actually
the main executive official of the United Nations. He carries out the huge activities .,
with the cooperation of others in the secretariat. s

Bangladesh and International Organization 143
Group work: Make a chart showing functions of the branches of UNO and
present it in the class.

Relationship between Bangladesh and United Nations

Bangladesh became a member of the United Nations in 1974.Since its birth, Bangladesh

has been faithful to the policy and the ideology of the United Nations.Bangladesh

received United Nations' help to solve its various problems. Bangladesh has been
playing a significant role to execute different activities of the United Nations.

Practically the deep relationship and friendship started to grow between United

Nations and Bangladesh libaration right from the time of Liberation war of

Bangladesh. Some important factors are as follows:

@ During the liberation war in 1971 United Nations gave 10million Bangladeshi
refugees, who took shelter in India, the opportunity to survive by providing them
with food, cloth, accommodation and treatment as humanitarian help. United
Nations also helped Bangladesh after its liberation war to reconstruct the country.

@ After gaining the membership in the United Nations the role played by
Bangladesh in different activities was well appraised.As a result Bangladesh
has become a very trustworthy member among the other member countries. So
far Bangladesh gained the membership of the Security Council twice as a non-
permanent member, which is considered as a rare honor for the country. Besides
this, Bangladesh was elected member of other councils of the United Nations.

@ Different organizations of the United Nations have been working for the social,
political, economic and cultural development of Bangladesh as a real friend.
These organizations have also been helping Bangladesh enormously in the
sectors of health, food and nutrition, communication, declining the rate of child
death, population control, achieving political stability, science, development of
tradition and culture and facing the challenges of natural disasters and calamities.
United Nations has honored greatly our mother tongue Bangla by declaring our
Martyr's day 21st February as and International Mother Language day. These
activities of the United Nations have played a great role in strengthening the
relation with Bangladesh.

@ In 1991 influx of thousands of Rohinga refugees to Bangladesh from Myamnar
created a disastrous situation. Bangladesh overcame the situation with the
immense help of the United Nations and its different organizations. Apart from

% this, there was a maritime border conflict between Bangladesh and Myamnar.
8 Bangladesh filed a case in this regard in the international court of the United

144 Civics and Citizenship
Nations. In 2012 Bangladesh won the case and gained the right over a vast area
in the sea border.

@ In this way United Nations has been helping our country as a close friend of
Bangladesh. Likewise Bangladesh is playing an active role in the execution of the
decisions taken by the United Nations through total trust on its charters and
Participating in different sessions of the United Nations. By showing proper
respect to the decisions of United Nations, Bangladesh bas been playing an
active role in the maintenance of peace by sending its troops to the peace
keeping forces of the United Nations in different countries of the world.

Group work: Create separate charts showing achievement & contribution of
UNO in Bangladesh.

Role of Bangladesh in the international peace keeping forces

Bangladesh is one of the members of peace keeping forces in the United Nations.

Since the beginning it has been supporting activities of the peace keeping forces and

playing an active role. In 1988 Bangladesh sent its army personnel to the peace

keeping forces for the first time. They were sent to Namibia to take part in two
operations there. During Iran- Iraq war Bangladeshi army personne] took part in

United Nations Peace Keeping Force in Kuwait and Sandi Arabia. Since then

Bangladeshi army personnel took part in peace keeping forces mission in 25 countries.

Bangladesh occupies the highest position among the countrics that sent their troops to the

United Nations Peace Keeping Force. It has sent almost 11 thousand soldiers to the UN

peace keeping forces. At present Bangladeshi army personnel are working in 12 countries

of the world.
I _ —— rE Gage é
a Ee > 9-4 a, oo li |
eo ayy 4 = \ LR a Sea Ue

Recognition of the special contribution of Bangladesh Members of Bangladesh Armed
Armed Forces in UN Peace Keeping Force Forces in Peace Keeping Force =

xy

Bangladesh and International Organization 145
The position of Bangladesh army in the peace keeping forces is glorious. As
recognition of that contribution many high officials of Bangladesh army have been
appointed commanders and in high positions. It is another recognition of the role of
Bangladesh that increased the dignity of the country. In recognition of this
contribution of Bangladesh, BBC has termed Bangladeshi peace keepers as "The
cream of the UN peacekeepers". Participation of Bangladeshi army in the
peacekeeping forces of UN has helped Bangladesh earn foreign currency; as a
result the country has been prosperous economically.Contribution of Bangladesh
in the UN peace keeping forces is a matter of pride for us.
Group work: Prepare a short report on contribution & sacrifice of

| Bangladeshi peacekeepers in keeping peace of the world.
Commonwealth
Formation
We know that once the British empire spread almost /
all over the world. Our Indian subcontinent was >,
also under the British Empire. The British ruled es o
in that period almost all over the world with Jy
tremendous might. Later, those areas ruled by the v
British witnessed the spirit of nationalism and ; F
started to become independent one after another, ‘ tit
During that period, the commonwealth was Pe
established to retain the bonds between the My 8 9 ry
countries which got the freedom from the British JB 7 a
rule. Britain took initiative to establish it. Britain ‘ ov
and other British-ruled countries are the members ae ee eer el
of this organization, but a country can abstain from being a member of
Commonwealth. Presently it has 53 members.
The Commonwealth is an international organization. It was established in 1949. Its
name was British Commonwealth of Nations then, later the word " British" was
dropped. The Queen or the King of Britain is the head of the Commonwealth. It has
its own secretariat to carry out its activities.

Forma-19, Civics and Citizenship- Class-9-10

146 Civics and Citizenship
The head of the secretariat is called General Secretary and its headquarter is situated in
London. A conference of the heads of governments of member countries is held every
two years.
Aims and objectives of Commonwealth
The main aim of commonwealth is to maintain minimum relationship between Britain
and its independent colonies.The aim of this organization is to assist the development
of member countries in socio-economic, cultural and political sectors, and to help
in the exchange of education, science and technology between each other through
maintaining this relationship.
Bangladesh gained the membership of Commonwealth after its independence on 28
April 1972. There has been a strong relationship between the Commonwealth and
Bangladesh since its emergence, especially the relationship with Britain, the
main initiator of commonwealth is much closer. During our war of independence
the British media created public support in favor of Bangladesh. During the war of
independence, Britain was the main center for the publicity in favor of Bangladesh
government. An assistance fund was established there to help Bangladesh. Other
member countries of commonwealth also extended their assistance and cooperation
in different ways. Our neighbouring country India, one of the member countries of
commonwealth gave shelter and food to almost 10 million Bangladeshi citizens.
Other member countries helped Bangladesh by sending medicine, food and clothes.
Due to the liberal mentality towards Bangladesh and friendly relationship it
gained commonwealth membership after its independence. In protest against the
decision taken by the commonwealth, Pakistan withdrew its membership from the
commonwealth. With the help of commonwealth and its member countries, Bangladesh
was able to overcome quickly the damages of war. As a sincere member of the
commonwealth Bangladesh takes part in all its conferences. It also helps to execute
the policies and programs taken by the commonwealth. It is one of the members
of the Colombo Plan; as a result Bangladeshi students go to the different
commonwealth countries for higher study with commonwealth scholarship.
Commonwealth is the second largest international organization in the world. It has
been working as a nonpolitical organization to maintain peace and prosperity in the
world; it has also been working for the development in the sectors of agriculture, =
N

Bangladesh and International Organization 147

education, health and technology in the commonwealth countries, and in the

eradication of discrimination of color and discrimination between the poor and

the rich in the world.

Group work: Discuss the contribution of the commonwealth in the liberation
war of Bangladesh.

Organization of Islamic Co-operation (OIC)

Formation

OIC is an international organization of Muslim majority countries in the world. Its

full name is Organization of Islamic Co-Operation (OIC). We are aware that there

has been a conflict between the Islamic countries in the Middle East and the western

countries for a long time regarding the establishment of the State of Israel. On 21

August in 1969, Israel suddenly set fire on Al-Aqsa Mosque, a sacred shrine of

Muslims. The Muslim world expressed serious anger and condemned the incident.

In this regard a foreign ministerial meeting was held in Egypt. Foreign ministers of

14 Muslim countries attended the meeting. A decision was taken in that meeting to

hold a summit conference of heads of Muslim countries. In accordance with that

decision a summit conference of the heads of Muslim states was held from

22 September to 25 September in 1969 in the capital of Morocco, Rabat and heads

of 24 Muslim countries attended the summit. In that

summit, Muslim leaders felt that to safeguard the interests

of the Muslim countries, establishment of an organization

was necessary and OIC came into being on 25 September,

and Malaysian Prime Minister Tenku Abdur Rahman was

elected its secretary general. In this way, it started its

journey. Initially number of members was only 23. At

present it has 57 members. All Muslim countries of the

world are its members. The OIC head quarter is situated

in Jeddah in Saudi Arabia.

Symbol of OIC

Aims of OIC

Primary aims of OIC are to ensure the security of Islamic shrines, and take steps
8 jointly against conspiracy of the foreign enemy by maintaining the unity and solidarity
N

148 Civics and Citizenship

between the member countries. Apart from this, there are some more aims.They are as

follows:

1. To strengthen the Islamic brotherhood and solidarity;

2. To increase the cooperation between the member countries in the social,
economic, cultural, scientific activities and other important sectors;

3. To eliminate racism and colonialism;

4. To ensure the security of Islamic sites, liberate sacred places and support the
struggle of the people of Palestine;

5. To safeguard the dignity of Muslims, and help accelerate the struggle of Muslim
nations;

6. To support and ensure the international peace and security;

7. To increase the cooperation and fraternity between the member countries;

8. To show respect to the freedom and sovereignty of the countries; and

9. To resolve any conflict between the countries peacefully through dialogues,
mediations, and negotiations.

Bangladesh and OIC

Bangladesh gained its membership in the OIC in its second summit conference

held in February 1974-Through this, the relationship between Bangladesh and Islamic

world became intimate. Since the beginning, Bangladesh has been taking an

active part in different activities of OIC. For the significant role played by

Bangladesh in OIC, it has been elected member in different wings or committees

of the OIC. Bangladesh has extended its cooperation to the various events of the

Muslim world through its solidarity with the aims of OIC. For instance, Bangladesh

has been extending its continued support to the struggle of the Palestinian people to

liberate Palestine. It made every effort to stop Iran-Iraq war, condemned the ,,

invasion by Russia of Afghanistan and sent soldiers to Bosnia to stop the war. S

Bangladesh and International Organization 149
Bangladesh, besides its significant role in the OIC, was also able to receive cooperation
from the member countries of OIC. Membership of Bangladesh in OIC has helped it
a lot to gain the recognitions of various Muslim countries, as well as to gain the
membership of UN and other international organizations Wartorn Bangladesh received
assistance from the oil-rich Muslim countries for the rehabilitation work. It is worth
mentioning that Bangladesh was able to send huge manpower to the oil-rich Muslim
countries which created job opportunities and earned enormous foreign currency
which played a great role in the economic development of the country. Apart
from the economic assistance, Bangladesh has been receiving cooperation of OIC
member countries in the educational, social and cultural fields. Every year many
Bangladeshi people go to Saudi Arabia to perform Hajj. Bangladesh also gets
financial assistance from OIC for the renovation of important and different Mosques.
Islamic University of Technology situated in Gazipur has been built with the
financial assistance of OIC and run by it. Bangladesh after gaining the membership
of OIC is really playing an important role to execute the policy and decisions of OIC.
Group Work : Evaluate the contribution of OIC to the economy of Bangladesh.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. When was OIC formed?
a. 1939 b. 1949
c. 1969 d. 1972
2. Which Council of the United Nations can use military force?
a. General b. Security
c. Trustee d. International Court
x
Ss
N

150 Civics and Citizenship
3. Which council works in settling international conflicts?
i. Security Council
ii. Economic and Social Council
iii. International Court
Which one below is correct?
ai b. ii
c. iand ii d. i and iii
In light of the diagram answer questions 4 and 5:
Discussion on matters related
to international human rights
Convening Sessions Appointment of
General Secretary
To determine the donations
of Various States
4. What organ is related to the '?' symbol?
a. General Assembly b. Security Council
c. Commonwealth d. SAARC
we}
S
AQ

Bangladesh and International Organization 151
5. The above organ -

i. elects a chairman every year

ii. elects a chairman every two years

iii. has the right to accept a new member state
Which one below is correct?

a.i b. ii

c. i and ii d. iand iii
Creative questions
1. Mr. Hasan and Mr. Hakim setup two different organizations in their village
Surjanagar.

The name of Mr. Hasan's organization is | The Name of Mr. Hakim's organization is

"Peace Organization’. Its form, goal and | 'Bagmara Cooperative Association’. Its

objectives: form, goal and objectives:

(1) Mr. Hasan is the general secretary of the | (1) Mr. Hakim is the general secretary of
organization. Number of primary the Association. Number of primary
members of his organization is 23 members of his organization is 50.

(2) To develop mosques and madrasas of the | (2) people of different communities,
area and maintain peaceful coexistence religions and colours are members of
between different communities by this association.
taking stand against communalism

(3) To set up libraries, sports clubs and
develop the peace and discipline of the
village through economic emancipation

a. What is the full form of SAARC?
b. What is trustee territory? Explain.
c. Objectives of which international organization have similarity with Mr.Hasan's
‘Peace Organization’? Explain.
6 d. Many of the objectives of the United Nations are seen to be reflected in Mr.
g Hakim's association. Verify the statement.

152 Civics and Citizenship
2. Present members 53
A B
Nennerterense in thE monet une a a relations with
Internal affairs of member states to regio) . erations Independent colonies
organization || Organization
7 7 7 Work for agriculture, industry,
Developing relations with other education and political
organizations including UNO, OIC. development of member states
a. How many organs does the United Nations have?
b. Which branch of the United Nations is responsible for maintaining world
peace and security? Explain.
c. In the diagram, which regional organization does 'A' reflect? Explain.
d. Relations between 'B' international organization and Bangladesh is very close-
Argue in favour of the statement.
The End
20
~
S
N

