Economics
Classes Nine-Ten
AY Ae WS ai? a
_\\ Ee
i : , Ne, ere e
|
NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH
ener’

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a Textbook for Class Nine-Ten from the Academic Year-2013
Economics
Class Nine-Ten
Written by
Md. Zahirul Islam Sikder
Dr. Md. Azam Khan
Mohammad Fakhrul Alam
Editor
Prof Muhammad Ismail Hossain
Prof Md. Amir Hossain
Translated by
Shwagota Sayeed
Nabila Nuzhat
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh.

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70 Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka.
[All rights reserved by the Publisher]
First Publication : December, 2012
Revised Edition : November, 2014
Reprint :
Co-ordinators
Dilruba Ahmed
Cover Design
Sudarshan Bachar
Sujaul Abedeen
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
Computer Compose
Perform Color Graphics (Pvt.) Ltd.
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Government of Bangladesh
Printed by:

Preface
Education is the pre-requisite for the holistic development in our national life. To cope
with the challenges of the fast changing world and to lead Bangladesh to the doorstep of
development and prosperity, a well educated and skilled population is needed. In order
to build up a nation imbued with the spirit of the Language Movement and our
Liberation War, the secondary education aims at flourishing the talents and prospects
inherent in the learners. Besides, the other aims also include expansion and consoli-
dation of the basic knowledge and skills of the learners acquired at the primary level in
order to make them fit for entry into higher education.
The aims of secondary education further emphasise on developing these learners as
skilled and competent citizens of the country through the process of acquiring knowledge
at the backdrop of socioeconomic, cultural and environmental settings.
Keeping the aims and objectives of National Education Policy 2010 in mind, the
curriculum at the secondary level has been revised. In the revised curriculum the national
aims, objectives and contemporary needs have been reflected. Along with these expected
learning outcomes have been determined based on the learner's age, merit and level of
acquisition. Besides, efforts have been made to raise, starting from the level of moral and
humanistic values down to awareness on history and tradition, the spirit of the Liberation
War, passion for art-culture and literature, patriotism, feelings for nature and equal
dignity to all irrespective of religions, caste, creed and sex. Efforts have also been made
to apply science in all spheres of our life in order to build a nation advanced in science.
Attempts are also there to make the learner capable of implementing the goals envisioned
in Digital Bangladesh-2021.
In the light of the present curriculum almost all the textbooks at the secondary level
have been introduced. While introducing the textbooks, the capacity, aptitude and prior
knowledge of the learners have been taken into utmost consideration. While selecting the
contexts and their presentation special attention has been given on the expansion of the
learner's creative faculty. Adding learning outcomes at the beginning of each chapter,
hints about the achievable knowledge of the learners have been given. By adding variety
of activities, creative and other questions evaluation has also been made creative.
It is indispensible for the students to be concerned about the economic activities and
economic development of a country. Focusing on this aspect the Economics book for
class Nine-Ten is designed. Aspects such as, introduction and importance of modern
economics, utility, demand, production, market, banking system, public finance of
Bangladesh, important economic aspects of Bangladesh, economic system of
Bangladesh government are presented in an easier and comprehensive way. These issues
are helpful to broaden the outlook and change the demand of the student.
Considering the challenges and commitments of 21st century and following the
revised curriculum the textbook has been written. Recently, the rational evaluation and
tryout program has been completed to make correction and revision of the textbook. I
hope the outcomes of the program will be reflected in this revised edition. Any
constructive suggestion for the improvement of the textbook will be welcomed and _ in-
corporated in future editions.
We appreciate the endeavours of those who assisted very sincerely with their merit
and hard work in the process of writing, editing, translating, revision, illustration and
printing of the book. We hope the book will ensure joyful reading and achievement of
expected skills from the learners.
Prof. Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

Table of Contents
Oe [Taiconnzamons |
[Se | Seton aon | 91

Chapter One
LJ e
Introduction to Economics

From cradle to grave, human beings continually struggle with financial
problems for their survival. Throughout their lives, they try to overcome various
obstacles. The subject economics helps them in numerous ways to overcome
these problems or obstacles. Economics plays a very significant role in
achieving human, social and national development. So to learn about this
subject is very important. This chapter discusses briefly the origin and
development of economics, the major economic problems, the definition and
principles of economics, the circular flow of income and the different economic
systems.

caer rT aT El % 4 Bi! 1M gS >

Ss a ames | BP * ) ee, oe ie n\a0e taal if

OP RBar Cy Wek re y gee 7.

Aas pyre St Pit eS \ &

hy eat, CS. wr < me

+) 3 \ « Veg » ai
After studying this chapter, we will be able to

e describe chronologically the origin and development of economics.

e explain the mutual relationship between scarcity and unlimited want.

e describe the concept of economics.

e describe the ten main principles of economics.

© introduce the various economic systems.

© evaluate the comparative advantages and disadvantages of different

economic systems.

Forma-1, Economics Class 9-10

2 Economics
1.1 The Origin and Development of Economics

The economics that we study today was not so complex in earlier times. The way
of living of humans was much simpler in ancient societies. Food, clothing and
habitation—these were the basic needs of people. The practice of exchanging
goods was very limited. Basically, physical labour was the only means of
production. There were no class-divisions among people in society. They were
united into a body with no feeling of defeat or victory to them; it was the main
pinciple of premitive society . Production and consumption were the main aim
of that society . During the time of the prophet Moses (a:), in 2500 BC in
Hebrew Civilization, there had been some simple discussions about economics
in religious and philosophy books. Law, religion, morality, philosophy and
economics were all discussed together at that time. There was no existence of
economics as a separate discipline. Knowing about production, consumption
and running the day-to-day family life was then called economics.

The English word ‘economics’ has been derived from the Greek word
‘oikonomia’. Oikonomia means the management of the household. Plato
(427 - 347 BC) and Aristotle (384 — 322 BC) were the two great thinkers of the
Greek Civilization. They have discussed various fundamental topics of
economics, including individual property, the wages of the labourers, slavery
system and interest.

In ancient India in the 4rth BC, Koutillya’s ‘Orthoshastra’ (Treatise on
Economy) focused elaborately on the issues of politics, society, economics and
military affairs of the whole country. From the last part of the 16th century till
the last part of the 18th century, the expansion that occurred in the international
trade in England, France and Italy has been termed as Mercantilism. For
increasing the wealth of the country, the power of the state and making the
surplus in its trade, the merchants of England exported more and imported less.
Goods produced in England were exported to different countries of the world in
huge quantities and valuable minerals (gold, silver, diamond, etc.) were S

Introduction to Economics 3
imported. By the middle of the 18th century, the French took a stance against the
luxurious lifestyle of the rich people of their country, excessive taxation and the
mercantilism of England, and propagated the tenets of Physiocracy. According
to the physiocrats only agriculture, including mining and pisciculture, was the
productive sector. On the other hand, industry and trade were considered
non-productive sectors.
In this way, during the ancient and the Middle Ages discussions about
economics had been gradually becoming complicated. However, economics
received the recognition as a separate discipline when the British economist
Adam Smith wrote his famous book, ‘An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of
the Wealth of Nations’ in 1776. This book by Smith is the basis of today’s
economics.
Task: Write chronologically about the origin and development of economics.
1.2 Two Major Economic Problems: Scarcity and Unlimited Wants
Human beings cannot get everything they desire. This is known as want. There
is no end to this need in life. For example, you are a student. Suppose you have
one thousand taka. You need a shirt, a pants and a pair of good shoes. In this way
you will find that you need many more things. But you have only one thousand
taka. Compared to your needs, the amount of money is very little. In economics,
this is known as ‘scarcity of resources’. Because of scarcity, a person chooses or
selects things according to their importance. If there had been no need to choose,
there would have been no need for this discipline, economics.
Scarcity and Unlimited Wants
The main problem of humans is not to be able to get everything according to
their wants. To produce any goods (e.g. books) or services (e.g. medical
services), resources are necessary. But ‘wealth is limited.’ Thus it is possible to
get limited goods by means of the limited wealth. Therefore, with limited wealth
S all the necessities in life cannot be fulfilled. This is indeed the reason of scarcity.

4 Economics
Scarcity would have not been created if there had been lesser needs. Famous
economist Professor L. Robins says, “Economics is a science that analyses
human behavior related to the combination of unlimited wants and alternatively
usable scarce resources.” According to economist Samuelson, since resources
are scarce, the question of the best utilization of the resources in society holds
such importance. The want for resources obtained from nature like sunlight or
the wind is very high. But we do not have to spend any money to get these.
Usually there is no scarcity of these resources. Since the wants of humans are
too many and the resources are limited, all their wants cannot be satisfied.
Amongst numerous wants, human beings satisfy only a few. And they fulfil
these wants judging the importance of these wants. Humans satisfy the most
necessary wants on a priority basis. This is known as selection of wants.

1.3 Concept of Economics

With the development of knowledge and science, the sphere of economics has
grown as well to a great extent. As a combination of the knowledge of
economics from both the past and the present, economics as a discipline is now
much developed or enriched. Among those who have presented economics as a
subject or discipline, Adam Smith, David Ricardo and John Stuart Mill think of
economics as a science of production and distribution of wealth. Of them Adam
Smith is regarded as the father of economics. This trend of economics is known
as classical economics. Back then the name of economics was Political
Economy.

Definition of Economics Given by Adam Smith: “Economics is a science that
explores the nature and reason of the wealth of nations.” Economics grows
centring wealth or resources. So to acquire resources is the main purpose of
people’s economic activities. The weaknesses of Smith’s definition lie in: 1) In
this definition there is no mention of how economics would satisfy people’s
unlimited wants by means of their limited resources. 2) Although national
resources have been given more emphasisin this definition, persons and their
activities have been ignored. 3) Acquiring resources has been emphasized
whereas how these resources would be acquired has not been mentioned. 4) In %
this definition, resources stand for goods, but there is no mention of services. ES

Introduction to Economics 5
Definition of Economics Given by Professor Marshall: Professor Alfred
Marshall emphasizes human welfare more than resources. He says, “Economics
discusses the general activities of human life.” The basic point of discussion
about economics is the income of human beings and their expenditure of that
money for the purpose of satisfying their wants. That is, the main purpose of
economics is to accomplish human welfare. Marshall has only discussed the
accomplishment of human welfare in real life. Whereas at present, the problem
of scarcity is the main problem of economics, and this basic issue has not been
taken into consideration.
Definition of Economics Given by Professor L. Robins: Professor L. Robins
has defined economics in such a way that has been much more acceptable than
the definitions given by others. In his opinion, “Economics is a science that
analyses human behavior related to the combination of unlimited wants and
alternatively usable scarce resources.” The characteristics of this definition are:
1) Human wants are unlimited and the nature and volume of the wants are
different. 2) The resource and time to fulfil the wants are very limited. 3) One
very important part of the discussion of economics is how to adjust unlimited
wants by means of limited resources. 4) As the supply of the resources is limited,
we have to try to satisfy our varied wants with the same resources. 5) Wants are
limited as per their priority. For these reasons, this definition is considered to be
a more acceptable one.
Criticism of the Definition of Robins: 1) Robins has observed the subject
matter of economics from a wider point of view. 2) Human beings often like
some things in their personal and social lives, which are not discussed in
economics. 3) It is not mentioned that the main purpose of economic activities is
human welfare. 4) The social position of economics has not been discussed in
Robins’ definition. 5) The economic development of the modern world has not
been included in his definition. 6) Robins had only discussed economics with
price, but he skipped to discuss national income, employment system,
investment, distribution, etc. In the end it can be said that Robins’ definition is
comparatively abstract. However, no theory in economics is above criticism.
x Therefore, in spite of the flaws, the definition provided by Robins is more
‘acceptable.

6 Economics
1.4 The Ten Principles of Economics

We have to meet unlimited wants in the perspective of limitation of resources in
our society. According to economist Gregory Mankiw, before discussing
concepts and ideas of economics, it is important to know about the ten
fundamental principles of economics. These are:

1. People Face Trade-offs

To get something that we like we often have to sacrifice some other thing that we
also like. To give an example, if you spend all your time studying economics,
you will have to keep off from studying Bangla or English. Similarly, if you are
watching television, you will not be able to spend time for playing. If the
government is spending more for military sector in the budget, it is reducing its
expenditure in other civil sectors including education sector. That is, a person in
society chooses an alternative for a trade-off.

2. Opportunity Cost

If you are spending time at school for your studies, you cannot help your father
or mother with their work at home or outside. Whereas if you were involved in
any economic activity that your parents are doing, they would have been
monetarily benefitted. But you are studying at school (not helping with your
parents’ economic activity). Here not being able to work for your parents
because of your studies is the opportunity cost of studies.

3. Rational People Think at the Margin

People think at the margin. After the feast at a wedding ceremony, some of you
may think that it would have been better if you had eaten a little more, and some
others may think that it would have been better if you had eaten a little less. This
little more to eat or little less to eat is the marginal eating. Suppose, you have
achieved an A in economics. You might think that if you had studied a little
more, you could have obtained an A+. Human beings also think of marginal
advantages and disadvantages. For example, you ate three bananas one after
another. The third banana is the marginal banana. The satisfaction you got from
the marginal banana is known as the marginal utility. To have that third banana, 8

Introduction to Economics 7
the money that you have spent is known as the marginal cost. As a rational
being, you will eat the marginal banana only when the marginal utility will be
greater than the marginal cost.
4. People Respond to Incentives
Inspiration or incentives play an important role in every task. If people get
incentives, they perform their job with better care. If your father tells you that he
will buy you a bicycle if you can get a GPA 5, surely your enthusiasm for studies
will be greatly enhanced. Similarly, in economics if the labourers get incentives,
they will produce more.
5. Trade can Make Everyone Better-Off
The United States produces cars cheap, and we can produce garments cheap. In
the circumstances, if we trade with the States giving them our garments in
exchange for their cars, we both will profit from the trade.
6. Markets are Usually a Good Way to Organize Economic Activities
Economic activities are organized by the market system. The reciprocal actions
and reactions between the firms and the households determine the price of any
goods. The owners of the firms supply goods observing the market demands and
numerous households buy these goods and services as per their incomes and
needs. So market prices are determined by the actions and reactions between
demand and supply.
7. Government can Sometimes Improve Market Outcomes
The market system is run by the signal of the ‘invisible hand’. But it always does
not turn out to be correct. For many reasons, the invisible hand fails to succeed.
In these situations governmental interventions are a must. The interventions are
necessary to ensure the proper supply of goods like education, health, law and
order, electricity, etc., the proper utilization of resources, and to prevent the

x centralized monopoly of resources, environmental pollution and corruption.

Ss

XQ

8 Economics
8. A Country's Standard of Living Depends on Its Ability to Produce Goods
and Services
The standard of living of those countries is high whose capabilities for producing
goods and services are better. The production capacity of the people of
developed countries is much better and as a result their per capita income is
much higher. The per capita income in 2016 in the United States was $56116 and
in Japan was $40763 (Source: The World Bank). As a result, they have better
food, better healthcare and better civic facilities. The working capacity of the
workers also increases. They can produce many more goods and services in less
time and less labour.
9. Prices Rise When the Government Prints Too Much Money
The power to print money rests with the central bank. If the central bank prints
too much money, inflation will occur. That means the price level of goods rises.
Inflation causes the value of money to fall. For example, you can get the
necessary materials for your studies, spending taka 500. But when the value of
money falls, you will have to spend taka 650 to get the same things, which is taka
150 more (650-500=150). As the prices of goods go up, you have to spend more
money to get the same things.
10. Society Faces a Short-Run Trade-Off between Inflation and
Unemployment
The rise in the price level of the goods is known as inflation. The unemployed
people are those labourers who want to work at the market wages but cannot get
jobs. When inflation decreases, unemployment rises. On the other hand, when
unemployment diminishes, inflation increases.
1.5 The Circular Flow of Income ( the two sectors)
There are two types of agents in a simple economy: consumers or households and
producers or firms. How the income and expenditure flow in a circular motion
between these two types of agents are shown here in the diagram below. 8
g

Introduction to Economics 9
Income Goods & Service Expenditure
market
Goods & Goods &

services sell services purchase

Factors of Labour, land,

production capital

Market of factors
of production
wage, rent, Interest Income
Circular flow of Income

In the above diagram, it is observed that there are two types of agents in
economics. For example, the firms and the households, Firms or the owners of
the firms purchase the materials of production. Later they organize these
materials and produce goods and services. They supply these produced goods
and services in the market or sell these. On the other hand, households earn by
selling different elements of production under their ownership such as labour,
land and capital. (Labour earns wages, the owners of land earn rents, capital
earns interest, Meeting all these expenditures an entrepreneur sells the produced
goods or services in the market. The entrepreneur keeps excess profit for
themselves before selling produced goods or services. For this reason the surplus
income of the entrepreneur is called profit). The households purchase goods or
services from the firms with their income. Thus the wheel of economy revives
through the circular flow of produced goods, services and income. And this is
known as “the circular flow of income”.
Forma-2, Economics Class 9-10

10 Economics
1.6. Different Types of Economic Systems
We know economics is the science of choice. We have known that economics
always tries to choose the right way for producing the highest production,
highest consumption and the highest welfare by using limited wealth. For this
reason economic system is always searching the answers of the three questions—
a) What will we produce and what we will not produce? For instance will
we produce guns, or clothes?
b) What type of technology or machine will we use for production? What
we want to produce?
c) For whom will we produce? Who will consume it?
To answer these questions the main responsibility of different economics in
different countries. In this respect we find their economic systems. Total
economic systems of the world can be divided into three fundamental systems.
These are (1) Market system or Capitalist system (2) Command system (3)
Traditional economic system. We have to keep in mind that no system is purely
implemented. Always they exist in the mixed system.
The characteristics of the three different economic systems are mentioned
below—
1. Market System or Capitalistic System
a) In this system all the decisions are determined according to the logic of
market. For example, if the demand and price of any goods is higher, the
production of these goods will also be higher. The relative demand of the market
will determine the order of production.
b) In the technology where the production cost is the lowest in the market.
Goods will have to be produced by using this technology.
c) The owners will earn or consume according to price of production determined
in the market.
20
S

Introduction to Economics 11
So it is observed that the production, the process of production and the
distribution of production are determined by market through the competition of
the owners of materials and the sellers and buyers. The buyers and sellers are the
personal owners of the total wealth and production materials. The price of
productions and others are determined by the internal activities of the buyers and
sellers.
2. Socialistic or Command System
In this system the central authority determines what products will be produced.
Here the owner of the total wealth and production materials is the state or
society. As their representative the Central Planning Ministry finally determines
everything such as the types of production, choice of technology, price, income
and consumption, etc. All the players of economy have to follow their
instructions as law. So, this system is called the command system. In this system
priority is give to social interest or social welfare other than self interest or
profit.
3. Traditional Economic System
There is no strong presence of state-owned or planning commission in some
ancient societies of the world where primitive economy exists. In those societies
a person generally takes economic decision or conducts economic activities
according to the religions values or the customs of their forefathers. As custom
and social belief determine all economic activities in this system (production,
consumers, technology, etc.) These economic systems are called traditional
economic system. As traditional economic system we can include the economic
system of the tribal people in our country or the economic system of the protein
community in the U.S.A. or the economic system on the basis of shariah in some
Islamic states.
Mainly market economy and capitalistic economy exist in the present world and
planned economy is running in some socialist countries. Islamic economic
~ system exists in some countries including Iran and Saudi Arabia. If we justify
S strictly we will find that everywhere other economic system work partially in

12 Economics
one economy system in these countries. For this reason it can be said in the final
analysis that all the economic systems of the world are mixed economy. We find
a mixed economic system in our Bangladesh. Here market is the main controller
in private sectors; state or planned decision is the main controller in the state
sectors; the instruction of Shariah is the main controller in Islamic institutions
(Islami Bank). All these sectors influence one another market, regulations or
Islamic values are not able to play dominant role in our economy.

Capitalistic Economy

In this system production materials are private properties. Without any

interference of government in automated price system the entire economic

activities are run by non-governmental initiatives. This type of economy is
called Capitalistic economy. The capitalist economy stated in whole Europe
during the end of 18th century after the French revolution. Classical economist

Adam Smith and his followers used to support this economic system.

Characteristics of Capitalistic Economy

The major characteristics of the capitalistic economy are mentioned below:

1. Private Property: In capitalistic economy, majority of the resources or
the materials of production of the society are under individual ownership.
The owner can exchange or consume these properties.

2. Private Enterprise: In capitalism maximum economic activities,
e.g. production, exchange, distribution, consumption, etc are run by
individual enterprise. Governmental interference is not expected in these
enterprises.

3. Free Competition: In this system, many firms get involved in free
competition regarding the production of goods and services. As a result,
the prices of the goods remain less and newer inventions are possible.

4. Automatic Price System: The price of the goods is determined through the
bargaining between the sellers and the buyers. -

Ss
N

Introduction to Economics 13

5. Profit: The producer, in capitalism, produces for the target of the highest
profit possible.

6. Consumers' Liberty: Every consumer is free to buy and consume goods
according to his/her individual choice, wish and taste. The producer
supplies goods as per the demand of the consumer and the opportunity of
profit.

7. Inequality of Income: In a capitalistic society there remains a greater
inequality of income between the rich and the general people in society. In
some extent unemployment is inevitable in capitalistic economy.

8. Role of the Government: Government, in this system, remains engaged in
the maintenance of the law and order, protecting the state, and securing the
rights of wealth.

In different sectors of economy, through mutual dependence, the activities of the

capitalistic economy are run. None works selflessly; rather everyone performs

the economic activities for their own interests .

Socialistic or Command Economy

In socialistic economy, the state or the society holds the ownership of most of

the resources and factors of production. State or society is the owner of the

majority of the industries and institutions of production and they are run by the
directions of the government. The state or the society decides which products
will be produced and in what quantity, how and for whom.

Characteristic of Socialistic Economy

1. State or Social Ownership Resources: In socialistic economy
government is the owner of most of the resources (Land, industries, mines,
etc.) and factors of production. Co-operative organizations and joint social
groups work under state.

2. Central Planning: State or government decides all planning centrally. The

eS
S productions and distributions are done according to this plan.

14 Economics

3. Lack of Consumers Freedom: In socialism most of the cases the consum-
ers consume the goods that are produced by state and central planning. No
consumer produces or consumes anything spending money on his/her own
will.

4. Lack of Free Competition: as the production, in maximum cases is run by
state enterprise, there is no free competition among huge number of private
entrepreneurs.

5. Absence of private Profit: In socialism production is run for national
demand and overall welfare of state instead of private profit. So no industry
is developed by private enterprise. Agriculture, industry and threat all are
under the ownership of state and social ownership. So there is no private
profit.

Group task: Present the comparison of the capitalistic and socialistic economic
system.

Mixed Economic System

The economy in which individual ownership and private enterprise exist side by

side with state enterprise and control, is known as the mixed economy. That is,

in this economic system, private and state enterprises play a combined role. In
most of the countries of the world, mixed economy exists for example, the

United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, Bangladesh, India, etc.

Characteristic of Mixed Economy

In different countries of the world, the characteristics of mixed economy are of

different kinds. Usually, the following characteristics of mixed economy are

observed:

1. The Private Co-operative and State Ownership of Resources: In mixed
economy an individual can freely possess and enjoy his/her movable and
immovable properties and also trade those off. Side by side with that, the
government runs the institutions that provide the public properties (highway) .,
and services (healthcare). §

Introduction to Economics 15

2. Private Enterprise: In mixed economy, most of the economic activities
along with production, trading, distribution and consumption, are organized
and conducted by private enterprises.

3. State Enterprise: In mixed economy, state enterprises are under taken
alongside private enterprises. The vital and heavy industries, national
security and institutions that are significantly public-related, are conducted
by the state.

4. Profit: It is possible to earn profits by conducting maximum economic
activities in the private sector.

5. Freedom of the Consumer: In this system, the consumer enjoys full
freedom regarding the trading and consuming of general products. However,
if the government deems it necessary, it can influence the price of the goods
and control the production and consumption of any goods as per its
necessity. For example: smoking, production of drugs and consumption, etc.

Many people consider this mixed economy as a better economic system since

pure capitalism or socialism can be found nowhere in the world.

Islamic Economic System

The economic system which is developed on the belief of fundamental roles of

islam is called Islamic economic system.

Characteristic of Islamic Economic System

In Islamic economic system it is said that all the resources of the world have to

be used for the welfare of human kind. The important characteristics of this

system are as follows:

1. Belief is Islam: The fundamental rules of Islamic economy are complied and
directed according to religion, religious philosophy, religious custom, rules
and regulations.

Bs Interest Free Deposit: Islamic economic system does not allow interest.

2 Here interest free deposit system is conducted in banking sectors.
S
aq

16 Economics

3. Zakat and Fitra: Zakat based distribution system has been introduced in
this system. For this Zakat and fitra are collected from the rich in order to
distribute among the poor.

Task: Which economic system is similar to the economic system of Bangladesh?

Explain.

Exercise

Descriptive Questions

1. Discuss the origin and development of economics.

2. Define economics. Which of the definitions is more acceptable and why?

3. Discuss the ten principles of economics.

Short Questions

1. What is meant by scarcity and unlimited wants?

2. Illustrate the definition of economics given by Adam Smith.

3. What is meant by the circular flow of income (two sectored)?

4. What is capitalistic economic system?

5. What is mixed economic system?

Multiple-Choice Questions

1. Who is the father of economics?
a. David Ricardo b. Aristotle
c. Adam Smith d. L. Robins

2. Market is a good medium to organize economic activities. Because, there
a. one can bargain.
b. one can buy consumer products at a cheap price.

°9

c. goods can be produced according to the demand. 8

Introduction to Economics 17
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iand ii b. i and iii
c. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii
Read the following passage and answer question numbers 3 and 4
Nabil went to the market to buy sugar and found that the price of sugar is too
high. A buyer standing beside him told him that sugar is being sold at the
governmental selling centre at the reasonable price just across the street.
3. Which economic system is prevailing in Nabil's country?
a. islamic b. mixed
c. capitalistic d. socialistic
4. In the economic system of Nabil's country-
a. there grows inequality of income b. interest-free loan is exchanged
c. stability of price is persistent d. there is no freedom of private
enterprise
Creative Questions
1. Telephone conversation of Rumi and her friend who is living abroad-
Rumi: The cost of rice is increasing every month.
Sumi: My monthly expenditure is always the same.
Rumi: How is it possible in your country?
Sumi: The price of the goods in this country is not raised just if someone wishes.
a. What is the productive sector according to the physiocrats?
b. What is meant by scarcity?
c. Which economic system is prevalent in Sumi's country? Explain it.
d. Analyse the difference between the economic system of Sumi’s country and the
mixed economic system.
Forma-3, Economics Class 9-10

18 Economics
2. Asad has been living in country 'A' for a long time. Recently he came to visit
his own country and he told his younger brother about the experiences of his life
abroad. The per capita income of the people of that country is very high. The
owner of the institution that he works for did not need permission from the
government before establishing his factory. And also, he can consume any
product that he likes.
a. Illustrate the definition of economics given by Adam Smith.
b. Describe the importance of incentive in economics.
c. Explain the real face of the existing economic system of the country 'A’.
d. Analyse the difference betweentheeconomic system of the country 'A’ and
that of Bangladesh.
x
Rg

Chapter two
The Important Ideas of Economics
It is important to know some significant facts about economics to acquire a
wholesome idea of Economics. The definition of resources and products and
their classification, opportunity cost and choice, income, savings, investment,
economic and non-economic activities, and above all, the activities of the people
of Bangladesh have been discussed in this chapter. Before entering into the main
discussion of economics, these concepts will be helpful to understand
economics.
TSS N28 ECT a ET
‘ ». Pet eee:
% iP. ze ee Ba: ¥ ies
- «4 a alia 4A <n |
SO i Eee Ke re y K ey et
ee. ‘pe x 44 ay Bit i Ye sh kb ‘sa ¥ by
en =". am oe mah if ‘ TOR dso lac anad
a NY wet 8 pee aa 4 Ka VLE eS
| : CNA RS PAE Re aL ae oy es oe
A 8 Bea + ee ey dias i. yg. as
¥ sth Kk Pi i « ! HL EAS sth
After studying this chapter, we will be able to
e illustrate the concept of economic resources.
e compare between natural resources, human resources and produced goods.
e notify different economic resources of Bangladesh.
e describe what a product is.
e differentiate between freely accessible goods and economic goods.
e compare between permanent and temporary consumable products.
e differentiate between intermediate and capital products.
e illustrate the concepts of opportunity cost and choice.
we e discern the relation between income, savings and investment.
S e prepare a sector-wise list of different economic activities of Bangladesh.

20 Economics
2.1 Economic Resources
We all are more or less acquainted with the term, ‘resource’. The word resource
comes in our daily conversations in many different ways. For example, Mr.
Sujan owns a lot of resources. To an economist, everything is not a resource.
In economics, the products or goods which are to be obtained by spending
money are considered as resources. Briefly we also call them economic
goods. For example, houses, furniture, television, etc are visible material
resources and doctor's services, teacher's lessons are invisible or non-material
resources. To obtain these things, money has to be spent. If any particular thing
is to be referred to be a resource in economics, it has to have four
characteristics. These are-

1. Utility: Utility means the capability of any goods/product to fulfil the need of
the people. If any goods is to become a resource, it must have the capability
to create utility. People do not buy anything with money that does not have
any utility.

2. Insufficiency: To become resource, the quantity and supply of any goods
will be limited. For example, the supply of river water, wind are ample.
These are not resources. On the other hand, land, gas, instruments are not
available. That means, these things are resources and these things are the
insufficient goods for us.

3. Transferrable/Exchangeable: Another characteristic of resource is its
transferability. Transferrable means being transferred to another hand or
handed over. That means that if the ownership of goods is transferable or
changeable is called resource. The talent of the world famous poet
Rabindranath Tagore cannot be considered as resource in economic terms.
Because, the ownership of his brilliance can not be handed over or
exchanged whereas the ownership of a television is changeable, which
makes a TV a resource.

4, Externality: Those things that stand for the internal qualities of human -
beings are not resources in economic terms. Because we cannot feel their S

The Important Ideas of Economics 21
existence externally. For example: the special experience or knowledge of
a person about computer or the qualities of someone's character cannot be
termed as resources. But in the capitalist market economy these human
qualities can be turned into saleable resources.

Classification of Resources:

Resources are of three kinds from the perspective of their origins. They are-

1. Natural Resources: Goods obtained from nature which satisfy people's
needs are known as natural resources. For example land, forests, mineral
resources, rivers, etc.

2. Human Resources: Different kinds of abilities and skills of a human are known as
human resources. For example, physical capabilities, intelligence, enterprise,
organizational capacities are human resources.

3. Produced Resources: Resources that are created utilizing natural and human
resources are known as produced resources. For example raw materials, instruments,
industries, transport and communication systems, educational institutions and health
care centres, etc are built by humans, so they are produced resources.

Task: Explain logically which of the following are resources in terms of
economics:
Wheat, rice, genius of a poet, experience with the computer, and of the
desert.

Description of the Economic Resources of Bangladesh

Bangladesh is one of the developing countries in the world. The per capita

income of a over-populated country like ours is low. The economic resources

of a country are very closely related to the development of the country. The
description of the economic resources of our country is given below:

A. Agricultural Resources

Bangladesh is an agriculture-based country. Fertile agricultural lands rich in

alluvial soil occupy vast areas of this country. The fertility of our lands,

favourable weather, rainfall, rivers, etc are supportive of agricultural
« production. There is about 90,990 square km of tillable agricultural land in our
& country. In our agricultural lands, rice, wheat, dal, potato, oil-seed, fruits and

22 Economics

other crops and jute, sugarcane, tea, tobacco, silk and other cash crops are

produced. Almost 63% of our population is directly or indirectly dependent
on agriculture. 16% of our national income comes from the agriculture sector.

B. Mineral Resources

Bangladesh is not rich in mineral resources. So far the minerals that have been

discovered here are given a brief description below:

1. Natural Gas: The main mineral resource of Bangladesh is natural gas. 23 gas
fields have been discovered in the country till 2016. There, about 16
trillion cubic foot gas is in reserve in total. Now, gas is being extracted from
only 22 gas fields. The producing gas fields are: Bakhorabad, Hobigonj,
Kailashtila, Rokidpur, Sylhet, Titas, Belabo (Narshingdi), Meghna, Sangu,
Salda river, Jalalabad, Bianibazar, Fenchuganj, Moulovibazar, Feni,
Bibiana, and Bangura. This gas is used as raw material to produce chemical
fertilizers. Besides, this gas is used as fuel in electricity plants, industries and
households.

2. Limestone: Limestone is used in producing cement, glass, paper, soap,
bleaching powder, etc. There are reserves of limestones in Bhangarhat of
Sylhet, Baglibazar, Tekerhat of Sunamgonj, Jamalgonj of Jaipurhat and St.
Martin island of Chittagong in Bangladesh.

3. China clay: There are reserves of china clay in Bijoypur of Mymensingh and
Patnitola of Naoga districts. It is used in making utensils and sanitary
products.

4. Coal: Coal has been discovered in Sylhet, Rajshahi, Jaipurhat, Faridpur, and
Boror Pukuria of Dinajpur of Bangladesh. Nowadays coal is being extracted
in Born Pukuria of Sylhet.

5. Hardrock: There are stores of hardrock at Moddhopara of Dinajpur and
Ranipukur of Rangpur district. Construction of roads, railways, dams, etc
needs this stone.

—
g

The Important Ideas of Economics 23

6. Silica Sand: These are reserves of silica sands in Sylhet, Chittagong, Comilla
and Jamalpur. It is used in producing glass, colour, and other chemicals.

7, Sulphur: Sulphur is used in producing gunpowder, at match factories, for oil
refining and in some other sectors. There is the possibility of getting
sulphur at Kutubdia Island in Chittagong.

8. Mineral Oil: Mineral oil has been found at Horipur in Sylhet. At the coastal
regions of the country, Chittagong Hill Tracts, and in Sylhet, mineral oil is
being searched for.

9. Bronze: A little quantity of bronze has been found at Ranipukur and Pirgonj
of Rangpur district and at the layers of hardrock at Moddhopara of Dinajpur.
Bronze is used for making electric goods and wire, coins, etc.

C. Forest Resources

Forestry and forest resources are very important natural resources. To keep the

natural and environmental condition well at least 25% of the total land of any

country should be forests. But the forest-land is only 11% of the total land of

Bangladesh which is less compared to the other countries. For example, there are

33.84% forests in the United States, 67% in Japan, 63% in Burma, and 24% in

India. The entire forest region of Bangladesh can be divided into five parts:

1. The Sundarbans: This forest is situated at the coastal regions of the districts
of Khulna, Satkhira, Bagerhat, and Borguna. The total area of this forest is
6,000 square km. Sundori, Goran, Geoa, Bain and some other valuable trees
are grown in this forest. The world-famous Royal Bengal Tiger lives in the
Sundarbans and so do many different kinds of animals and birds.

2. Forests of Chittagong and Chittagong Hill Tracts: About 13,295 square
km of the hilly regions in these two districts are occupied by this forest.
Segun, Garjan, Gamari, Jarul, Shimul, Champa, Bamboo, Cain, etc are
grown in these forests in huge quantities.

2
8

24 Economics

3. Madhupur and Vaoal Forests: The Madhupur Gar of Mymensingh and
Tangail districts, and the Vaoal Gar of Gazipur district together make this
forest occupying at least 1064 Square km. Here, Shal, Gajari, Bonjam,
Koroi and other trees are grown.

4. Forest in Sylhet: This forest is situated in Sylhet. Its size is about 1040
square km. Here, Shimul, Bonjam, Bamboo, Cain and many other trees are
grown.

5. Forest in Dinajpur and Rangpur: This forest is situated at north-east of
the country, at the Barendravumi of Dinajpur and Rangpur districs. Its size
is about 39 square km. Shal, Gojari, are etc. grown here.

D. Animal Resources
Everywhere in Bangladesh, different kinds of animals and birds are found.
Among the domestic animals, cow, goat, sheep, buffalo, duck, chicken, etc are
the main. Besides, in the Sundarbans and forests of Chittagong Hill Tracts
there are tiger, elephant, deer, and some other valuable animals and numerous
kinds of birds. Various kinds of fishes are found in our rivers, lakes and
marshes (haor) and ponds and in the Bay of Bengal. This kind of resources meets
our demand of nutrition. They create employment opportunity. They provide
raw-materials to leather industries. This resources are helpful to increase export
earning.

E. Energy Resources

The use of the power resources is a must in the sectors of factories,

transport and communication, mechanized cultivation, household etc. There

are some sources from which energy resources are obtained. These are, coal,
mineral oil, natural gas, water, atomic energy, solar energy, and the different
types of prevailing fuels.

Although at some places of Bangladesh, coal has been found, but the extracting

has not yet begun. Petroleum has been found at Haripur in Sylhet. The necessary

quantity of petroleum is imported from the foreign countries. It has not yet 20

been possible to begin producing atomic and solar energies in this country. R

The Important Ideas of Economics 25
The supply of energy in Bangladesh comes mostly from natural gas, electricity
and some other traditional ingredients. We use natural gas in the factories, for
household works and for producing electricity. Electricity is produced from
water in this country. It is known as hydro electricity. The only hydro electricity
production plant of the country is situated at Kaptai in the Chittagong Hill
Tracts, by the bank of the river Karnafuli. The electricity that is produced by
gas, oil and coal, is known as thermal electricity. In the electricity production
plants in Bangladesh that are listed below, mineral oil is used as fuel:

1. Goalpara thermal power centre, Khulna

2. Veramara thermal power centre, Kushtia

3. Thakurgaon thermal power centre

4. Saidpur thermal power centre, Nilfamari

The gas run electricity production centres of this country are:

1. Shiddhirgonj thermal power centre, Narayangonj

2. Ashugonj thermal power centre, Brahmanbaria

3, Ghorashal thermal power centre, Narshingdi

4. Shahjibazar thermal power centre, Sylhet

5. Chittagong thermal power centre

Heat energy is produced in this country from various existing fuels like wood,
hay, dung, jute-stalk, husk leaves etc. The present government has set up the
scheme of supplying electricity by quick rental service.

It is worth mentioning that, nowadays, air current, solar heat, and organic gas
are being used in many countries as materials for producing energy. In the
modern world, atomic energy is given much importance, too. It can be expected
that in near future, energy production will be attempted from these sources as
well.

Forma-4, Economics Class 9-10

26 Economics
F. Water Resources

Water is a basic natural resource which is a must for the survival of animals
and plants. Water resource is necessary for the existance and development of the
agriculture, forestry, animal, and energy resources of the country. There are
mainly three sources of water resources in Bangladesh. They are: 1. rivers, lakes
and marshes, ponds and sea, 2. rainfall, and 3. underground water. The water
from these three sources is important for our agriculture. Cultivation is hampered
if the supply of water is either less or more. In the internal water reservoirs and
sea, there are fishes and other aquatic resources. Hydro electricity is produced
from the river current. Centring the numerous rivers and marshes and other
water reservoirs, the transport system and trading have been developed in
this country. River water and rainfall create positive impact upon the weather
and environment of the country. If the development of water resource and its
proper usage is ensured, our economic development will surely gain pace.
[Source: Bangladesh Economic Review-2016]

2.2 Goods

By goods, we only understand material possessions. However, there are many
goods in reality which, though non-material (e.g.- light, wind, etc), are goods in
terms of economics. Therefore, we call all material and non-material things that
have the capability to fulfil human needs are goods. That is, the thing that has
utility is goods.

Freely Accessible Goods: The goods that can be obtained without money are
known as free-access goods. These goods are freely available in the nature and
their supply is unlimited. e.g.- light, wind, river water, etc.

Economic Goods: The goods for which people have to pay are known as
economic goods. Their supply is limited. e.g.- foods, clothes, books, pens,
chairs, tables, etc.

Consumer Goods: The utility of goods which is consumed by consumption or
use, are called consumer goods i.e. car, clothes etc. S

The Important Ideas of Economics 27
Permanently Consumable Goods: The goods that can be consumed over a
long period of time are termed as permanently consumable goods.
e.g.- refrigerator, car, house, land, playground etc.
Temporarily Consumable Goods: The goods that are to be consumed within
a short period of time and sometimes can be consumed for once only are known
as temporarily consumable goods. e.g.- food, clothes, vegetables, etc.
Intermediate Goods: Some produced goods that are not to be used for direct
consumption, rather used as factors of production, are known as intermediate
goods. Intermediate goods are consumed at final production. For example, raw
materials, milk and sugar used for preparing sweets. These raw materials,
milk and sugar are intermediate goods.
Final Goods: The produced goods that are used for direct consumption after
their production are known as final goods. i.e.- a loaf, a chair, etc.
Capital Goods: The produced goods that are used for the production of other
goods, are known as capital goods. e.g.- instruments, factories, warehouses, etc.
Capital goods are used again and again in production. Capital goods can be used
to produce other capital goods.
Task: Mention which goods are of which kind- light, rivers water, tables,
land, ornaments, instruments, thread.
2.3 Opportunity Cost and Choice
Opportunity Cost: One highly used concept in economics is ‘opportunity cost’.
Suppose, you are a student. Can you do everything every day? For example, you
cannot take the economics examination and watch a cricket match at the field at
the same time. If you are choosing to do one task it will obviously not be possible
for you to do the other one. Let us take another example, suppose you have 1
acre of land. If rice is cultivated here, 20 quintals of rice can be produced in
this land. If you want to cultivate jute on that land, it would be possible to
produce 10 quintals of jute there. In this case, the opportunity cost of 20 quintals
of rice is 10 quintals of jute. Briefly speaking, to obtain something, another has
x to be sacrificed- the sacrificed quantity is the opportunity cost of the other
N
goods.

28 Economics
Choice: Jasim is a farmer. He has a land of three bighas. He can cultivate paddy
or wheat in that total land. Besides, he can cultivate paddy in some parts of the
land and wheat in other part. Ifhe cultivates only paddy in that land, 120 quintals
paddy can be produced. Again if he cultivates only wheat, 80 quintal wheat can
be produced. Now he will decide what he will cultivate in the land. This process
of taking decission for the production of crops is choice. In economics, choice
is done because of the scarcities of resources. It happens due to the scarcities
of resources in the personal sector as well as in social and public sector.
2.3 Income, Savings and Investment
Income: For using a factor of production, the money that the factor or its
owner gets in a fixed period of time is known as income. The income obtained
for labour is known as wage. Income obtained for land is called rent. The owner
of the capital is given interest for the use of his capital and this interest is also his
income. The income that an entrepreneur earns by meeting all his expenditures
is called profit.
Savings: People earn for consumption. Thinking of the future, people do not
consume the whole of the earned income of the present. They keep a portion
of that income in some economic institution. This portion that is kept is known
as savings. Say for example, your father gets a salary of ten thousand taka in one
month. He spends nine thousand for your family. Here, your father saves one
thousand taka. This concept of savings can be shown by an equation. e.g. S =
Y - C (when Y > C).
Here, S =savings, Y =income, C = consumption cost.
An individual's savings usually depends upon the quantity of income,
responsibility towards the family, farsightedness, social security and the rate of
interest. -
ES

The Important Ideas of Economics 29
Investment: People save from their income. When the saved money is
utilized for enhancing production, it is known to be investment. For example,
there are capital goods of one lakh taka in a factory at a particular time. To
increase production, capital goods of another fifty thousand taka are bought.
This extra fifty thousand taka is the investment. Through investment, the
quantity of production rises and economic development is possible.
Task: Refer to at least four sectors where investment brings about economic
development.
2.5 Economic Activities and Non-Economic Activities
For survival, people perform various activities. The main purpose of these
activities is to earn a living. For a living, some people work at factories, some at
offices, and some on lands. Apart from earning a living, people also perform
activities like playing, entertainment or rearing children. And some others get
involved in anti-social activities. All of these activities referred above are not
to be termed as economic activities. We will divide these activities into two
parts. e.g. a) economic activities, b) non-economic activities.
a) Economic Activities
To earn a living, the activities done by people are known as economic activities.
By economic activities, people earn money and spend that for survival. e.g. the
labourers work at the factories, farmers work on the lands, doctors treat the
patients, industrialists run the industries, all these are economic activities. The
basic inspiration of people for their economic activities is to fulfil their needs of
goods.
b) Non-Economic Activities
The activities which do not generate income and cannot be spent for the survival
are known as non-economic activities. These activities, though they fulfil some
of the needs of humans, do not play a role in earning money. e.g. the rearing of
« children by the parents, playing as persuing a hobby etc. are the examples of
& non-economic activities.

30 Economics
2.6 Economic Activities of Bangladesh
Bangladesh is a developing country of South Asia. The economy of this
country depends 3 sector- agriculture, industry and service. However, the
contribution from the industrial sector and service sector is increasing
gradually in national income. And the contribution of agriculture in national
income is decreasing gradually.
Agriculture Related Economic Activities: From the employment point of view
of Bangladesh, agriculture is known as the largest sector now. 50% of the
labour force is employed in this sector. Almost 75% of the total population is
directly or indirectly related to agriculture. Cultivating the lands, sowing,
irrigation, giving fertilizer, spreading insecticides, harvesting the crops, selling
the crops, livestock farming, pisciculture, fishing, poultry, producing various
types of vegetables and fruits, and selling them all are included in the
agricultural sector.
Economic Activities Other than Agriculture: Apart from agriculture, the
other economic activities of the people of this country are- activities at the
garments industry, various small industries and cottage industries, large
industries and factories, public services and private services, construction of
roads and railways, driving vehicles, small and big business, etc. Besides, many
people of the country earn their living by making toys, dolls and sweets,
tailoring, the works of the blacksmiths, goldsmiths, shoemakers or curriers,
weaver, woodmen, hawkers etc. Many people earn their living by working
as village doctors, Ayurvadic physicians, exorcists, by showing
performances of wild animals etc.
The economic activities of a country like Bangladesh are of different kinds.
From the very ancient time, the people of this country have been struggling
relentlessly to live happy and well-to-do life by these various types of activities.
Task: Prepare a list of 10 agriculture based economic activities and 10
economic activities beyond agricultural activities of the people of &
Bangladesh. s

The Important Ideas of Economics 31
Exercise
Descriptive Questions
1. Give a brief description of the economic resources of Bangladesh.
2. Describe the mineral resources of Bangladesh.
3. Illustrate opportunity cost and choice with a diagram.
4. Explain the economic activities of the people of Bangladesh.
Short Questions
1. What are the characteristics of resources?
2. Refer to the classification of resources.
3. What are goods?
4. Refer to the classification of goods.
5. What is opportunity cost?
6. Define income.
7. What is a saving?
8. What is meant by investment?
9. What are economic activities?
10. What is meant by non-economic activities?
Multiple-Choice Questions
1. Which of the following is natural resource?
a. house b. post-office
c. the river Padma c. the Bay of Bengal
2. Good will is the wealth of business, Because of-
i. ithas the capability to satisfy wants
ii. its ownership can be changed
iii. collective ownership can be seen
Which of the following is correct?
co a. i b. i and ii
§ c. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii

32 Economics
Read the following passage and answer question numbers 3 and 4
Rahela has a sewing machine. She earns monthly tk 10,000/- from it. After
maintaining the family and the education costs of her children, she saves rest of
the money. From that savings money, this year she has bought another sewing
machine.

3. In economic terms, what can we call Rahela's buying of the new sewing machine?

a. savings b. capital
c. investment — d. opportunity cost
4. By the last activity of Rahela-
i. family security will be enhanced
ii. responsibility towards the children will be increased
iii. employment will grow
Which of the following is correct?
a. i b. i and ii
c. ii and iii d. i and iii

Creative Questions

1, Some guests came at Shafiq's house. His mother gave him tk 1000/- and sent
him to the market to buy some fish and meat. At the market he found that with
that money he can buy 2 kg of fish and 4 kg of meat. Thinking a bit, he bought
1 kg fish and 2 kg meat.

a. What is income?

b. What is meant by power resource?

c. Illustrate the idea of Shafiq's buying fish and meat presenting it in a diagram.
d. Analyze the economic significance of Shafiq's choosing the two goods.

2. Hafiz can inspire any person very easily with his words. He has unrestrained
capacity of organizing people. He has a room at Sadarghat for the
preservation of goods that come from different parts of the country. From
here, his employees supply goods to different parts of the country according
to his will.

a. What are economic goods?
b. What are natural resources?
c. What type of economic goods is Hafiz's room at Sadarghat? Explain. ES
d. What type of resource is Hafiz's quality? Give reasons for your answer. »

Chapter Three
Utility, Demand, Supply and Equilibrium
In this chapter, utility, consumption, total utility, and marginal utility, law of
diminishing marginal utility, demand, the market demand line, and selection of
the equilibrium price have been discussed.
' ty ol
' | ot ao A he d
a ee, ee
a eRe AO ei ane / Sips 25 Bl) on SO) a aera 4 el?
Ay Poe Bie) i) ae ee wid A | i
Fe ee ee
NN nt aS A Be ec SEs ee
After studying this chapter, we will be able to-
e illustrate the concept of utility.
e discern the relation between utility, consumption and consumers.
e prove that the total utility is the sum of the marginal utilities.
e can illustrate the law of diminishing marginal utility with a picture.
e can elaborate the relation between price and the quantity of demand.
e can elaborate the relation between price and the quantity of supply.
e discern the equilibrium price and quantity.
Forma-5, Economics Class 9-10

34 Economics
3.1 Utility, Consumption and Consumers
Utility: A person needs many goods and materials for his survival. Many other
things are necessary along with food and clothes. Without these, we cannot
live a normal life. For example, food, clothes, books, services of the doctor,
etc fulfil the demands of human beings. Therefore, in economics, the
capability of any good that satisfies. people's needs is termed as utility. Utility is
a psychological idea.
Consumption: Every day we use rice, fish, pen, clock, cloths or we consume
these things. Here, consumption does not, however, only stand for finishing
these off. Because, we cannot actually destroy or finish anything. By using the
goods we can just get their utility. We have to keep in mind that if the utility of
any goods is destroyed in any way other than satisfying a need, it will not be
considered as consumption. That is, in economics, to finish the utility of any
goods for the purpose of satisfying a want or need, is known as consumption.
Consumer: The person who consumes is called a consumer. That is, other than
the freely accessible goods, the person who is prepared to spend money to
consume any other goods is known as the consumer.

Task: Mention two differences between consumption and the consumer.
3.2 Total Utility and Marginal Utility
Total Utility
Going to the market, you want to buy more than one mango to eat. The money
that you spend to buy the first mango is not the money that you spend to buy the
second or the third or fourth mango. Because, after consuming the first mango,
your wish to eat mango is satisfied to quite an extent. Your wish to eat a mango
for the second time is lessened. In the stage of the third or fourth mango, it will
be even lesser. It might even be possible that you will not buy any more
mangoes. Because, you do not have the wish to eat mango any longer, in other
words, the utility of extra mangoes to you is zero. To buy mangoes, you have to =
spend money. Let us assume that you buy the first mango for 5 tk, the second for S

Utility, Demand, Supply and Equilibrium 35
4 tk, the third for 3 tk and the fourth for 2 tk. Thus, you buy 4 mangoes for
(5+4+3+2)=tk 14. If money is taken as the measure of utility, the total utility of
four mangoes is 14. Therefore, the sum of the satisfaction from different units of
goods derived at a particular time is known as the total utility. Since the extra
mangoes gradually give lesser satisfaction, therefore, with the increment of
consumption, the total utility increases at a decreasing rate.

Marginal Utility

Suppose, you have bought 3 mangoes. Now you buy another mango. This fourth
extra mango is the marginal mango. From this marginal mango, the satisfaction
or the utility you get is the marginal utility. If you have spent tk 2 to buy this
mango, then the marginal utility will be 2. That is the utility one can get by
consuming one extra unit of goods or service is marginal utility.

Presentation of Total Utility and Marginal Utility by a List
ss
an isonis St —C*”
It is seen in the list above that when the price of the Ist mango is tk 5, the
marginal utility is tk 5. Buying the 2nd mango makes the total cost tk 9. The total
utility derived from 2 mangoes is tk 9. And the marginal utility derived from the
2nd mango is 4. This way, utility derived from 4 mangoes is 14. The marginal
utility of the 4th mango is 2. And thus the marginal utility, chronologically is, 5,
4, 3, 2, 1, 0, and -1 tk. And you will not buy the 6th mango since it has no utility
to you. Your total utility will decrease at the time of buying 7th mango as it has
negative marginal utility.

36 Economics
3.3 The Diminishing Law of Marginal Utility
From the example above, it is observed that if you eat the same quantity of
mango repeatedly, your interest towards mangoes diminishes, and so does the
utility. Since the utility falls, you want to pay less for one extra unit of mango.
The marginal utility of the 6th mango is 0 and the marginal utility of the 7th
mango is negative. That means to consume the same product over and over again
causes the marginal utility to diminish accordingly. This tendency of the
marginal utility to fall due to the increment in the unit of consumption is
known as the diminishing law of marginal utility. The diminishing law of
marginal utility maintains some conditions. These are: a) the consumer should
have general capacity of judgement; b) the consumer can measure the utility of
the goods in terms of money if she/he wishes to; c) the price of the good is to be
equal to the marginal utility; d)there will be no change in the income, taste and
liking of the consumer while consuming the good; e) a particular time is
considerable.
Illustration of the Law by a Diagram
It is possible to show the diminishing law of marginal utility by a diagram. In
the picture, the horizontal axis will show the quantity of mangoes and the
vertical axis will show the marginal utility and the price.
Diagram:

& ¥

i a a

2 3 c,

i i &

a fg

O1la2b3cec4d5e 6 x
Quantity of mango (unit) g eo
Diminishing marginal utility curve U S

Utility, Demand, Supply and Equilibrium 37
In the diagram, the amount of mangoes in the horizontal axis and the marginal
utility and price in the vertical axis are indicated.
In the picture, you get aal quantity of utility or marginal utility from the Ist
mango and you pay tk 5 for the Ist mango. With the increment of consumption,
from the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th mango, you gain bb1, ccl, dd1 and ee1 quantities
of marginal utility respectively. That means, with the increasing consumption,
you would agree to pay tk 4 for the 2nd mango, tk 3 for the 3rd, tk 2 for the 4th,
tk 1 for the 5th. The marginal utility of the 6th mango is zero and the marginal
utility of the 7th is negative, i.e.- tk -1.00. The point f on the horizontal axis
shows the zero marginal utility. And the marginal utility of the 7th mango is
negative (tk -1) which is shown by ggl. Here, ee,<dd,<cc,<bb,<aa,. From
this we can understand that with the increasing consumption of mangoes the
utility of the extra units gradually decreases for you. Now we can get the MU
(Marginal Utility) line by connecting the points, al, b1, cl, dl, el, fl, and gl.
The line is sloping on the right hand side. Here we can observe that with the
increase in the quantity of consumption, the marginal utility is gradually
decreasing. And that is why the marginal utility line is sloping downwards.
3.4 Demand
We, in our daily life, want to get many things. A car, a beautiful house, good
foods, etc. But all of our wants are not demands. Three conditions are to be
fulfilled to make a demand in economics. e.g. 1. the wish to get any goods 2.
Necessary monetary capacity to buy and 3. the wish to spend money to get that
goods. Therefore, if a buyer has the wish to buy some goods, the capacity to buy
it and the wish to buy it at fixed price, then it is called demand in economics.
The Law of Demand: Your mother asked your father to bring a hilsha fish from
the market. Returning from the market, your father was annoyed and told her that
the price of the hilsha fish was very high for him and it was not possible to buy
it. That means, due to the rise in price, there is no demand for the hilsha fish to
your father. Another day, your father returns home with two hilsha fish in his
hand and said with a smiling face that today the price of the hilsha fish is low
co and that is why he bought two hilsha it. So, there is a close relation between
% the demand and the price.

38 Economics
Therefore, by the law of demand, we understand, "all else being constant or
unchanged, at a particular time, if the price of the goods falls the quantity of
demand rises and if the price rises, the quantity of demand falls." [price (1h
Demand () again price () Demand ())] . The other factors being constant means
here, the taste of the buyer, habit, likings will not be changed and the income
of the buyer and the price of the alternative goods will also remain unchanged,
etc.
Drawing the Demand Curve from the Demand Schedule
We have seen in the law of demand that there is an inverse or negative
relationship between price and demand. That means, when the price of the
goods increases, quantity demanded falls, on the other hand, when the price
falls, demand rises. This concept, when presented by a schedule, is called the
demand schedule. Therefore, it can be said that the schedule through which the
different quantities of demands for goods bought at different prices at a
particular time is called the demand schedule or demand list.
Demand Schedule or Demand List

Price of each unit of goods (in taka) Quantity of demand (unit)
In the schedule we can see that, when the price of one unit of goods is tk 8, a
consumer buys 4 units of the goods. When the price falls to tk 6, tk 4 and tk 2,
the demand rises to 8 units, 12 units and 16 units respectively. The inverse
relation between price and demand is shown in the demand schedule.
From the demand schedule above, we can draw the demand curve.

S

Utility, Demand, Supply and Equilibrium 39
Demand Curve Y

g D

Es,

E 6 z

s

% S

34

D
o 4 &§ 12 16 x
Quantity of Demand (Unit)
In the diagram above, the horizontal axis or the OX axis shows the quantity of
demand and the vertical axis or OY axis shows the price of the goods. When the
price of the goods is tk 8 the quantity of demand is 4 units. If two
perpendiculars are drawn using the price 8 tk and the quantity 4 units, they
intersect at the point Q. Likewise, 8 units at tk 6, 12 units at tk 4 and 16 units at
tk 2 is shown at the points R, S and T. Now, if we join the points Q, R, S, and T,
we will get the DD line. This DD line is the demand curve. The points on the DD
line are indicating the different quantities of demand at different prices of the
goods.
This way we can draw the demand curve from the demand schedule according
to the demand law. It is worth mentioning that we have drawn here the demand
curve of regular goods.
Task: Mention three differences between the demand schedule and the demand
curve.
3.5 Drawing the Market Demand Curve
A personal demand curve can be drawn from a person's demand schedule.
Similarly, it is also possible to draw a market demand curve. The sum total of the
personal or different demands of all the consumers at a particular price in the
x market is known to be the market demand. For the convenience of our
& understanding, we will presume that the number of the consumers at the market

40 Economics
is two. A market demand curve is drawn below from the personal demand
schedules of the two consumers.
The Market Demand Schedule
Demand of the 1st Demand of the 2nd Maket demand (Q)
Price of the good (tk) consumer (Q,) consumer (Q,) (Q=Q,+ Q,)
Unit of the good (quintal) | Unit of the good (quintal) | Unit of the good (quintal)

Sn
es ls
The schedule above shows the demands of the Ist and the 2nd consumer at
different prices of goods. Now it will be shown how the market demand
schedule is prepared from the individual demand schedule of these two
consumers.
The demand curve that shows the quantities of any goods that different persons
are prepared to buy at different prices is known as the market demand curve.
The market demand curve can be drawn by summing up the demand curves of
the 1st and the 2nd consumer side by side.
Diagram:

¥ y¥ =

a) R

H < 6. = 6] 2

FI A! - A S

8 rT

z & Bo = ed]

x 0 x 0
0 5 #10 15 20 0 5 10 #15 20 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Quantity demanded of Ist Quantity demanded of 2nd Quantity of market
consumer (Quintal) consumer (Quintal) demand (Quintal)
Individual demand curve for Ist and 2nd consumer and market demand curve.
S

Utility, Demand, Supply and Equilibrium 41
In the diagrams above, the personal demand curves of the lst and the 2nd
consumers are D1D1 and D2D2 respectively. When the price of the goods is tk
6, the quantities of demand of the 1st and the 2nd consumers are 5 quintals and
10 quintals and the market demand, therefore, will be (5 quintalst+ 10
quintals)=15 quintals, which is shown on the market demand curve by the point
R. The price falling to tk 4 and tk 2 has resulted in the personal demands of
the lst and the 2nd consumer being (10 quintals+ 15 quintals)=25 quintals and
(15 quintals+20 quintals)=35 quintals respectively, which has been shown in the
market demand curve by the points S and T. Now let us join the points R, S and
T to draw the DD demand curve. This is known as the market demand curve.
3.6 Supply

When we go to the market, we will find that the retailers have decorated their
shops with various kinds of goods for selling. But we do not name this as
supply. In economics, the quantity of a goods that a producer is willing and
capable to sell at a specified time and at a specific price, is known as supply.
To mention, one goods, a specified time and a specific price is considerable here.
Therefore, the different quantity of a product that a producer is willing to sell at
different prices is called supply in economics.

The Law of Supply

We buy and sell goods every now and then at the market. When will a
producer/seller be interested to sell his/her product? Definitely when the price
of the product is high at the market, only then the producer will be willing to sell
the product. Suppose, when the price of potato is tk 15 per kg, the seller will sell
2 quintals of potato. If the price rises to tk 20 the producer is willing to supply
more potatoes. Let us think, the supply then will be 30 quintals. That is with the
rise of the price of the goods the supply of the good also increases and with the fall
of the price the supply decreases. Therefore, the relationship of price and supply
is direct or positive. The way the price changes, the supply also changes. That
means, all else being constant, (e.g. factor price and technolgy and normal
time are to be considered), the price rises, the corresponding quantity of
supply rises and as price falls, the corresponding quantity of supply falls.
Forma-6, Economics Class 9-10

42 Economics
Drawing the Supply Curve from the Supply Schedule
When the price of the goods rises, the quantity of supply increases and when the
price falls, the quantity of supply also falls. This direct change of supply due to
the change of price can be shown in a supply schedule.
The price of the goods is shown mathematically on one side of the supply
schedule and on the other, the supply.
The Supply Schedule
Price of each unit of the product (in taka) Quantity of Supply (quintal)
ee
It is seen in the schedule that the supply of a good is 10 quintals when the price
of that good is tk 10 per quintal. When the price rises to tk 20, tk 30 and tk 40,
the quantity of supply becomes 20 quintals, 30 quintals, and 40 quintals
respectively. Thus the law of supply is reflected in the supply schedule.
The Supply Curve
The quantity of supply increases if the price of a product rises, and the quantity
of supply falls if the price falls. When this direct change of supply in
corresponding to the change of the price is shown by a curve or diagram, it is
called the supply curve.
How the supply curve is drawn from the supply schedule is shown below.
x
Rg

Utility, Demand, Supply and Equilibrium 43
In the diagram, the supply of the goods is shown in
* the horizontal axis or the OX axis and the OY axis
g Ss or the vertical axis indicates the price of the good.
& 0 D When the price of the goods is tk 10, the quantity
3 |g of supply of the goods is then 10 quintal. They
= 30 mrs connect at the point A. Thus, when the prices of
8 2 the goods are tk 20, tk 30 and tk 40, the supplies
« | a of the goods are then 20 quintals, 30 quintals and
10 8 q q
S| 40 quintals respectively. They are connected at the
O70 20 30 40 quintal X points B, C and D. Now if we connect the points
Quantity of supply A, B, C and D, we will get the SS line. This is the
supply curve.
3.7 Drawing the Market Supply Curve
At a specified time, the different quantities of goods that a salesman supplies at
different prices, is known as the personal or individual supply. On the other
hand, the quantity of goods that all the salesmen supply at a specific time at
different prices is known to be the market supply. Summing up the individual
supply schedules of all the salesmen, the market supply schedule can be
prepared. Here follows a brief and simplified market supply schedule-
Market Supply Schedule
. Supply of the 1st Supply of the 2nd Market supply
Price of the producer (S;) producer (S2) $=51+82
Good (taka) Unit of goods (quintal) | Unit of goods (quintal) | Unit of goods (quintal)
i
In the table above, the supply of the 1st and the 2nd salesmen is shown. How the
market supply curve with the supplied goods of the two salesmen can be drawn
is shown below.
2
Rg

44 Economics

y $1 y $2 y, S

Go
~ 20 20 20
0 50 100 150 200 * 0 25 50 75 100 xo 75 150 225 300
Quantity supplied 1st seller (quintal) Quantity supplied 2nd seller (quintal) Quantity of market supply (quintal)
Individual & market supply for 1st & 2nd seller
In the diagrams above, $181 and $282 are the individual supply curves of the Ist
and the 2nd salesmen. When the price of the goods is tk 10 the quantities of
supply of the Ist and the 2nd salesmen are 100 quintals and 50 quintals
tespectively, and the market supply will, therefore, be (100+50) =150 quintals.
This is shown by the point A in the diagram. When the price rises to tk 15, the
quantities of the individual supplies of the 1st and the 2nd salesmen will be 150
quintals and 75 quintals and the market supply will be (150+75) =225 quintals.
This is shown by the point B. When the price rises even more to tk 20, the
quantities supplied by the 1st and the 2nd salesmen will be 200 and 100
quintals. The quantity of the total supply will be (200+100) =300 quintals, which
is indicated by the point C in the diagram. Now we can draw the line SS by
joining the points A, B and C. This is known as the market supply curve.
Task: Refer to 3 differences between supply schedule and supply curve.

3.8 : Determining Equilibrium Price
An ordinary picture of the market is the bargain between the buyer and the seller
for the price of the goods. The buyer tries to buy the goods at the lowest possible
price. On the other hand the seller tries to sell it at the highest possible price.
Through this bargain between the buyer and the seller, ultimately the goods is
bought or sold at a price where the demand and the supply are the same. The
price at which the demand and the supply are the same is known to be the
equilibrium price. At the equilibrium price the quantity of the goods that is
bought or sold is known as the equilibrium quantity. ES

Utility, Demand, Supply and Equilibrium 45
Y
D s
~ A
i)
SZ
3 P
LIAN
°o
Bc
tes
oO E M H x
Quantity of demand and supply (quintal)
Deriving the Equilibrium Price
In the diagram above, on the horizontal axis, the quantities of the demand and
the supply are shown and on the vertical, the price of the goods is indicated. In
the diagram, the demand curve DD and the supply curve SS are drawn.
Suppose, at OA price, the quantity of the demand and the supply are
respectively OE and OH. In this price, the quantity of supply is greater than the
quantity of demand. When the supply is greater than the demand, a downwards
pressure is created on the price. Thus, the price will fall from OA to OP. Here the
demand and the supply will be the same. And if the price is OC, then the
quantity of supply is OE and the quantity of demand is OH. That is, here the
demand is greater than the supply and therefore, the price of the goods will
definitely rise and the price will get stable at OP. There also, the demand and the
supply are the same. Thus it can be seen that when the price is OP, only then the
total quantity of the demand and the supply is the same that is OM. That means,
at price OP, the demand and the supply are the same and there is no tendency of
any rise or fall in the price. Therefore, OP is the equilibrium price and the
equilibrium quantity is OM. The lines DD and SS intersect at the point R. This
intersecting point R indicates the equilibrium price and the equilibrium quantity.
S in the class.

46 Economics
Exercise
Short Questions
1. What is utility?
2. What is meant by consumption and consumer?
3. What is meant by total utility and marginal utility?
4. Define demand. What is the law of demand?
5. What is the market demand curve?
6. What is the law of supply?
Descriptive Questions
1. Explain the diminishing law of marginal utility.
2. Describe the process of drawing a demand curve from an imaginary
demand schedule.
3. Draw a market demand curve from imaginary demand schedule of
two consumers.
4. Draw supply curve from an imaginary supply schedule.
5. Explain the concept of deciding the equilibrium price by a diagram.
Multiple-Choice Questions
1. How many conditions are there for demand in economics?
a 2 b. 3
ec 4 d 5
2. Which of the conditions below is compulsory for market equilibrium?
a. the point where demand = supply b. the point where demand > supply
c. the point where supply > demand d. the point where supply = demand wo
8

Utility, Demand, Supply and Equilibrium 47
Read the following passage and answer the question numbers 3 and 4

Tahsin bought a guava and ate it at the school. Here, the utility schedule of his guava is
given below-

Unit of the goods Total utility (in taka) Marginal utility (in taka)
ee ee ee ee
ee ee ee

3. What is the marginal utility of Tahsin's 3rd guava?
a. tk5 b. tk4
c. tk3 d. tk2
4. Inthe behaviour of Tahsin-
i. an ordinary situation is expressed
ii. the attraction towards the guava is unchanged
iii the marginal utility of the guava has gradually decreased
Which of the following is correct?
a i b. ii and iii
c. iand iii d. i, ii and iii
Creative Questions
1. The demand schedule of the goods 'X' of person 'A’ and person 'B' are given here-
Price per unit of the goods The quantity of demand The quantity of demand
(in taka) of person 'A’ (quintal) of person 'B' (quintal)

48 Economics
a. What is utility?
b. Elaborate the relation between total utility and marginal utility.
c. Draw the demand curve of person 'A' from the demand schedule of the
goods 'X', and explain it.
d. Draw the market demand curve of the goods 'X' and compare with the
demand curve of person 'A'.
2. Going to market Sujan finds that the price of potato is tk 25 per kg. He wants
to buy 120 kg of potato, but Karim wants to sell 160 kg of potato at the same
price. When the price of potato falls to tk 20 the next day, Sujan buys 140 kg
of potato and Karim sells 140 kg of potato.
a. What is demand?
b. Explain the law of demand.
c. Draw the supply curve for the potato of Karim and explain it.
d. Do you think that Sujan and Karim could reach at the equilibrium price at
the market for potato? Give reasons for your answer.
ES
Rg

Chapter Four
Production & Organisation
Sharbat is one kind of produced goods. Water, lemon, sugar, etc are necessary to
prepare sharbat. Utilizing ingredients, it is possible to produce goods or to create
utility or satisfaction. And this job is done by organisation. For production,
ingredients like water, sugar, lemon etc are needed. There has to be a planning
of how the production is to be done, different people perform different jobs
during the production; these jobs are to be distributed according to the
qualifications and skills, and finally the produced goods have to be taken to the
market. An organisation performs these types of jobs. If the organisation is not
skilled, it is not possible to enhance production.
Oa = = gee ee
SS ya’ Ka a BEATy) = ee oe ee “ Jee
Gd LESS ON AE he | ee
NS we fo Ae cn ee ee

- ene. > Se ee
After studying this chapter, we will be able to-

e illustrate the idea of production.

e explain the relation between production and producer.

e describe the factors of production.

e discuss an organisation and its growth.

e explain the relation between average and marginal production.

e illustrate the idea of production cost.

e identify visible cost and invisible cost.

e discern the difference between personal and social costs.

e _ be interested in productive works and enterprise.

e present the law of diminishing marginal product with a schedule and graph.
Forma-7, Economics Class 9-10

50 Economics

4.1 Production and Producer

Production basically means creating utility. The produced goods have to have an

exchange cost. On the other hand, if utility is not produced, it is not called

production. To create a new product or utility using the factors or the primary
products is known to be production. For example, bread is made using flour, salt,
water, roller, etc. Bread is produced goods. We satisfy our hunger eating bread.

That is, utitlity has been careated by making bread. We can get bread for money

or in exchange of any other product. That is, there is an exchange cost for the

new product, bread. If breads are produced for business purpose, these bread
sometimes need to be taken to the market. The organization supervises all the
activities from the collection of ingredients to taking the produced goods to the
market place. For example, the organization supervises what materials are
needed, where they will be brought from, who will bring them, who will prepare
the mould by mixing the salt, flour, water, who will roll the breads, who will
bake the breads, who will take these to the market, at what price they will be sold
etc. If all these things are not supervised by the organiser skillfully, the highest
quantity of production cannot be ensured from a fixed quantity of factors or
ingredients. One individual can be the organiser and the producer. For example

a small/medium farmer who grows crops in his own fields is a producer and an

organiser at the same time. But the owner of a factory who works in his own

factory as a manager and runs his factory by the labourers is an organiser not a

producer. Again the owner of a factory who runs his factory appointing a

manager and produces goods by the labourers is neither an organiser nor a

producer. He is only an owner. The owner, who takes part in productive activities

and supervises other producers, is an owner, producer and organiser at the same
time.

The process of production or creating utility is shown in five stages. e.g.-

1. Transformative Production: Producing new goods by transformation is
known to be transformative production. e.g. transforming wood
conveniently into bed, chair, table, etc. These products therefore, are ~
transformative production. S

Production & Organisation 51

2. Regional Production: Utility increases when some goods are moved from
one place to another. For example, wood from the forest is usually used as
fuel by the people who live near the forest. If these wood is brought to the
city, people can make attractive fumiture from this wood and thus its
utility increases. Furthermore, flower is not appreciated in the forest. On the
other hand, if that plant with flowers is placed on the compound of a house
in the city, it is far more appreciated, that is, its utility increases.

3. Time-Based Production:The production and utility of many goods increase
in the course of time. These are known as time-based production. e.g. the
outturn of paddy is more at the monsoon in Poush and Magh. On the other
hand, at this time the price of paddy is less. Storing the paddy at this time
to sell in the months of Vadra-Aswin will bring higher prices.

4. Service-Based Production: The production that people produce by their
services is called the service-based production. The teacher makes
educated people by giving lessons, the doctor keeps the health of the people
well by giving treatment, in other words, sustains or increases the
production capacity.

5. Ownership-Based Production: It is possible to ensure superfluous
production by changing the ownership of some of the economic goods and
services. For example, a farmer can produce by buying an unused land
and tilling it or can increase the production through better/improved
cultivation by buying a used land.

You have got the idea of creating utility through production. Now you will know

about the people involved in production. Ramzan Ali is a farmer. He has 3

bighas of agricultural land. In this land, Ramzan produces paddy in one

monsoon, and wheat in the other. In-between the production of paddy and wheat,
he grows vegetables. As the factors of production for all these crops, he uses
seeds, fertilizer, water, insecticide, machines for harvesting. His family
members helps him in these activities.

S

52 Economics
Task: (1) Classify the changed situation given below according to the different types
of production. (a) fish-pond, (b) work of the soldier, (c) affection of the parents,
(d) giving the property of the father to the children, (e) making instruments from
iron, (f) flour from wheat (g) sugar from the sugarcane, (h) rice from paddy, cakes
from rice, (i) transporting the banana, fruits, vegetables from the village to the city,
(j) selling the potato of the month Agrahayan in the month of Ashar.

4,2 Factors of Production
Suppose that in your area, wheat, potato, banana, rice and some other
agricultural goods are produced alongside some industrial goods like cloths,
biscuits, plastic, etc. To produce these agricultural and industrial goods, many
factors are necessary. For the farmer, to produce rice, he needs land, seeds,
fertilizers, plow, irrigation, labour, etc. On the other hand, to produce industrial
goods, factory, building, cloth, threads, machines, electricity, gas, flour, sugar,
oil and labour are necessary. To produce these goods, natural resources like soil,
the fertility of soil, light and air, environment, mineral resources, sun light,
water, and many other things are necessary. The goods that are mentioned here
are factors of production. That means, the goods and services that are necessary
for any kind of production, are called factors of production.

There are basically four types of factors in production. For example, 1. Land, 2.

Labour, 3. Capital, 4. Organisation.

1. Land: The natural resources that help production, are called land. For
example, land, soil and the richness of the soil, minerals, forests and water
resources, the sun-ray, rainfall, weather, and all the other types of natural
resources are included in land.

2. Labour: Every kind of physical and mental labour of men that is used for
the purpose of production is called labour. The physical labour of farmer,
fisherman, blacksmith, potter and the labourer of the industry of ready-made
cloths is labour. On the other hand, the physical and intellectual labour of the
officer and staff is also called labour. Similarly, the teachings of a teacher, .,
services of a doctor and counselling of a lawyer are all labour. §

Production & Organisation 53

3. Capital: Capital is the factor of production that is produced by human
beings. Man uses this produced factor for further production and not for
consumption. e.g.instruments, raw materials, factories, office furniture and
so on.

4. Organisation: The organisation is known as a synthesizer. To direct the act
of production by bringing harmony amongst the other factors of production
like, land, labour and capital is known as organisation. To adjust and to direct
the course of actions is also termed as management. The person who
conducts this work is known as the organiser or entrepreneur. Therefore, the
varied works of an entrepreneur, like, planning for producing something,
bringing the land, labour, and capital together and combining them and
directing the act of production taking the risk, all these are included in
organisation.

Therefore, it is a must that in the entire production system, land, labour, capital

and organisation, all these four factors participate. Production is not possible

with any one of these being absent. However, in the production arena, the
importance of all these factors is not equivalent. Depending on the situation,
some of the factors are needed more, and some are needed less. Since

Bangladesh is an agriculture-based and heavily populated country, land and

labour are more important than capital here. On the other hand, in the

industrialist countries like Japan, the Unites States and others, capital is more
significant than land and labour.
country?
Bangladesh is an agriculture-based country sestanecscscacaesesseseseneaveneseneaccecececseaeaeen
.

54 Economics
4.3 Organisation and Its Development

Ayesha Begum has built a poultry farm in her house amidst all her household
works. All throughout the year, eggs are produced from this farm. One year later,
Ayesha went to visit a governmental fisheries project and after that the idea of
pisciculture drew her attention. Within one year, from the neat income of selling
eggs from her poultry farm, which is twenty thousand taka, she built a pond on
the two bighas of land beside her home and started a fisheries project. Some
more labourers are recruited in both the farms. Ayesha's income increases from
selling eggs form her poultry and after one year from selling the fishes of the
pond. Her savings also increase even after meeting the expenditures of the
education of her three children and all those of her household. As Ayesha's work
grows in volume, her husband, Rahmat Ali leaves his job in the city and comes
to join his wife's farm. With both of their enterprises, they manage to acquire
some land, poultry and fisheries. They also employ 12 men and women. They
train each of the labourers. By turn, Ayesha and Rahmat supervise the labourers
and their farms. They also manage to marketize the eggs and fishesin the market
place. Seeing their success, many other villagers follow their example and
begin to develop poultry farms and fisheries all throughout the village and areas
in vicinity. To take the eggs and fishes, the wholesalers from different areas now
come regularly to Ayesha's village. Within a number of years, the whole area
achieves economic success through agriculture, poultry farming and fishery
projects. Poultry stock and fish are now produced in this area for business
purpose.

Can we say that Ayesha Begum is an organiser? Have her organising
capabilities developed?

We can be ensured from the discussion above that to conduct and control
productive activities for the purpose of business can be called organisation. In
true sense production and control of business and management are almost
impossible without an organisation. In the modern world, different people
play different roles in the production activities. The organiser distributes these ~
responsibilities skilfully according to efficiency. Thus, with the help of the $

Production & Organisation 55
workers, different jobs in the production and business are conducted. But while
completing the tasks a kind of mutual authority and responsibility is created
amongst the workers. This structure of reciprocal authority and responsibility is
organisation. Therefore, organisation is the base of business.
It is the duty of the organisational structure to hold together the different parts of
the organisation and to prepare the necessary arrangement to achieve the goal.
Apart from that, distributing the responsibilities of different activities,
developing rules and regulations, etc are included in the structure of
organisation. The organisational structure is dependent on the extent of the
business, the nature and volume of the produced goods, the character of the
industry, the process of production, skills of the labourers and many other
things.
The picture of the management structure of an institution which is clearly visible
when the posts of the superior and inferior workers are arranged hierarchically
discerning the different divisions of the organisational structure of the business,
the sub-divisions and the branches, is called the picture of an organisation. The
success of the business will grow as much as the management of organisation
will be well-arranged and proper. Therefore, organisation is the fundamental
and prior aspect of business.

A good organisation has some particular tendencies or characteristics. They are-

1. The Purpose and Nature of Business: The purpose of the business needs to
be determined in the first step of organisation. According to the purpose and
nature of business, the organisational structure of the business has to be built.
It has to be discerned that among these possible purposes which one is main
and which one is subsidiary, or which one is short-termed and which is
long-termed.

2. Deciding the Business Activities: After deciding properly the purpose and

oo nature of the business, all the activities of the business are analysed. e.g.
ES production, buying and selling, arranging for money, employing labourer

56 Economics
and workers, managing labourers and owner relationship, etc. For these,
maintaining the finance, advertising and publicizing, storing the goods,
managing, etc are necessary.

3. Division of Activities: After analysing the activities, according to the
similarities in type and purpose of the activities, they are divided into some
groups. The associate activities in one group are again divided into some
sub-divisions, for example, the production sector, buying sector, selling
sector, financial sector, publicizing sector, etc. Sometimes some businesses
are divided regionally also. Some divisions together are considered as
regional divisions.

4. Distributing Responsibilities: Each worker in the business is entrusted with
one particular responsibility. The particular duty of each of the worker in
each division and sub-division is set in accordance with his/her experience,
capacity and skill and each is given the task in which she/he is expert and
skilled.

5. Distributing Authority and Duties: To place a duty means to place the
proper executive power of fulfilling a responsibility. Each worker is to be
given the right to work freely, uninterruptedly and properly. The superior
officer hands over one part of his authority or power to workers working
under his command. On the other hand, the junior worker is accountable for
his works to his superior. An organization is successful when these two
opposite streams are persistent.

4.4 Total, Average and Marginal Production

Mr. Komol grows 600 quintals of wheat from his one bigha land employing 10

labourers. Here, 60 quintals of wheat is grown by each labourer on an average.

This 60 quintals of wheat per labourer is called average production. In the next

season 655 quintals of wheat is grown employing 11 labourers. Compared to the

last year, the production has increased by 55 quintals. This production of

655-600 = 55 quintals of wheat is known as marginal production. That is, x

g

Production & Organisation 57
employing an extra labourer (11th) the production is increased by 55 quintals.
The 11 the labourer is the marginal labourer. So, the production of the marginal
labourer is 55 quintals. Therefore, here 600 quintals is the total production, 60
quintals is the average production and 55 quintals is the marginal production.
The total, average and marginal production are shown by a diagram.
Total Production: The production that is acquired by employing different
factors 1s known as the total production.
Y
Total 2
Production / rp
(e) N_ factor
Total production curve
In the diagram above, the line TP (Total Production) shows the total production.
Employing only one factor of ON amount, the highest NE amount of production
is possible at the point E.
Average Production: We can get the average production when we divide the
amount of the total production by the total amount of factors (Labourer). (Here,
we have taken labourer as the factor. The average production can also be
calculated by other factors of production).
Average Production = _Total Production __
Total Labour Factor
Marginal Production: With the change of one unit of a factor of production
(i.e.- labour or capital), the change that happens in the total production, is known
as the marginal production. If labour is used, we shall call it marginal production
of labour and if capital is used, it will be called marginal production of capital.
That means, using a factor or labour, the change that occurs to the total
production, is marginal production. From the schedule that follows, it can be seen
that when the labour factor increases from 10 to 20, the total production increase
Forma-8, Economics Class 9-10

58 Economics

from 10 to 22 quintals. Here, the marginal production is (22-10)=12 quintals.

Thus, if the usage of the factor is increased up to 30, the total production

becomes 30 quintals. Here the marginal production is (30-22)=8 quintal.

The Relation between Average and Marginal Production: There is a

relation between the average and marginal production in the production system.

In the diagram below, AP is the average production line, and MP is the marginal

production line. We can see in the diagram that,

1. When the marginal production is more than the average production, the
average production is increasing. Therefore, the marginal production curve is
usually above the average production curve. In the picture, at the ON 1 level of
factor usage, marginal production is more than the average production.

2. When marginal production decreases, average production also decreases. In
this situation, the average production curve remains above the marginal
production curve. In the picture, at the ON2 level of factor usage, average
production is more than marginal production.

3. When the average production is at its highest, the marginal production curve
intersects the average production curve at its highest point. That means, at the
highest point of the average production, the average production and the
marginal production become equal. In the picture, at ON level of factor usage,
the average and the marginal production are equal at the point E.

y,
— (Average production = Marginal production)
an °
production Poi \G
fo) N N N, x
Labour/ usages of factors
Relation between average and margind] production
20
S
AQ

Production & Organisation 59
In the picture, the horizontal axis (OX) indicates the labour factor usage, and the
vertical axis (OY) indicates the average and marginal production. Before the ON
amount of factor usage, at the level of ON 1 factor usage level, MP and AP both
rise but the MP rises at an increasing rate. At the ON factor usage level, AP is at
its highest point and AP and MP are equal. On the other hand, after employing
ON amount of factors, at the ON2 factor usage level, AP and MP both begin to
fall, but AP falls at a higher rate than MP. Therefore, the three types of
relationship between average production and marginal production are, in the
first stage, marginal production is greater than the average production, then
marginal production = average production and later on, marginal production is
less than the average production.
4.5 Law of Diminishing Marginal Returns
Keeping production strategy and all the other factors fixed in the process of
production, if only one factor is increased, as a result, the production primarily
rises at an increasing rate. At one point, if the factor is used more, production
rises at a diminishing rate. This law of increasing production with the usage of
factors is known as the Law of Diminishing Marginal Returns.
Usually in the agricultural sector, this law is applicable while attempting to
increase production. It is worth mentioning that, in the first stage, production can
grow more compared to the increase in the factors. Suppose, we have two factors
which are, land and labour. The amount of land is stable. Primarily, when the
amount of labour is less, as the labour rises, there remains sufficient land for the
marginal labour. Therefore, marginal production increases. That is, production
rises at an increasing rate. But, to increase production, if the factors are
continuously engaged in a higher amount, the marginal production diminishes.
The reason behind this is engaging extra labour results in lesser amount of land
for each unit of labour. Therefore, production increases at a diminishing rate.
This is known as the law of diminishing marginal returns. The law of

« diminishing marginal returns can be illustrated by the diagram and table below.

S

x)

60 Economics
The Law of Diminishing Marginal Returns by table:
(Amouat oe land dae ne Combination | Total production maleate
is stable) the labourer) of factors (quintal) (quintal)
[iter [2 ~| se | 2 | 2 |
[Theor [3 ~+| dS Cd
| thetor [| 4 TT
Labour hour = 1, 2, 3, 4. The one hour of labour of a labourer is known as one labour hour.
From the schedule above it can be seen that, if labour is continuously increased
on | hector of land, although the production primarily increases at an increasing
rate, later on it increases at a diminishing rate. As per combination A, spending
1 hour of labour hour on 1 hector of land results in the total and marginal
production of 10 quintal. As per B, when the labour hour is doubled, i.e.- 2, the
total production is 22 quintals and marginal production is (22-10)= 12 quintals.
Here, although the factor has been increased from 10 to 20, marginal production
is 2 quintals more than the previous one. This production of the primary stage is
known as increasing production. Similarly, in the case of combination C, total
production increases at the same rate by increasing the labour hour (factor). But
the marginal production falls from 12 to 8 quintals. That means, the marginal
production is falling at a diminishing rate. Marginal production being less with
the increased use of factors is known as the law of diminishing marginal returns.
The law of diminishing marginal returns is illustrated here by a graph:
¥
g 12 Bb
: 10 7
c
8
ALD
Marginal Produciton curve (MP)
A D
oO 10 20 30 40 x
Labour hour
Law of Diminishing marginal return %9
S
N

Production & Organisation 61
In the picture, the horizontal axis (OX) shows the labour hour, and the vertical
axis (OY) shows the marginal production. In the picture, the stages of the labour
hour are, 1, 2, 3 and 4. In accordance to these, the amounts of marginal
production are Aa (10), Bb (12), Cc (8), and Dd (4) quintal.
When the marginal production combinations, i.e. the points a, b, c and d are
joined, the marginal production curve (MP) can be drawn. The MP curve
appears to falling on the right hand side after the highest production. That is,
here the law of diminishing marginal returns has been effective.
4.6 Cost of Production
Nuru Mia of Rajshahi has made a lychee garden on 2 acres of land. There are
about 100 lychee trees in the garden. This year, for different types of factors, 20
thousand taka has been spent. The production of lychee was also good. Nuru Mia
and his son protect the garden form the disturbances of bats and other birds
leaving their sleep and comforts.
There are two types of expenses for the lychee garden. 1. Costs for the factors,
i.e. financial cost of production and 2. Leaving comfort and sleep, i.e- human
sufferings. In order to measure the real cost of production these two types
expenses have to be considered. The total of the two types of expenses is called
real cost of production.
4.7 Explicit and Implicit Cost
The sum of the visible costs that any production institution spends, for renting or
to buying materials is known as explicit cost. For example, the wages and
allowances of the people working at the production institutions or farms,
expenditures for buying raw materials and intermediate goods, different kinds of
fixed costs, e.g. house rent, interest of the capital, etc.
Implicit costs stand for the value of the entrepreneur's own labour and other
costs, costs for self-employed resources, e.g. the business institution at one's
own home, establishing factory, building an office, etc. These costs are not
= included in the accounts book of the farm. For example, in a self-owned farm,
N

62 Economics
the person counts the profit as the remuneration of his services rather than
counting a separate salary. In this case any type of allowance of the owner is
treated as the implicit cost of the farm.
Task: Make a list of the explicit and implicit costs of a production institution
that you know.
4.8 Personal and Social Cost
In the above we have got the idea of financial cost production, real cost
production and explicit and implicit cost. Now we will learn personal and social
cost.
Any farm or production institution spends financial cost and other explicit cost
directly in order to purchase different kind of wealths or materials. The total
amount of financial cost and explicit cost is called personal cost. In brief, the
total of explicit and implicit cost of a person that is engaged in production
activities is personal cost. In order to produce or consume, different men in the
society face loss for the process of production or consumption. The total amount
of money that is needed to compensate these loss is social cost.
For example the city dwellers use cars. The smokes of the cars hamper the
inhabitants of city physically. For this reason the society has to spend money for
health and treatment. The amount of money that is spent for health and treatment
is called social cost. Personal cost is reflected in social cost but social cost may
not be reflected in personal cost.
Though social cost is engaged in personal cost, generally it is not included in
personal cost.
Task: Why is it important to know the idea of explicit and implicit cost of a
production institution? Discuss it in groups and present it in the class.
hao)
S
N

Production & Organisation 63
Exercise
Short Questions
1. What is meant by production and factors?
2. Name some of the factors in agricultural production.
3. Give an idea of the organiser.
4. Why does the marginal production diminish?
5. What is the main idea of the law of diminishing marginal returns?
6. Give an idea of financial and real cost.
7. What are explicit and implicit costs? Explain the idea with examples.
Descriptive Questions
1. Explain five processes of creating utility in production.
2. Illustrate the factors of production.
3. Illustrate with examples how an organisation can be developed.
4. Explain the characteristics of a good organisation.
5. Explain the relationship between total, average and marginal production.
6. Illustrate the law of diminishing marginal returns.
Multiple-Choice Questions
1. How many factors of production are there?
a 2 b. 4
c. 6 d. 8
2. What type of cost is not included in the accounts book of the farm?
a. Fixed cost b. Total cost
c. Explicit cost d. Implicit cost
oo
ES

64 Economics
x.
b
E
z
i 4
Marginal Produciton curve (MP)
oO L Li La ls x
Labour
Take a look at the diagram above and answer questions 3 and 4
3. What is the amount of labour at the optimum point of marginal returns?
a. OL b. OL1
c. OL2 d. OL3
4. From the shape of the MP curve it can be understood that-
i. production rises in an increasing manner
ii. marginal production diminishes gradually
iii. production rises in a diminishing manner
Which of the following is correct?
a i b. ii
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
Creative Questions
1. Kabir is a businessman. He has a number of furniture shops at different parts
of the country. With the help of 30 employees, he cuts wood and makes different
types of furniture from those wood and supplies these furniture to his shops. He
employs different people for each of his shops. He participates in the exhibitions
for expanding the market for the products. The demand for his products is rising
day by day in the market.
°9
S
AQ

Production & Organisation 65

a. What is labour?

b. What is law of diminishing marginal returns?

c. Illustrate the process for creating utility as adopted by Kabir, in the light of
your textbook

d. Can Kabir be called a successful organiser? Give reasons for your answer.

2. Hossain Ali produced 50 kg of rice from his one acre of land employing one

labourer in the first year. For better production, in the following years, he

employed more labours, the production that he gets is shown in the table below-
Number of Total production of | The production cost Marginal

labourers rice (20 tk per kg) of rice (taka) production

a

ee <

ee

a. What is total production?

b. What do you understand by personal cost?

c. Fill in the table above and illustrate its main idea.

d. The presented matter in the table is also applicable to the agriculture of
Bangladesh. Give your opimon.

Forma-9, Economics Class 9-10

Chapter Five
Market
In economics, the concept of market is related to the demand, supply, and price
determination of goods etc. Therefore, the concept of market is explained from
the perspective of time limit, in terms of area, the nature of the goods and on the
basis of competition. There are different types of market in Bangladesh.
Changes are noticed in the thoughts and ideas of the buyers and sellers in the
market because of many basic characteristics.
Nl ea eS gall Poe ‘J .
ke eo eee AE
WAS, f NCA ee a Sd | ad - > SPP ETE 2 BR IE
he . hay Ose ay 5 —— y t i 4]
es Cri AZ Bai ang |
After studying this chapter, we will be able to-
e illustrate the concept of market.
e describe the method of development of market.
e explain the characteristics of a perfect competitive market.
e¢ compare monopoly market with monopolistic competitive market.
e identify the types of the market system of Bangladesh.
e be inspired to know about the reasons of the change in the price of goods
and their influence. ~
e draw the market type chart on the basis of competition. s

Market 67
5. Market
Subed Ali is a job holder. He went to New Market in the first week of the month
of May to buy the necessary goods for his household. Scrutinizing the prices of
fish, vegetables, rice, dal, sugar, oil, salt, etc. he bought these. The traders sold
their goods to Subed Ali in exchange of money. Shraboni orders online to buy a
dress. She pays the price getting the dress in time. In the above mentioned
events, the connection between the buyer and the seller over the goods is called
market.
In economics, market does not stand for just a specific place for buying and
selling. Rather, market is a process. A process where goods and services are
bought and sold between the buyers and the sellers in different ways. e.g. buying
and selling online, buying and selling over the phone or fax. In these types of
market, many types of goods can be bought and sold, or some specialised goods
can be exchanged. For example, buying cement over phone.
Markets can be different as per the types of the products. e.g. market for jute,
market for paddy, labour market, market for tea, gold market, share market, etc.
On the other hand, there are very short term markets, short term markets and
long term markets which are based on of the duration of time.
The price of the goods is decided through bargain between the buyer and the
seller. The buying and selling of the goods is dependent on this price. Once the
price is decided on the buyers and sellers buy and sell products and services. The
demand and supply forces decide the price.
According to the French economist Kurnat, "The economists did not mean any
specific place for buying and selling goods by the world market. Rather they
mean the whole of a region, where through free communication between the
buyers and sellers, there grows the tendency for the price to become equivalent
easily and quickly."

2

R

68 Economics

5.1 Types of Market

The basic matters that work for the concept of market are demand, supply, time

and price.

In the market system, at a specific time, by different mediums, through

bargaining the buyer and the seller fix the price of the goods or the service and

exchange them. In the perspective of this idea, in the course of time, due to
different situations, different types of market have been originated. And the
market system has developed.

The originations of market have been different over the time.

1. Very Short-Term Market: Where the supply of the goods is stable at a
fixed time, the production can not be increased in that short period of time.
Even if the demand rises or falls, the supply of the goods cannot be changed.
The raw material market can be taken as an example. In this type of market,
within the short time in the morning, even when the demand or the price of
the goods rise, the supply of the goods cannot be changed.

2. Short Term Market: When there is a change in the demand, the supply
may be able to respond a little. In this market, the firm, remaining the same
size, can adjust the changeable factors and bring change to the supply to
some extent. On the other hand, if the demand of the goods falls, the firm
can still produce or if the demand in the market is even worse, the firm can
even stop producing for some time. Therefore, in the short term market,
because of any change in the demand of the goods, supply can respond to an
extent.

3. Long Term Market: With any change in the demand, any kind of change is
possible in the supply. In this case, any production institution can bring a
complete change in the size and factors of production. If the demand is
growing for a long time, the production organization tries to bring a balance
combining the demand and the supply by establishing new machinery and
changing the usage of the other factors. e.g.- raw materials market, fish
market, jute, tea or rice market, mango market, labour market, finance
market, capital market, woven cloth market, fruit market, etc. FS

Market 69

Market is divided into three kinds on the basis of the range of availability of goods.

e Local Market: In the market of goods where the sellers and the buyers are
limited within a particular area is called Local Market. e.g. the market of
meat

e@ National Market: In the Market of goods where the sellers and the buyers
are within a country is called National Market. e.g. the market of coarse rice

e International Market: In the market of goods where the sellers and the
buyers are expanded beyond the boundary of a country is called
International Market. e.g. readymade garments.

Classification of market on the basis of competition

We have been introduced to the types of the market in the earlier section with

respect to the time, place or size of the market. Now we will discuss the total

market structure in the light of competition. Actually, this type of analysis is

more important for economics. The types of the market on the basis of

competition are:

1. Perfectly Competitive Market

2. Inperfect competitive market. Inperfect Competitive Market is mainly of 3
tipes: a. Monopoly Market, b. Oligopoly Market, c. Monopolistic
Competitive Market, etc. Very briefly some ideas about a number of
markets like these are given below.

1. Perfectly Competitive Market

Perfectly competitive market is a system of market where numerous buyers and

sellers buy and sell similar kind of products. No buyer or seller can change the

price of the good once it is decided by the demand and supply in the market. The

demand of one buyer or the supply of one seller is an insignificant part of the

market. Therefore, one or a very few numbers of buyers or sellers cannot

influence the market of the similar types of goods. So, the buyer or seller has to

= comply with the price that has been fixed in the perfectly competitive market.
N

70 Economics

Characteristics of Perfectly Competitive Market

Let us take a look at the characteristics of the perfectly competitive market.

1. Numerous buyers and sellers: There are numerous buyers and sellers of
goods in a perfectly competitive market.

2. The unit of the goods is similar: The goods considered in a perfectly
competitive market are similar or of the same quality. From the perspective
of size or quality, one unit cannot be differentiated from another. The units
of the goods which are the same according to their making and quality, but
still can be differentiated, are known as similar goods. e.g.- rice, dal etc.

3. The buyer and the seller are fully aware of the market: If the market
system is perfectly competitive, the buyer and the sellers, in that case are
fully aware of the qualities of the unit of the goods and the price.

4. The free entry and exit of the firms in the industry: In an industry under
the perfectly competitive market, a firm can enter freely in the long run, and
if necessary, can leave the industry. There is no impediment to that.

5. No external influence: There is no external or governmental influence on
the setting of production or price in the perfectly competitive market. To
sum up, government does not create any influence by taxation, giving
subsidies, rationing, etc.

6. Full mobility of factors: There is free movement of factors in the perfectly
competitive market. There is no obstacle in the movement of any of the
factors including the labour factor. Due to the dynamism of factors amongst
the industries, the price of the factors remains the same everywhere.

7. The producer takes the initiative to maximize the profit at a particular
price: The main objective of the perfectly competitive farm is to earn the
highest profit at the lowest cost. Although the farm tries to take the profit to
the highest at the given cost, in the long term, the industry earns the normal
profit. It has to be kept in mind that when the total cost and the total income
are the same, that is said to be the normal profit. S

Market 71

8. Unit of the produced good is divisible: In different markets, different
amounts of similar goods are produced. Each of the farms produces the
goods dividing them in small parts. Therefore, it can be said that the
market of the produced goods is divisible.

2. The Types of Imperfect Competive Market

a. Monopoly Market

Mono means one and poly means seller. Therefore, the meaning of the word

‘monopoly’ is only one seller. The dictionary meaning of the word monopoly is

the sole right to produce and sell goods by a person, government or corporation.

Therefore, when a firm produces these goods and supplies then to the

innumerable customers, the firm is called a monopoly business and the market

where that goods are bought and sold is called the monopoly market. The firm
that achieves the monopolistic right to sell goods, controls the supply of the
goods in the market. Up to a fixed period of time, no other firm than this
particular one can produce those goods, so there is no difference between a firm
and an industry in the monopoly market. A completely monopolistic market
may be a bit difficult to find. But a number of examples can be given of the
almost monopoly market, for example, Bangladesh Oxygen and Arms and

Ammunition factory situated at Joydevpur etc.

Characteristics of Monopoly Market

The following characteristics can be identified if the monopoly market is

analysed.

1. The seller controls the production or supply: In a monopoly market,
there is only one producer or seller. Therefore, the seller is the one who
controls the production and supply of the goods in the market entirely.

2. There are no near alternative goods: There are no near alternative
goods for the product produced and sold by the monopolistic farm. That
means, there is no similar or nearly similar goods for that product.

3. Try to earn the highest profit: If the monopoly business is run by a person

oo or private sector, the objective of the monopoly business is to earn the
R highest profit.

72 Economics

4, The firm and industry are the same for the monopoly business: There is
only one firm in monopoly market. Thereby, that firm is known as the
industry.

5. Singular controller of the price or supply: The monopoly firm singularly
supplies the production. Being the only producer, it can control the price or
the supply of the product very easily. The monopoly firm can not be control
price and supply at the same time.

6. The entry of a new firm is prohibited: In the monopoly industry, there is
no opportunity for any new firm to enter. When there is possibility for anew
firm to enter, the monopoly firm increases the production and allows the
price to fall. Thereby, in fear of a tentative loss, the new firm does not enter.
That is why in a monopoly market, no new firm can enter.

b. Monopolistic Competitive Market

In the monopolistic competitive market, a few characteristics of both the

perfectly competitive market and the monopoly market are observed. In a

monopoly market, the goods that the different farms produce may be similar but

not completely the same. That is there are some differences among the products.

And in this difference of the goods, the features of the monopoly market are

prevalent. On the other hand, as there are numerous buyers and sellers, the

features of a perfectly competitive market are also observed. The market, which
is based on the combination of competition of almost similar but differentiable
products and monopoly products, is called the monopolisitc competitive market

e.g. body soap made by different companies are almost the same, yet it is

possible to differentiate them. e.g. the covers are different or the scents are

different. If the price of any of these soaps rises, the demand of soaps may fall a

little, but does not become zero. The fixed buyer of this soap always buys this

soap. If there is a change in the price of these goods, the buyer does not leave to

consume this goods or to use it. 3

g

Market 73

Characteristics of Monopolistic Competitive Market

The major characteristics of the monopolistic competitive market are discussed

below:

1. Number of firms/sellers: In the monopolistic competition, one farm can
control a small portion of the total production of the market. So, it is not
possible for any firm to exert considerable influence upon the price of the
goods or the total production. Therefore, sometimes there exist unions or
firms that belong to a group.

2. Differentiation between the produced goods: Different products that
different firms produce in this type of market are to a large extent similar
yet differentiable from one another. The goods are different to some extent
regarding quality and some external factors. That is, the differentiation
between the products means that the goods produced by different firms are
not of the same kind. That is why, the monopolistic competition starts off.

3. The free entry and exit of a firm in the industry: In the monopolistic
competition, there is no restriction for any firm to enter the industry or exit.
Usually, if any farm makes excessive profit over the short term, new firms
enter the industry in the long term. On the other hand, facing a loss, a firm
can leave the industry in the long term. There is no internal or external
objection regarding that.

4. Advertisement and the cost of sale: Each of the firms publicizes its goods
more to enhance its sale. The cost of advertising and other related costs of
selling for these firms, therefore, increase. The firms compete with one
another by advertising and the standards of qualities of the products.

5. The nature of demand: If a firm increases the price of its goods, many
consumers buy the alternative goods of other firms, but there are some
consumers who continue to buy the product of the first firm even if in a
smaller quantity. That means the demand for some goods does not fall to be
zero even when the firms increase the price of those goods. Some of the
buyers have special preferences for some firms, therefore, the shape of the

Forma-10, Economics Class 9-10

74 Economics
demand curves of each of the firms is not usually the same. The shape of the
demand curve mainly depends upon how much different are the goods of
the firm being considered from the goods of the other firms.

6. Maximization of profit: In a monopolistic competitive market, the
objective of each of the sellers is to maximize the amount of the profit to its
optimum limit.

7. Copying the goods: In the monopolistic competitive market, one seller
cannot copy the goods produced by another seller completely. Thereby,
each of the sellers or firms, like the monopoly firms, can control the supply
of their own goods and thus, by controlling the supply can also control the
prices of their goods.

8. Long term situation: The balance of the firm in the long term in the
monopolistic competitive market remains at the normal profit level like that
of the perfectly competitive market.

c. Oligopoly Market

Oligopoly is such a market where several sellers and many buyers buy and sell

homogenous or almost homogenous goods. In this type of market, a seller takes

decision by observing other sellers’ strategy, i.e. Firm 'A' of telecommunication
sector, uses a filmstar in it's advertisement; Firm 'B' uses a popular player in it's
advertisement to attract the buyers.

Characteristics of Oligopoly Market

1. Number of seller: This type of market has a few sellers.

2. Nature of goods: The goods of this type of market are homogenous or
identical or almost homogenous of which a little can be differentiated.

3. Decision Making: By observing other competitive firms’ strategy, a firm in
this type of market makes decision in choosing the price of its goods and
amount of production.

4. Influence of Advertisement: In this market, firms resort to advertisements .,
to attract the buyers. R

Market 75
Task: Prepare a chart of the market system on the basis of competition.
Market expansion can be classified in 3 ways
1. Market on the basis time 2. Market on the basis of
region
v v
* Very short time market * Locl market
* Short time market * National market
* Long time market * International market
3. Market on the basis of competition
1. Monopoly Market
2. Monopolistic Competitive Market
3. Oligopoly Market

5.2 Market System of Bangladesh

The perfectly competitive market system, the monopoly market system and the

monopolistic competitive market system have been discussed in this chapter.

Because of the Nature and Environment of Bangladesh, different types of

market and modes of buying and selling can be observed for different kinds of

goods. The three types of market can be discussed as realistic examples.

1. Perfectly Competitive Market: There is no perfectly competitive market
for any goods in Bangladesh, but nearly perfectly competitive markets can
be found. The retail market of agricultural goods in Bangladesh is a good
example of this type of market. For example, in the primary market of rice
there are numerous buyers and sellers and no single producer can influence
the market of rice. Similarly, markets for other crops, fish, chicken, egg,

20 milk, etc. are also perfectly competitive or almost so. This market is also
& seen in cases of some services too. e.g. rickshaw transportation.

76 Economics

2. Monopoly market: Monopoly market of produced goods is not found in
Bangladesh. But in cases of imported products or services, this type of
market exists. e.g. the only importer of fuel oil is Bangladesh Petroleum
Corporation. This type of market is also prevailing in Dhaka city in the cases
of water, electricity and gas supply. For railway transportation, Bangladesh
Railway is the only institution.

3. Monopolistic competitive market: The market for different goods in
Bangladesh is monopolistic competitive, e.g. different food products,
cosmetics, etc. For some services also, this type of market can be found,
e.g. private hospitals and diagnostic centres.

arguement.
Name of the goods Name of the region market
and argument
a. Mango siseeaeseseceeeeeeeeeaeaeananaees
c. Vegetables Sir
e. Woven cloths soeseneeeeveneneeececseseaeatenens
f. Tea sasseseesesosopeseeeseesesenensees
g. Guava, banana, boroi sesaueesnesseecessecessesneeseees
h. Coconut sierra
i. Cow-milk diem
j. Meat suis
ES
ES

Market 77
Exercise

Short Questions

1. What is meant by market?

2. What is the rule of price?

3. What are the three fundamental things in the market system?

4. How many types of market are there from the standpoint of time and what are
they?

5. How many types of market are there regarding region and what they are?

6. What is money market?

7. What is meant by labour market?

8. Give an idea of goods market.

9. Give an idea of firm and industry.

10. What is factor market?

Descriptive Questions

1, Illustrate the classification of market from the perspective of time limit.

2. Give an idea of a perfectly competitive market and Inperfect competitive
market. Mention the 8 characteristics of perfectly competitive market.

3. Explain the characteristics of monopoly market.

4. Give an idea of monopolistic competitive market. Illustrate its features.

5. Make a chart of the market structure based on the competitions mentioned in
your book. Give an introduction to the market systems of different
products in Bangladesh.

Multiple-Choice Questions

1. ‘Buyers and sellers completely know the quality of goods and price’. Which
market can you find this characteristic?

a. Monopoly b. Perfectly competitive
2
& c. Oligopoly d. Monopolistic competitive

78 Economics
2. Buying and selling according to the law of price mean
i. through the bargain between buyer and seller.
ii. by themutual action and reaction of demand and supply.
iii. on the basis of a fixed price.
Which of the following is correct?
ai 9 b. i and ii
c. ii and iii d. i and iii
Read the following passage and answer question numbers 3 and 4.
Bringing small fishes and chickens from roadside market, Mr. Siddique came
home at 8 A.M. Mrs. Siddique informed that there was no vegetables. So, he said
that they would not be available then.
3. From what type of market did Mr. Siddique buy fishes and chickens?
a. very short term b. long term
c. very long term d. short term
4. The characteristic of this market is
i. arrival of too many people for buying and selling goods.
ii. the quality and the shape of the sold goods are of the same type.
iii. the same person controls the supply of goods of the market.
Which of the following is correct?
a. iandii b.  iand iii
ce. iv and iii d. i, ii and iii 6
S
N

Market 79
Creative Questions

1. Kamal: Give me a Matador pen.

Shopper: Bhaia, this week the price of the Econo pen has gone down. Would you

like to have that?

Kamal: Why? Is Econo different in quality from matador?

Shopper: No, it's not like that. There are many companies in the market. All of

their pens are almost the same; They just look a little different.

Kamal: In that case, give me a Matador, please. I like it more.

a. What is a firm?

b. Explain the idea of short term market.

c. Which market does the product bought by Kamal belong to? Explain.

d. Analyse the relation between the perfectly competitive market and the
market of the goods bought by Kamal.

2. Rimi uses bags of one particular brand. When she goes to the market to buy
a new bag, she finds the price much higher than earlier. When she wanted
to know the reason for this, the shopkeeper answered that the bags are
imported by only one company. They have got nothing to do if the company
raises the price. Since there is no other bag like this in the market, Rimi has
to buy the bag at a higher price.

a. What is a factor?

b. What is meant by product differentiation?

c. Which market are the goods that Rimi bought from? Explain.

d. What is the kind of the goods bought by Rimi in Bangladesh? Analyse.
2
8

Chapter Six
National Income and Its Measurments
The economic situation of a country can be understood from the national income
of that country. That is, it is possible to assume whether the country is developed
or developing or underdeveloped. To know how much the national income of a
country is, national income has to be measured. In this chapter, the system and
technique of measuring the national income of Bangladesh will be discussed.
Other tax and duty Import duty . es . - - —_
0% } 12% ue added = =) —— ir
ue ; - eae fin = =
doty (import) Ae
Me je ~~ ie
ay acal Excise duty 1% —_— (EM a
EOS
BS Gen aa ee
(eo ! Mm i hax eo \ ain
wee Stn we 6  ee
It can be expected that after studying this chapter, we will be able to
e illustrate the ideas of national income.
e show the differences between the national income (NI) and the gross domestic
product (GDP).
® compare the national income (NI) and the net national product (NNP).
e illustrate the systems of measuring the national income.
e classify the determinants of GDP in two groups, which are factors and technology.
e prepare a list of the factors outside GDP.
io}
e describe the system to measure the national income in Bangladesh. S

National Income and Its Measurement 81
6.1 Concepts of National Income
Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
At a specific time, usually one year, the sum total of the market price of the
final goods and services produced within the geographical boundary of a
country is called the gross domestic product or GDP.
Let us assume that three goods are produced within Bangladesh in a year, e.g.
100 quintals of paddy, 1000 shirts, and 1000 pens. GDP=100 quintal of paddy x
the market price of paddy + 1000 shirts x market price of shirts + 1000 pens
x market price of the pens. Thus GDP of a country is calculated by summing the
result of the multiplication of the amount of all produced goods with their own
prices. If rice is produced as a final goods from paddy, then at the time of
calculation, we will have to estimate the production and the price of rice.
Gross National Income (GNI)
At a specific time, usually within one fiscal year, the sum total of the market
price of the total amount of the final goods and services produced by the citizens
of a country is known as the gross national income or GNI.
The gross national income can be determined by adding the gross domestic
product and the net factor income. Net factor income means the subtraction
result of the income of the citizens of a country from foreign investments and
labour, and the income of the foreign citizens from their investment and labour in
the country being considered. If this amount is negative, the gross national
income will become less than the gross domestic income. Again, if it is positive,
the gross national income will become less than the gross domestic income. The
second one is true in the perspective of Bangladesh.
Net National Income or (NNI)
In an economy, at a specific time, if the Capital Consumption Allowance or CCA
or Depreciation is deducted from the monetary price of the final products and
services, what is left is known as the net national product or NNP. The capital
consumption allowance means the cost of the supervision for the wearing
away or decays due to the use of the capital.
Forma-11, Economics Class 9-10

82 Economics
Task: 2. What is CCA (Capital Consumption Allowance)?

6.2 Measurments of National Income-Production, Expenditure

and Income Approach

The national income can be measured basically in three ways. They are— the

Production approach, the Income approach and the Expenditure approach.

1. Production approach: The economy of a country is divided into some
important sectors. Adding the value of the final products and services
produced in these sectors in one year, the gross domestic product can be
calculated. The economy of Bangladesh can be divided into 15 sectors and
the value of the production is decided sector-wise. In the end, summing up the
value of production in these 15 sectors, the gross national product is
determined.

2. Income approach: The National income in this system is the sum total of the
income received by the factors used in production. The basic factors used in
production are—land, labour, capital and organisation. Their incomes are
respectively, revenue, wage, interest and profit. Therefore, national income =
revenue + wage + interest + profit.

3. Expenditure approach: In this system, the national income is the sum total
of all kinds of expenditure in a society at a specific time. The total
expenditure in a society stands for the cost of consumption and investment of
the individual sector and the governmental expenditure and the net export.
Therefore, consumption + investment + governmental expenditure + net
export (= export - import) = gross domestic product. So, gross domestic
product or Y = C +I+ G+(X-M). Here, C = consumption, I = investment, G =
governmental expenditures, (X-M) (export-import) = net export.

If the amount of the gross domestic product calculated in these three systems is

fairly the same, the measurement is considered to be correct. Due to the mistakes

in calculation, there may be some difference, but in the real sense, the result will .,

be the same. 5

National Income and Its Measurement 83

6.3 Per Capita Gross Domestic Product

GDP per capita means the annual GDP per person. In a specific fiscal year, if the

total gross domestic product is divided by the total population, the GDP per

capita can be calculated.
., _ the total gross domestic product of one year

Se per-fornnila, GDP pereapita = the total population of that year.
GDP per capita is the primary indicator of the economic development and the
standard of living of a country. By this indicator, we can determine if a country
is developed or underdeveloped, or developing. If the GDP per capita is more
than a particular level, it has to be understood that the country is developed, and
if the GDP is less, the country is to be considered as underdeveloped or
developing.

6.4 Determinants of Gross Domestic Product-GDP

The amount of the gross domestic product of a country depends upon the

mobility of its land and other natural resources, labour, capital, technology and

the amount and the productivity of these resources. Therefore, they are called the
determinants of the gross domestic product.

1. Land: The gross domestic product depends on land and natural resources.
The gross domestic product will increase if satisfactory usage of the natural
resources is possible and if there is necessary fertile land for producing
agricultural products. Therefore, land and natural resources are the
significant determinants of the gross domestic product.

2. Labour: Labour is a significant determinant of the gross domestic product of
a country. Skilled and efficient labour force is helpful for increasing the gross
domestic product. If the member of labour increases and if they know the use
of technology, and are trained, it becomes helpful for increasing the gross
domestic product.

3. Capital: Capital is a fundamental determinant of increasing the gross

20 domestic product of a country. In the developed countries of today, capital
BS works at the root of increasing gross domestic product. On the other hand, the

84 Economics
developing and underdeveloped countries cannot increase their total national
income and the gross domestic product due to their lack of capital. Therefore,
capital is an important determinant of the gross domestic product.

4. Technology: The gross domestic product largely depends on technology.
Technology can be developed in many ways. For example, new inventions,
development of the design of the machinery and skills, invention of new
products, etc. As it can be seen, the use of highly productive seeds instead of
the regular seeds in the agricultural sector has increased the production of rice
many times. Similarly, the use of seeds of better quality has also resulted in
enhanced production of different vegetables, such as gourd, pumpkin,
giddiness, finger, etc. Technology basically enhances the productivity of the
factors of production. As a result, more production is possible with the same
production factors.

5. Mobility: The gross domestic product depends on the capacity to move the
resources from the economic activities that are lagging behind or
diminishing, to the newly expanding economic activities in an economy. For
example, it is mention that in Bangladesh we can increase the use of land and
other factors in the production of rice, wheat or corn by decreasing the
production of jute.

6.5 Factors not included in GDP Calculation

The total market price of the final products and services in an economy at a

specific time is known as the gross domestic product. The following factors are

never included while calculating GDP.

1. Capital gains and losses: With the change of time there may occur changes
in national resources or factors of a production institution or the price of the
produced goods resulting into profit or loss. This profit or loss is not counted
in calculating GDP. Because, the profit or the loss due to the change in the
price of the resources in course of time does not influence determining the
national income. Besides, this profit or loss is recorded only in the cases of an
individual business institution. While there is profit for one institution, the
same amount of loss occurs for another. So, the influence of profit or loss in FS
calculating the GDP is zero. “

National Income and Its Measurement 85

2. Intermediary goods and services: To calculate national income, only the
final goods and services are considered. Because, the prices of the
intermediary goods and services are included in the price of the final goods
and services. If the intermediary goods and services are considered again
after the final products, there arises the problem of double counting. For this
reason, the intermediary goods and services are not considered while
estimating the GDP.

3. Goods and services free of charge: There are some goods and services in
the economic system which are not bought or sold through market. e.g. a
mother rearing her children, the cooking and other household work of
women, a singer singing to his friends, these are not produced goods.
Therefore, while estimating the GDP, the value of these services cannot be
included.

4. No consideration for previous production and transaction: GDP
calculated for a certain year does not include any production of any previous
year in the GDP of that year e.g. old cars, old houses or flats. The price of
these products is included in the GDP of that year when they were bought.
The problem of double counting will arise if these are calculated again.
Similarly, the exchange of stock, bond or any paper is not included in the
GDP.

5. Interest on public debt: The interest against a governmental loan is not to
be included in the GDP. For example, the loan taken by the government
during a war, does not contribute to the national production. The interest
against this loan is taken to be the transferrable due. And therefore, it is
excluded from the GDP.

6. Illegal activities: Income from any illegal activity is not included in
estimating the national income. Illegal activities mean, any activity that is not
acceptable socially and is against the prevailing law of the country.

:
3 calculation of gross domestic product.

86 Economics
6.6 Method of Estimation of National Income in Bangladesh
Bangladesh Statistics Bureau is a government institution that is entrusted with
the responsibility of estimating the national income of Bangladesh. Estimating
the current market price and the fixed price of the goods and services, the
Statistics Bureau measures the GDP and the GNI every year. For these
estimations the institution has to collect data from different sources.
Bangladesh Statistics Bureau estimates the GDP and the GNI, using the
production approach and the expenditure approach. In the production approach,
to estimate the GDP, the economy is divided into 15 different sectors. These are-
Estimating the GDP in the Production Approach

Contribution of different sectors in national income of Bangladesh

1. Agriculture and forest resources: Agriculture is an important sector of the
domestic product. It is difficult to estimate in any formatted way. To
estimate the GDP of Bangladesh, this sector is divided into three parts.

(a) Crops and vegetables: The amount of domestic product in this sector is
estimated from the perspective of the current wholesale market price. For
example, in 2012-13, the product in this sector was of 1,06,794 crores of taka
and in 2014-15 it was estimated at 1,76,121 crores of taka.

(b) Animal resources: The estimation of domestic product in this sector also is
done on the basis of the current market price. In this sub-sector of animal
resources, in 2012-13 the amount of domestic product was of 25,359 crores
of taka. In 2014-15, it was 29,885 crores of taka.

(c) Forest resources: In the forest sector, because of the lack of data regarding
the factors, while estimating the GDP, 3% of the price of the total production
is deducted and the rest is considered to be the value added. In 2012-13, the
domestic production was 16605 crore taka and in 2014-15 was 20,494 crore
taka.

2. Fish resources: GDP is calculated from the perspective of gathering fish
from the internal and sea sources. In 2012-13 the GDP in this sector was =
36995 crore taka and in 2014-15, it was 47,581 crore taka. R

National Income and Its Measurement 87

3. Minerals and mining: Minerals and mining is taken as a separate sector in
the industrial sector. In this sector, the market prices of (a) natural gas and
unrefined oil and (b) other mineral resources and produced goods from
mining are calculated. The calculation of these sectors are done in terms of
gross national product. The income from this sector in 2012-13 was 19,461
crore taka and in 2014-15, 23,876 crore taka.

4. Industry (manufacturing): In the case of estimating GDP in Bangladesh,
the present market prices of the produced goods of all the industries are
calculated. The amount of the industrial production in Bangladesh is
1,97,127 crore taka in 2012-13, of which, (a) the production of the large and
the medium industries is 1,58,448 crore taka while (b) for the small
industries it is 38,679 crore taka. In 2014-15 industrial production large and
small industrial production and small industrial production were worth of
Tk. 2,54,483 crore, 2,05,992 crore and 48,491 crore respectively.

5. Wholesale and retail selling: In this calculation, the GDP product is
estimated by calculating the wholesale price of goods. In 2012-13 it was
1,54,579 crore taka and in 2014-15 it was 1,92,585 crore taka.

6. Electricity, gas and water resources: On the basis of the value of
supplying the services, the GDP is estimated in this sector. This sector is
very important for Bangladesh. Alongside the government, this sector is
extended privately, too. The gross domestic product in 2012-13 was 16,381
crore taka. Amidst that, (a) in the subsector of electricity, it was 12,168 crore
taka, (b) in the sub-sector of gas it was 3,448 crore taka and (c) in the
sub-sector of water it was 766 crore taka. In 2014-15, the total from these
three sctors was 19,868 crore taka.

7. Construction: From the data received from the individual, the construction
institutions, the consumers and the government, the gross domestic
production in this sector is estimated. In reality, the amount of income from
this sector is less compared to what it should be because, the current market

eo price is more than the price set by the government.
Ss
aq

88 Economics
Whereas, GDP is calculated based on the price that is fixed by the
government. 82,432 crore taka was earned from this sector in 2012-13, and
90834 crore in 2013-14.

8. Hotels and restaurants: The matter of gross domestic product in this sector
is estimated from the perspective of produced goods and the selling price of
the services. In 2012-13 11263 crore taka was earned from this sector, and
in 2014-15, 14,928 crore taka.

9. Transport, preservation and communication: This sector is quite a big
one regarding the estimation of the domestic income. A big portion of this
sector belongs to the private sector. Even so, the gross income from this
sector in 2012-13 was 1,24,281 crore taka, of which (a) 92,183 crore taka
was earned from the sub-cector of ways land, (b) 7,649 crore taka was
eared from the sub-sector of ways water, (c) 1,047 crore taka was earned
from the sub-sector of ways air, ( d) 6,001 crore taka was earned from the
sub-sector of associate transport services and preservation, and ( e) 17,400
crore taka was earned from the sub-sector of mail and cable
communications. In 2014-15, the total income in the transport, preservation
and communications sector was 1,50,025 crore taka.

10. Financial institutional services: The estimation of this sector depends on
the price received from the services. In 2012-13, the amount of domestic
product value was 42,237 crore taka, of which (a) 34,727 crore taka came
from the banking sector, (b) 4,920 crore taka from the insurance sector, and
(c) 2,590 crore taka from the other sectors. In the fiscal year 2014-15, the
amount was 55,761 crore taka. As per the sub-sectors, the income was
46,644, 5,937 and 3,180 crore taka respectively.

11. Real estate, rent and other businesses: On the basis of the income received
from services, the domestic production in this sector is estimated. In
2012-13 the domestic income was 78,820 crore taka, and in 2014-15 it was
10,060 crore taka..

ES
8

National Income and Its Measurement 89

12. Public administration and defence: The domestic income from this sector
is actually calculated from the expenditures. The domestic product in
2012-13 was 37,678 crore taka, and in 2014-15 was 50,674 crore taka.

13. Education: In the education sector of Bangladesh the domestic product is
estimated from expenditures. In 2012-13, the domestic production was
28,429 crore taka and in 2014-15 it was 37,624 crore taka.

14. Health and social services: The estimation of the health and social services
is done by the expenditure approach. In this case, the total domestic product
expenditure in 2012-13 was 23,868 crore taka and in 2014-15 it was 30,135
crore taka.

15. Community, social, and personal services: The estimation of this sector is
also done from the expenditure approach. In 2012-13, 1,38,952 crore was
the expenditure in this sector and in 2014-15, it was 1,76,402 crore taka.

The Source of all information of this chapter: Bangladesh Economic Review 2016.
Exercise

Short questions

1. Give an idea of the gross domestic product.

2. What is meant by the gross national income?

3. What is meant by net national income?

4. Give the elaborated form of GNI, GDP and NNI.

5. What is meant by CCA?

Descriptive questions

1. Illustrate the approaches of estimating national income.

2. Describe the determinants of gross domestic product.

Forma-12, Economics Class 9-10

90 Economics
3. Describe the matters that are not included in the accounts of the gross
domestic product.
4. Describe the contribution of sub-sectors of agriculture in national income
of Bangladesh.
Multiple-Choice Questions
1. What is annual income per person?
a. national income b. net income
c. GDP d. per capita income
2. Which one of the following is taken into the estimation of national income?
a. price of the final goods and services
b. price of the intermediary goods and services
c. interest of governmental loan
d. income by corruption
Read the following passage and answer questions 3 and 4.
By sowing better quality seeds in the next year, Rumana got more vegetables
than what she got in the first year by sowing ordinary seeds on the compound of
her house.
3. For increasing production, the use of which one of the following did Rumana
change?
a. land b. labour
c. technology d. capital
4, This type of change in production
i. increases GDP.
ii. increases GNI.
iii. decreases NNI. S

National Income and Its Measurement 91
Which one of the following is correct?
a i b. ii
c. iandii d. ii and iii
Creative Questions
1. Event: 1
Shihab has been working in Bahrain for 10 years. Every month he sends a
portion of his income to his country.
Event: 2
Mrs Brownie is a British citizen. She is working at a private organization in
Bangladesh. She also sends money to her country every month.
a. What is net national income?
b. How is national income estimated by the income approach? Explain.
c. How is the sending of money by Shihab related to the estimation of
national income? Explain.
d. How would the income of Mrs. Brownie influence the national income
of Bangladesh? Give your own opinion.
2, Zahir went to his grandfather's home at Madhupur. His grandfather has fish
in his pond. Zahir saw many trees and animals near his grandfather's house.
He came to know that it is a special kind of region.
a. What is the full form of CCA?
b. What is understood by gross domestic product?
c. Which sector of economy would the region that Zahir finds near his
grandfather's house be included in?
d. Analyse in the light of the textbook, the contribution of the pisciculture
by Zahir's grandfather in the economy of Bangladesh.
2
R

Chapter 7
Money and Banking System

Nabil's father is a service holder. His monthly salary is 20000 taka. He keeps
some cash for household expenses and deposits some money to the bank. After
some days, he decides to set up a poultry farm. For this he takes some loan from
the bank. The bank sanctions this loan to him on condition of repaying it within
36 months at 10% interest. His income-expenditure, savings and loans- all are
generated by money. Money and loan business are operated by bank and
financial institutions. The bank receives the surplus money of the public as
deposits and sanctions this to debtors as loans. Different banks play significant
role in our agricultural development, industrialization, self-employment and
trade and commerce.
On, Lf 8 HUE ae
Ris Oia ==
WMO a)
a Ne ihe Oe ee
A ON CI
After studying this chapter, we will be able to

e describe the idea and classification of money,

e explain the functions of money,

e describe the concept of a commercial bank and its main functions.

e illustrate the procedures of opening and operating a bank account.

e explain the concept of the central bank and its major functions.

e compare the central bank with commercial banks.

e evaluate the role of some important banks of Bangladesh in agricultural

development, industrialization and self-employment. ©
e show the banking system of Bangladesh by drawing charts. 3

Money and Banking System 93
7.1 Money and its classification
For a long time farmers used to collect their clothes from weavers in exchange
for crops and fishermen used to collect utensils from potters in exchange for
fishes. This system of fulfilling the necessities of certain goods in exchange of
other goods is called the Barter System. This system is still practiced in some
rural areas of our country. But this system created some problems sometimes
(e.g. problems in division of the goods and the dissimilarities in needs, etc). To
overcome these problems money was invented. In modem economy money is
unanimously approved and accepted as the medium of exchange. Money
functions as a mode of exchange, a measure of the prices of services and goods,
and as a mode of savings.
So the object that is promoted by the government, generally accepted as a
measure of value, accepted everywhere as a medium of repayment of debt, and
granted by all as the mode of savings and basis of loan, is called money. It is
named differently in different countries, like Taka in Bangladesh, Rupee in
India, Dollar in America and Euro in most of the countries of Europe.
Classification of Money
Money can be classified from various points of view. It is discussed below:
According to the components of making, money can be classified in 2 types, like:
1) Metal coin —_ _ “a
2) Paper notes ff ae \ iF & Pe i As 4 .
Metal Coins ¥ yj \ Sp & :
The coin which is made by > Ee ae ahh:
metals and used to conduct our ih, . = i \ ys We \ ) \ Vi ; \
day-to-day transactions is called
a metal coin. In Bangladesh, “i EES —_
metal coins of 5 taka, 2 taka, 1 Metal Coins
taka and 50 paisa are available.
o Metal coins can be classified into two groups based on material value. They are,
S (a) authentic coin, (b) symbolic coin. An authentic coin is the metallic coin

94 Economics
which can be sold at its visible price if sold as metal only after melting it.
Symbolic coin holds less value as metal than its visible value. Generally, metal
coins are introduced and authorized by the government.

Paper Money

The money which is made of paper is called paper money. The value written on
the note is the monetary value of that note, which is generally higher than its
internal value. In almost all the countries, paper money or paper notes are
introduced by the central bank by the order of the government of that country.
The paper money of Bangladesh includes the notes of 1 taka, 2 taka, 5 taka, 10
taka, 20 taka, 50 taka, 100 taka, 500 taka and 1000 taka.

Paper money can be divided into two parts, as: (a) convertible money (b)
non-convertible money. Convertible money means the paper notes instead of
which the government is bound to give the local money of equal value on
demand. In Bangladesh, the notes of 5 taka, 10 taka, 20 taka, 50 taka, 100 taka,
500 taka, and 1000 taka are the convertible money. And non-convertible money
means the paper notes against which no foreign currency, gold, silver can be
received from the government. The non-convertible money in Bangladesh is the
notes of 1 taka and 2 taka. Money can be divided again according to the
obligations of acceptance. Such as: 1. Legal Money 2. Bank Account.

Legal Money

The money which is approved by government law is called legal money. In our
country the legal money is formed of the metal coins and paper notes
authenticated by the government and the central bank. The legal money can be
divided into two parts- (a) unlimited legal money (b) limited legal money. The
unlimited legal money means the legal money by which any amount of
transaction can be made legally and if it repays the debts and dues the creditor is
bound to receive it. The unlimited legal money of our country is the notes of 5
taka, 10 taka, 20 taka, 50 taka, 100 taka, 500 taka and 1000 taka. On the other
hand limited legal money means the legal money which can be transacted up to
a certain limit. The public cannot be forced or compelled to receive more legally
and public can receive it according to their wish. The limited legal money of our 2
country is the metallic coin of 50 paisa, 1 taka, 2 taka and 5 taka. &

Money and Banking System 95

Bank Created Money

At present to repay the business transactions and

debts and dues, people receive bank account or

bank money as the medium of exchange. But no

one can be forced to receive it. Commercial bank eC >.

can create money by creating deposits or CN

sanctioning loans. a >)

‘ rect “ap Besirs

Transactions can be made through check against —i)

the bank deposit or over draft. The bank deposit = _ CAR,

or account may be considered as money. In our : S ioe. > :

country bank money is the deposit in current nS 7

account and deposit in savings account which pebit card & eredit ea

can be received through cheque. Besides, debit fea EEE

card and credit card introduced by bank work as

the medium of exchange.

Task: Make a chart of the differentiation of money.

7.2 Functions of money

Money plays different types of significant roles in the modern production system

and social lives.

While describing the functions of money, the poet says,

‘the thing that measures exchange and value
Paying the loans and savings,
Everyone knows that, Money it is’
(translated)
The following two lines of an English poem refers to the functions of money:
"Money is a matter of functions four;
A medium, a measure, a standard, a store."

This means that, money has four functions. Those are: medium of exchange,
c measure of price, means of savings and standard of delayed or postponed
S transaction.

96 Economics
Below is a description of the four major functions of money:

Medium of exchange

Transaction is done through exchange of money as money is acceptable to
everyone. A salesman takes money in exchange for things and a customer buys
things by paying money. In this way, by exchanging money anytime any product
or service can be purchased. For that reason transaction becomes easy and fast.
So, it can be said that money is the easiest and the most convenient medium of
exchange.

Measure of price

As a meter measures length and a kilogram measures weight, money is used as
the scale to measure the price of products and services. For example, Amir buys
a book with 50 taka. Here, 50 taka is the assessor of price of that book. Through
money, we can easily measure the price of a product and services and we can
also make comparisons between the former and then upcoming price of a
product and services.

Means of savings

Savings cannot be built through products as most of the products are perishable.
On the other hand, service is a living item for consumption and so industry and
services cannot be stored. But the price of these kinds of products and services
can be stored by money as everything can be exchanged through money.
Nowadays people can save their surplus after subtracting the consumption cost
from the production wages because savings through money is much more secure
and more stable.

Standard of delayed or postponed transaction

Delayed transaction refers to future dealings. The calculation of these dealings
is done through money. Moreover, taking and returning loans by money is more
appropriate. As a result, economic activities can be done without any hindrance.
At present, most of the business transactions are finanlised through cheques,
bank drafts, exchange bills, debentures, etc. The bank circulates these
debentures on the basis of the cash saved as a fixed deposit. Thus, money is ,,
considered to be the basis of loans and the standard of delayed transaction. S

Money and Banking System 97
Apart from the above mentioned tasks, money also works as a price
transmission medium, standard of liquidity and a symbol of social status. These
roles of money are not different; rather one has arisen from another. Hence, it is
said that the economic development of the society has become easily accessible
because of the functions of money.
Task: Money has made our day-to-day life easier. - Explain.
7.3 Commercial Bank
The bank that saves money from any individual or company as deposits and
provides loans to an individual or a company for commercial purposes
according to their demands is called a commercial bank. The main objective of
a commercial bank is to earn profit. These banks give interest at a low rate on the
deposited money. Alternatively, they charge interest at a higher rate from the
debtors. The difference between these two interests is the profit of a bank. The
bank gives loans for a short time from its reserve as it is bound to return money
whenever the account-holder demands it back. That is why this type of bank is
known as entrepreneur of short-term-loan.
Commercial banks of Bangladesh are: Sonali Bank, Janata Bank, Rupali Bank,
Agrani Bank, Pubali Bank, Uttara Bank, City Bank, Arab-Bangladesh Bank,
Dutch-Bangla Bank etc.
TTT TTT LZ u
SIS PREpanaas —— *
Sonali Bank Building Janata Bank Building
Forma-13, Economics Class 9-10

98 Economics

Functions of Commercial Bank

In modem times, as a result of its performance of various activities, the

commercial bank has become an important organization of the state. Below is a

discussion on the major functions of a commercial bank:

1. Accepting Deposits

The first and foremost function of a commercial bank is to collect deposits from

individuals and companies. Commercial banks accept three types of deposits-

(a) Current Deposit, (b) Savings Deposit, (c) Fixed Deposit.

(a) Current Deposit: The account-holder of a current deposit can withdraw
money anytime. For that reason, no interest is given on this deposit.

(b) Savings Deposit: Money of savings deposit can be withdrawn twice a week
after a certain period of time. The bank gives some interest on this deposit.

(c) Fixed Deposit: This deposit is for a certain period. For example, 3 months
6 months, 1 year, 3 years, 5 years etc. The bank gives interest at a higher rate
on this deposit. Money of such a deposit can even be withdrawn before it
matures. Some terms and conditions are followed in this case. But less
interest is paid.

2. Providing Loans

For earning profit commercial bank retains a particular amount of the deposit to

meet the demands of the account-holders and with the rest of the money it

provides loans to individuals or companies for short periods. Commercial banks

provide loans against appropriate surety and mortgage e.g. expensive metal,

metal products, government and foreign debentures, and permanent assets.

Commercial banks of our country provide loans for house-building, fisheries,

trade and commerce and industry.

3. Creating medium of exchange

At present commercial banks create cheques, bank-drafts, e-payments,

money-laundering and travelers' cheques as easy mediums of exchange.

Bank-issued cheques are vastly used in the mediums of exchange. In developed =

countries most of the transactions are accomplished through cheques. §

Money and Banking System 99

4. Supporting local and foreign trade

For supporting trade at both national and Sy im | ——

international levels, commercial banks cane “ i. —

besides supplying money, provide mi | ca 5

suggestions to business persons. In addition, ° BY , ~~ q

giving identification in exchange-bills to I | ee re

business persons, bill-discounting, providing §}— | CF 2

loans to importers-exporters, paying bills via oa] IS ri = . Doe

mail and telegrams are also arranged. In ee one se |
. a... | aa, < (3 q

some cases, exchanging goods through jf .: RS ®)

banks, purchasing foreign currency and | Ee ce AN

debit-credit of buyers and sellers are also _ i rae | on ee AS

solved. By performing these activities Technology in Banking Programmes

commercial banks play a vital role in trade.

5. Money transfer

Banks transfer money safely and quickly from one place to another place on the

demand of clients. The media of sending money are cheques, bank drafts, postal

orders, travelers' cheques, mail transfers and telegrams etc.

6. Remittance

Commercial banks provide proper services, collecting foreign currency for the

people who are working abroad and handing it to the local receivers as soon as

possible.

7. Increase savings

Commercial banks collect small savings which are spread throughout the

country at different places and accumulate these as deposits. Banks help to make

capital to the business and production sector, lending the amassed money. Thus

commercial banks increase savings of the country and at the same time

accelerate the development of economy.

Besides these, commercial banks do the following activities.

a. Store safely the valuable accessories of people, for example, deed copies and

[ove
Ss valuable ornaments, etc. in the locker.

100 Economics
b. Help to trade share, debenture of different companies and public bond.
c. Perform the task of a trustee by looking after the properties, arranging to
collect and give taxes for the properties.
d. Provide income certificates for the clients and make it secret.
e. Collect and pay cheques, exchange bills, house rent, income tax, insurance
premium and electric bill, etc. as a representative of the clients.
By completing the above tasks commercial banks play a vital role in the
economic development.
Task: How does a commercial bank accelerate the economic development of
a country? Explain.
7.4 Rules of opening and maintaining bank account
Sujon goes to deposit one part of his earning money to the branch of Sonali Bank
situated in his upazila town. One employer of the Sonali Bank Mr. Masud helps
him to open an account. At first Mr. Masud tells Sujon about the three types of
account which are (1) current account, (2) savings account and (3) fixed deposit.
He says that the rules are almost the same for opening all the accounts. Except
Grameen Bank, all the banks follow almost the same rules and regulations.
Sujon decides to open the savings account. At first he collects a form from the
branch and puts the necessary information in it.
According to the rules of the Bank he (applicant) has to take Sayem's signature
for identifying himself. Because Sayem has an account in that bank. Sayem is
called as an identifier. Besides, Sujon selects his wife as a nominee and puts her
information in the form. A nominee is a person selected by the depositor, who
will in the absence of or after the death of the depositor will be the owner of the
deposited money. Sujon attaches the passport size attested photos, and
photocopies of the national identity cards of his own and of his wife to the filled
out form. He gives it to Mr. Masud. Then Mr. Masud tells him to deposit
minimum 500 tk (this amount may be less or more and varies at different banks).
°0
According to the bank rules for opening an account within some time, Mr. 3

Money and Banking System 101
Masud gives an account number and a cheque book and a deposit book to Sujon.
Subsequently, using this account number Sujon can deposit cash, cheques, bank
drafts by the deposit book (moreover using online system money can be
deposited to the account number from inside as well as outside of the country).
Deposited money can be drawn by cheque and from ATM booth (where ATM
booth is available).

Nowadays computer and the internet are used in almost all the banks. So,
depositors can collect the list of the dates and amounts of the drawings and
deposited money (even can close their account if they wish). According to bank
rules, depositors can complete all activities about the transaction by using the
internet at present.
Like Sujon everybody can open any kind of bank account and maintain it by
depositing and drawing money according to their ability.
Task: Make a list of the continuous process of opening and maintaining a
bank account.
Yeey Somali Bank Limited ae
ee cvditccaeee ae nee ea
= Ce alt ston acer rege tee eos ete eye tere-ewr $ vite
i) Part of Application for opening a Bank Account from

102 Economics
7.5 Central Bank
Central Bank is such an institution that controls the whole banking system
situated at the top of the banking system and works as a guardian of money
market. Being under the government ownership and control it works for
circulating notes and coins, controlling loans, preserving the standard of
currency, creating and maintaining money market, and currency advisor and
banker of the government. Its main characteristic is that it is the most powerful
economic institution of the government. So its main aim is nots earning profit
rather preserving economic balance and the highest development and welfare of
the country.
Central bank is the national institution. There is one central bank in each and
every independent country. For example: Bangladesh Bank is the central bank of
Bangladesh, Reserve Bank of India is for India, Federal Reserve System is for
the USA, Bank of England is for England.

—— | :

Building of the Bank of England Federal Reserve Bank Building

The functions of Central Bank
The Central bank performs different types of important tasks as the guardian and
controller of money market. The main functions of the central bank are:
1. Circulation of note and currency Vx Sp 6
In some countries only central bank ; rE wer) a Cae
circulates notes and currency. This bank (GZ J Noir lf,
circulates notes as per the needs. Earlier, ?hitES —¥ se
according to the law, gold, silver or foreign [Rs Aihcg sian a4 a
currency had to be deposited. At the present AZ@ was —
time the supply of the home currency and its Ey igo ee) _ =
controlling of the price is dependent on the P27 7 “~~ x
principles of the central bank in the most Printing of paper Money 8
cases.

Money and Banking System 103
2. Bank of Government
The central bank deposits the revenue of the government from the different
sectors and pays the money to different sectors according to the direction of the
government. During the time of monitory crisis, it provides long and short term
loans to the government. It works as a representative of the government,
maintaining the communication with the international economic institution. It
plays a vital role in giving information and advice to the economic activities and
deciding principles of the government.
3. Bank of other banks
Central bank authorizes license for new banks and their (banks) branches. It
provides necessary directions and advices to the enlisted banks to be
administered properly. According to the banking law, the enlisted banks are to
preserve a certain amount of their deposits in the central bank. In case of
necessity the enlisted banks can take a loan from this deposited fund. In our
country, the commercial banks are to deposit 5% of their current and fixed
deposits according to the banking law of Bangladesh.
4, Controlling loans
Both paucity and excess of loan are counterproductive for the economic
development of a country. As the loans provided by the commercial banks are
included in the integral stock which influences the currency exchange and the
value of currency. Central bank takes different measures to control the inflation
and diffident of currency in the country.
5. The last money lender
The enlisted banks go for the loan from the central bank when they fail to
manage loans from other sources. Central bank lends money to the jeopardized
listed commercial banks according to the ratio of their deposits and bonds. For
this, the central bank is called the last money lender.
6. Determining and controlling exchange rate
~ Central bank determines and controls the exchange rate of the currency of a
S country in relation to the foreign currencies to bring stability and balance in the

104 Economics
foreign transactions such as controlling the exchange rate of dollar and euro
against taka. For the convenience of business, central bank purchases and sells
foreign currency and gold on behalf of the government to clench the exchange
rate well-adjusted.

7. Clearing house

The commercial banks transact cheques,

bank drafts, pay orders among themselves. fe __ —.

Subsequently, one bank is either a debtor or a <r hikes a

a creditor to the other and central bank [© 7 iy) ) he

preserves this record. This kind of debit or [ td vs > A ~

credit is paid or cleared from the fund that | \V Ye e

the enlisted commercial banks deposit in \ | %. = = A SS

the central bank. Thus, central bank J) * “\ P cage

functions as a clearing house for the a

commercials banks. Automatic Clearance House

Moreover, the central bank accomplishes

the following functions:

a) Provides training to develop the standard of the involved employees in the
enlisted commercial banks.

b) After a certain period of time, looks into the economic activities of enlisted
commercial banks to observe whether these activities are going properly or
not.

¢) Prepares and implements various laws and principles for the betterment of
the mass and to develop the banking system.

d) Helps to found branches of commercial banks both at home and abroad.

e) Conducts research, collects and preserves different economic records for the
convenience of the mass and for drawing up the official economic policy.

f) Takes measures for the development of the various aspects, such as
agriculture, industry, services (business, education, health).

Thus, the central bank contributes a lot to the entire socio-economic condition ,

preserving the stability in the economy. s

Money and Banking System 105
Task: Central Bank can preserve the economic stability of a country. Elucidate.
7.6 Banking System in Bangladesh
In our country, Bangladesh Bank acts as the official bank (bank of the
government) and the guardian of the monetary institutions. Commercial banks
are administered to take and preserve deposits from people and to lend money in
the necessary areas to make profits. On the other hand, specialized organizations
are directed for developing special areas and reducing poverty.
Chart of the banking system in Bangladesh:
Bangladesh Bank Bangladesh Agricultural Bank
Bangladesh Development Bank Ltd.
Bangladesh Cooperative Bank
; HSBC Bank
es Standard Chartard Bank | | meen Bank
Janata Bank Ltd, | | Pubali Bank Ltd. Habib, Bank
; Islami Bank Ltd. State Bank of India
Sonali Bank Ltd. | | po Bank Ltd.
Rupali Bank Ltd. | | City Bank Ltd.
Agrani Bank Ltd. | | National Bank Ltd.
Duch-Bangla Bank Ltd.
NCC Bank Ltd.
Uttora Bank Ltd. .
AB Bank Ltd. * Name of some Bais Antone Domestic
IFIC Bank Ltd. Foreign and Specialized Private
Prime Bank Ltd.
Forma-14, Economics Class 9-10

106 Economics
7.7 Role of Bangladesh Bank in Agricultural Development,
Industrialization and Self-Entrepreneurship
In this regard, the contributions of some banks are discussed below:
Bangladesh Bank
The name of the central bank of Bangladesh is Ta : xy
Bangladesh Bank. Bangladesh Bank was feos i eee
established after the independence with the | J Ke KN be,
"Bangladesh Bank Ordinance 1972" certified by §™ | . —_ z i
the then president. Since then this bank has been | = : ¥
leading currency system and the other banks in; \ & Sie
the country. It is noteworthy that at its outset it [7 AX" alls .
possessed all the properties of State Bank of [2 — d
Pakistan. Leading the economic and loan system Monogram (Bangladesh Bank)
to the right direction and maintaining stable
financial conditions through the agricultural development, industrialization, and
building scope of self-reliant employment of the country, Bangladesh Bank
contributes to the overall economic development and welfare of the people of
the country in the follwing way:
Bangladesh Bank lends loan on easy terms to the organizations that provide
agricultural loans. Acting directly, Bangladesh Bank conducts research and
prepares statistics for the development of agriculture.
For the sake of prompt industrialization in the country, Bangladesh Bank lends
money to the organizations that supply capital to the industrial organizations. It
also provides entrepreneurship encouraging loans.
In exchange for debt instrument the commercial banks carry out some important
tasks such as money lending, founding new banks, founding branches of
commercial and agricultural banks in undeveloped areas, ensuring the stock of
loan to facilitate loaning. In some special cases, the bank, of its own accord,
creates working opportunities for the unemployed young by providing loans on
easy terms.

Task: As a guardian of monetary system Bangladesh Bank plays important eo

role to the overall development of Bangladesh-elucidate. s

Money and Banking System 107
Commercial Banks
development of business, development of et Se
agriculture and industrialization of the country. On ___ 0. ayaa
the basis of ownership, the commercial banks can be Ses — re
categorized into two types: tip € 5 ae ES hee |
a) Governmental [ Ms rar
b) Non-governmental Commercial Bank in Agriculture & Industrial Sector
The contributions of the commercial banks are described below:
Agriculture is an important sector in Bangladesh. So the economic development
of Bangladesh largely depends on the development of agriculture. The majority
of the farmers of this country are poor. They need sufficient agriculture loan to
carry out farming activities. For the development of agriculture, the commercial
banks take active part in loan-sanctioning activities at different times declared
by the government. The commercial banks run different loan sanctioning
programs for promoting food production, standard seeds, fertilizers, pesticides,
deep tube wells and less-deep tube wells for irrigation and for establishing
cottage industry. At present, according to Bangladesh Bank, farmers get the
facility of opening bank accounts giving Tk 10 as deposit. As a result, the data
collection of all the farmers of Bangladesh becomes easier within a short time.
The commercial banks take the scattered individual savings as deposit from
different parts of the country. From this, the bank provides loans for the
construction and extension of small, medium and large scale industries. The
commercial banks provide enough loans under easy conditions for purchasing
taw materials for industry and modern machinery. Besides, the bank assists in
developing mills and factories, purchasing the shares of the new companies.
Commercial banks help in creating employment opportunity. At present, this
bank has started to provide loans against individual security for purchasing
rickshaws, vans, opening grocery shop, rice mill, wheat mill, etc. It is hoped that

co this will create employment opportunity for many people.

S

108 Economics
Task: Commercial banks are a powerful partner in the economic development

Bangladesh Krishi Bank

Bangladesh Krishi Bank has been established for promoting the dynamism of

agriculture, attaining self-reliance in agriculture and for the overall development

of agriculture. This bank has been established after the independence of the
country, according to Ordinance 1973 with the assets and liabilities of Pakistan

Krishi Bank. It is a state-owned and semi autonomous institution. The role of

Bangladesh Krishi Bank is discussed below:

Bangladesh Krishi Bank provides small, medium and large scale loans for

promoting production of the sectors promoting agriculture and production of the

sectors related to agriculture.

a. The majority of the farmers of our country are poor. So this bank provides
short-term loan for fulfilling the little requirements of the farmers, for
example, purchasing fertilizers, seeds, pesticides, ploughing land, weed-out,
threshing crops, harvest, etc. Generally, this loan is to be paid within 18
months.

b. This bank provides medium-scale loans for leveling land, setting up
semi-deep tube well, for buying cattle for ploughing land and purchasing
light agricultural machinery. Generally, this loan is to be paid from 18
months to 5 years.

c. Krishi Bank provides long-term loans for purchasing land, heavy machinery,
(e.g. tractor, harvester etc.), setting up deep tube well, constructing
warehouse, constructing coldstorage, digging canals for irrigation,
developing tea lands etc. This loan is to be paid from 5 years to 20 years.

This bank provides financial and technical assistance for establishing agriculture

based small and cottage industry. This bank also provides loans for raising

poultry, setting up sericulture, and pisciculture and helping the unemployed _

youth get the facility of self-employment. S

Money and Banking System 109
Bangladesh Krishi Bank. Explain.
Bangladesh Development Bank Limited
According to the decision of the government, the Vendors Agreement was
signed between the government and the Board of Directors of Bangladesh
Development Bank Limited on 31st December, 2009. Thus the two institutions -
Bangladsh Shilpo Bank and Bangladesh Shilporin Songstha- are unified as
Bangladesh Development Bank. So the assets, liabilities and workforce of these
two closed institutions have been handed over to the new institution. The role of
this bank is discussed below:
Generally this bank provides loan for the development or extension of industries
related to our country, for example. jute industry, leather industry, sugar
industry, fertilizer industry, etc. This bank gives priority to agriculture based
industry of the rural areas which is helpful for both production and development
of agriculture.
This bank provides long-term loans for introducing new industry, extension and
modernization of old industry in both public and private sectors. The maximum
timeline of repaying the loan of this bank is 20 years. It also provides short term
loan for the necessity of mills, factories and industries. It supplies entrepreneur's
free technical counseling and industrialization- related research, statistics and
information.
This bank provides different term-based loans in small and medium scale
industry with the aim of attaining self-reliance, promoting production and
employment. It delivers important counseling and assistance in establishing
small scale industry to make the women self-dependent. It gives investment
facilities and formulates the blueprint of industrial activities so that business
enterprises are taken privately.
Task: Write down the role of Bangladesh Development Bank Limited in
5 production and employment.

110 Economics
Grameen Bank
Grameen Bank is a specialized financial institution which has been established
with the aim of providing banking service to the landless, helpless male and
female, and the owner of less amount of land in the villages. This bank provides
micro-credit to the general people for production activities. Grameen Bank first
emerged in 1983 as a specialized financial institution. The role of this bank is
discussed below:
This bank gives loans to poor, landless and helpless farmers under easy
conditions and without any security. For the development of agriculture, it
provides loans in the sectors of vegetable cultivation, raising cows, pisciculture,
poultry farming, etc. As this bank gives loans under easy conditions, the farmers
need not take loans from local rich people under steadfast conditions with a high
rate of interest.
Grameen Bank provides loans as well as
supplies materials and required information to | ie Ny Wee ee ux "4
make the deprived section of the country \' i a. we - a
attached to local small scale and cottage \' \ Beene es ai: ae &
industry, for example, crafts of bamboo and \ AG Se Cg
cane, making biri, soap, cloths, sweet meats, | >|" @ ae ry
etc. Palliphone facility has been launched with Find ‘f + Xai) Bi i. 3
the technical support of Grameen Phone to Jag We fp PS
reach the facility of information technology to | e es a
the people of remote areas. q ‘Sq 4 £2 Fi
Grameen bank is the bank which is directed to [i . nS e. rime as
create employment opportunities and organize “ee WN Ng N=
the unemployed deprived group under Small und collage Indusiry
institutional structure. This bank provides the of Grameen Bank
beggars the opportunity of self-employment giving interest free loans. It
encourages women for job and helps them in flourishing their leadership
qualities. It gives Palliphone to the poor and helpless women as loan.
Rehabilitation for women is attempted after repaying the loan from its income.
Dividend is provided to the poor superior owners from its profit every year. 99
iJ
AQ

Money and Banking System 111
Task: The role of Grameen Bank in changing the luck of deprived people is
Cooperative Bank
Cooperative Bank is the bank which is formed and directed according to the
principles of cooperation. The objective of this bank is to provide loans with
little interest on the basis of mutual cooperation. Bangladesh Cooperative Bank
Limited is directed with the joint ownership of the government and the
cooperative section of the country. The cooperative institutions have 86% and
the government has 14% ownership of the share of this bank. The role of
cooperative bank is discussed below:
The bank provides agriculture loan to the members of cooperative society with
the aim of alleviating poverty, promoting food production, etc. The sectors of
loan are- agriculture, land, land development, Aaush, Aamon, Born cultivation,
cultivation of the crops and vegetables of winter season, different agricultural
instruments, seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, irrigation machines, tractors, etc.
There are three types of agriculture loan: short term for 6 months, medium term
for 2 years and long term for 5 years.
This bank provides finance in agriculture based industries which are organized
on the basis of cooperation and in construction industry. This bank undertakes
microcredit activities for the employment of the rural young male and female.
The cooperative bank is the partner of the project named "Akti Bari Akti
Khamar" undertaken by the government. It also provides finance for
employment in the sectors of pisciculture, raising animals, poultry farming,
processing and preservation of produced goods, etc. Thus this bank plays an
important role in both reducing unemployment and alleviating poverty.
self-reliance of the cooperative members.
2
8

112 Economics
Exercise
Short Questions
1. What do you mean by money?
2. What do you mean by commercial bank?
3. What do you mean by clearing house?
Descriptive Questions
1. Describe the functions of money.
2. Elucidate the functions of commercial bank.
3. State the tasks of central bank.
4. Mention the contributions of "Krishi Bank" in the development of the economy of
Bangladesh.
Multiple-Choice Questions
1) Which is the prime and preliminary task of Commercial Bank?
a. lending money b. taking deposit
c. transferring money d. constructing the means of exchange
2) Which coin can be transacted at any amount?
a. coin of TK. 2 b. Note of TK. 2
c. coin of TK. 5 d. Note of TK. 5
Read the following passage and answer questions 3 and 4.
Arif deposits his saved money in an organization. At the end of the year he
withdraws his deposited money with some additional money.
3. What is the name of the organization where Arif conducts his transaction?
a. Bangladesh Bank b. Shomobai Bank ~
c. Sonali Bank d. Grameen Bank ES

Money and Banking System 113

4. The contribution of this institution to the economy of the country is
i. raising capital.

ii. preserving the standard of coin.
iii. economic development.
Which of the following is correct?
a i b. iand ii
c. iand iii d. i, ii and iii

Creative Questions

1. Ratna is appointed in a financial institution. Her institution cannot provide
loan but acts as consultant for other financial institutions in the case of loan
sanctioning. On the other hand, her friend is engaged in another financial
institution. It deposits the savings of people as well as gives extra amount
against the deposits.

a. What is barter system?

b. Describe the function of money as the medium of savings.

c. Explain the nature of Ratna's institution.

d. Analyze the difference between Ratna's institution and her friend's.

2. Harun's wife badly needs a sari. But he has nothing but a goat. Harun took
the goat to a weaver and the weaver wants the goat in exchange for the sari.
But Harun does not agree to get a sari in exchange for a goat. This problem
is solved when a material is discovered and acceptable to everyone.

a. What is legal money?

b. What is meant by Clearing House?

c. Explain the reason of Harun's unwillingness to buy the sari from the weaver.

d. Analyze the role of the material acceptable to everyone in the light of your textbook.
Forma-15, Economics Class 9-10

Chapter 8
The Economy of Bangladesh
Ratan is a rich farmer. For a few years he has been using the modem technology
in farming which has increased the production. After spending the money in
household expenditures he saves the excess money. Last year he established a
small readymade garments factory which is conducted by his wife Jayanti. Lots
of female workers of his village work there. They have enrolled their only son
Roni in a good quality school. Roni is given treatment at the health complex of
the union according to the doctor's prescription when he becomes sick.
From the above discussion we get an overview of a certain sectors of
Bangladesh economy, such as agriculture, industry and service.
ee a oe cat Pel ® Gh Saee id —o of Ti ¥
ee ee ee Neg
ie
Saeae eee li) Ch lL De
by a Rc
After studying this chapter, we will be able to
e explain main characteristics of Bangladeshi economy.
e explain main sectors (agriculture, industry and service) of Bangladeshi
economy.
e analyze the comparative importance of the main sectors (agriculture,
industry and service) of Bangladeshi economy.
e identify the dependence of agriculture and manufacturing sectors on one
another.
e discuss sectorwise analysis of the data of the economy and use it
mathematically. S
e discuss the importance of various sectors through drawing graphs.

The Economy of Bangladesh 115
8.1 Characteristics of Bangladeshi Economy
Bangladesh was torn up due to 200 years of British reign and 24 years of
Pakistani rule. As a result, the development of Bangladesh economy did not take
place to a great extent. Moreover, the economic infrastructure was damaged due
to the long war of nine months in 1971. After the four decades of independence
there has been significant development in the economy of Bangladesh. But it is
still a developing country with lower-middle per capita income.
The main characteristics of Bangladeshi economy is given below:
1. Importance of Agriculture
Agriculture is an important sector of re ncaa
Bangladesh economy. But the production Wea UNG a Pas
capacity in agriculture of our country is on Bk ie wee er ote
very low, compared with that of the developed ou a) i ‘ ee
countries due to primitive methods, lack of aly why + i
good quality seeds, irrigation and (« Va < Tite a ee
agricultural loans, and for natural ce Mel bie am fi: a
calamities. But the situation is improving LURE aoa
day by day. Now there is more availability ee s ay Re 4 a Ne i
of good quality seeds, fertilizers, pesticides 729 ea ane Mik iD
and irrigation. Thus the production is also Agriculture
increasing. The share of agricultural sector (crops, fisheries, animal resource and
forestry) in the GDP for the fiscal year 2014-15 was almost 16%. 45.10% of the
total labor force is involved in agriculture (MES, 2010, BBS).
2. Projects for Industrialization t | ray a
The development process in industrialization P | * FE ay, a a |
in Bangladesh is very slow. So, it is oy 4 ey |
necessary to announce a new policy for “a. ¥ (Nee fie
industrialization to increase the rate of . tay (oe a =
development. National policy was declared at a) 2 a ~f
for this purpose in the year 2010. The aim of & a “gy oS ‘ )
this policy is to increase the employment, ~C ‘nn aaa: /
participation of women in industrialization §— at fo th 4}

so and reduce poverty. To achieve these goals a Sain x De) A

§ the government has taken some steps like to Eahoursayorking:in factory

116 Economics
reduce barriers on investment, to create tax free investment, to encourage private
investment, to ensure free flow of capital, to increase foreign investment, to
create markets abroad, and establish labour intensive industries. The benefits
from these projects can be seen now. In the fiscal year 2014-15 the share of
industry sector was 30.42%. 16.40% of the total labour force is involved in this
sector (employment survey-2010).
3. Rise in Per Capita Income
The per capita income in Bangladesh is low, compared to that of the developed
countries as the production of agriculture and industry is lower in this country,
population is high and opportunities of employment are low. In 2016 current rate
of the per capita income was 1466 US dollars and per capita GDP was 1384 US
dollars. Though the rate is slow but our per capita income is increasing.
4. Rise in Standard of Living
Due to low per capita income 31.50% people were living below the poverty line
in 2010. Though the progress is slow but the standard of living is increasing for
which the average life expectancy has increased to 70.7 years in 2016. 97.80%
people drink pure drinking water and the literacy rate is (age 7+) 62.3%.
5. Rise in Supply of Capital for Investment
Our savings is low due to low per capita income. Thus the investment or
accumulation of capital is also low. Currently the government has adopted many
encouraging policies to attract investors. For this reason domestic and foreign
investment is increasing slowly. In the fiscal year 2015-16 the total investment
was 29.38% of the GDP. Increase in investment increases the production of our
agriculture and industry sectors. It is helpful to reduce poverty in our country.
6. Food Deficiency and Malnutrition
Though it is an agriculture-based country, it has been suffering from food
deficiency and malnutrition for a long time. So, the government has given
highest importance to agriculture sector in order to make Bangladesh
self-sufficient in food production. For this reason, the use of good quality seeds, .,
Ss
N

The Economy of Bangladesh 117
fertilizers and technology has increased in the production over the past few
years. In the fiscal year 2014-15 a total of 384.19 lakh metric ton food grain was
produced.
7. Decrease in Population Growth
Bangladesh is an over-populated country. The total population of this country is
14 crore 97 lakh 72 thousand 364 (according to the estimate of the year 2011).
The population density is 1015 people per square feet and the population growth
is 1.37%, which was 1.48% in year 2001. Though population is decreasing by
degrees, it is a very small country in area and thus it is the world's 9th most
populated country. In 2017, our population is approximately 16 crores and the
total area is about 1,44,000 square kilometers. Accordingly, the present density
of population is 1138 persons living in per square kilometer.
8. High Unemployment '
In our country savings is low compared = ; bi tl ae nS
with population. Thus the accumulation of 2) .eapl=ay)Sosg ies
capital is low. Unemployment is increasing | ] PLE = al ae
as there is scarcity of capital which reduces (ee Pee pee tees E
employment opportunity in agriculture and =... a
industry sectors. - Dhaka EPZ
But domestic and foreign investment is increasing in Export Processing Zone
(EPZ). To attract the foreign investment, various encouraging policies have been
taken which are increasing foreign investment and the economy is in progress.
Thus we can hope that the unemployment problem will be reduced in near
future. (25 lakh people of our total population were unemployed in 2014-15).
9. Increase in the Use of Natural and Human Resources
Natural resources are the basic elements in socio-economic development and in
raising the standards of living. Currently the use and detection of these natural
resources have increased. The combined contribution (approximate) of natural

«©

S gases, unrefined petroleum and coal and other mineral resources was 1.68% in

118 Economics
the fiscal year 2014-15. 75% use of the

fuel comes from natural gases. Tillnow ED sigh
total 25 gas fields have been discovered e gh eh gl Sa , ee
from which 20 gas fields are being used a fF; a Nee fy sf

to extract gases through 101 wells. Gas | an! ees Na, a a Ki
is mostly used in the production of [ ga» yee | iy i oi Me
electricity. To ensure the fuel security # ek
the refining capacity of Eastern gpa) Se Bee mop Wi te iayace
Refinery is being increased and SPM he eg me 9 a Ae:
(Single Point Mooring) project has ~~

started to deport refined and unrefined Coal Mine

fuel in the deep sea. The total storage of our 5 coal mines (Khalashpir of Rang-
pur, Barapukuria of Dinajpur, Fulbaria and Dighipara and Jamalganj ofBogra) is
almost 2700 million tons. 65% of the extracted coal is used in Barapukuria
power station to produce electricity.

Various public and private projects are in progress for the development of
human resources. Among these, family planning, women and children, social
welfare, youth and sports development, culture, labor and employment, etc. are
important.

10. Deficit in Foreign Trade

To meet the various needs and development of our mass population we have to
spend lots of money to import various products which is much higher than our
export earnings. For this reason, there is an imbalance in the trade. Currently our
export has increased thus the trade deficit is decreasing. Besides, there has been
a surplus after removing deficit because of the foreign remittance.

11. Dependence on Foreign Aid

It is not possible to collect all the money we require for the economic
development from within the country. So, we have to depend on foreign aids.
But the good thing is the dependency on foreign aid is decreasing. Because of s

The Economy of Bangladesh 119
inadequacy, uncertainty and lengthy process of these aids, our development
process is hampered. So, the dependence on internal sources is increasing which
can be identified as a positive advancement.
12. Development of Economic and Social Infrastructure
To increase the production, components of production and proper distribution of
products in the market and to maintain the stability in price level, the economic
infrastructure such as roads, railway and naval system, electricity and
telecommunication system play a vital role. The government has taken various
steps to improve these infrastructures. Constructing Padma Bridge, 26 kilometer
long elevated expressway to reduce traffic jam, safe naval system, development
of electricity sector and setting up modern Tyee” |. de tn
telecommunication system through the = a Pros ie we
establishment second submarine cable are y C | Bae i,
some important projects under taken by | i M\\ In Rd
the government. Education, training, His * eo
research, public health, —_ cultural BY Wi Se
development, ethical views play an Le ; ; S = }
important role in the development of SE On \\\\\\" Ss |]!
human resources. Current government has CA w. : \\ 1
announced education policy 2010 to Elevated Expressway
improve the quality of education and for the development of public health
combined health, population and nutrition development sector would be in effect
throughout the year 2011-16.
13. Privatization Programmes
Though our economy is a mixed economy, the government has given importance
to privatization to maintain a free market economy for the development of our
economy in all respects. For this purpose the government has taken various
steps. After the establishment of Privatization Board (now Privatization
Commission) in 1993, a total of 77 institutions have been privatized till June
2012. Among these 56 institutions were privatized by direct selling and 21

ES institutions by selling shares.

N

120 Economics
From the above discussion, we can say that the economic condition of
Bangladesh has developed to a large extent in comparison to the past. For
economic development various kinds of projects are being taken and
implemented. Through the expansion of education and technology, there is an
increase in technologically skilled labor and manufacturer group. These people
play an important role in increasing the production of the country and removing
social superstition through self-employment but lack of good governance and
increasing of inequality of income and resources. The possibility of
development of Bangladesh is being hampered in some sectors.
Task: What steps should be taken on the basis of current context for the
economic development of Bangladesh?
8.2 Main Sectors of Bangladesh Economy
The branches or sections of an economy of a country conduct economic
activities within its own region and on the basis of their combined contributions
an economy is formed. These branches or sections of an economy are called the
economic sectors.
Main Three Sectors of Bangladesh Economy
Agriculture Sector Industry Scrtor Service Sector
Agriculture Sector
Agriculture is the work that involves cultivation, sowing seeds, nurturing of
grains-trees, collecting crops and then storing, protecting and marketing these
crops. Apart from growing crops agriculture sector also includes fisheries, bee
breeding, raising livestock and forestry.
Pisciculture Livestock Sundorbans N

The Economy of Bangladesh 121
The introduction of sub-sectors of agriculture sector is given below:

A. Food Grains and Vegetables

Farmers of our country produce rice, wheat, jute, pulses, sugarcane, tobacco, tea,
oilseeds etc. among food grains and potato, bean, gourd, peas, parble, brinjals,
balsam apple, etc. among vegetables.

B. Animal Resources

In our country poultry, cows, goats, lambs, buffalos, horses, pigeons and other
birds are raised for both domestic and business purposes. Meat, milk, egg,
feathers and skins etc. of these animals are included in this sector.

C. Forestry

Only 17% of our country's land is covered with forests, whereas 25% of a
country should be covered with forests. In these forests bamboo, cane, shal,
shegun, shundori, goran, geowa, gamari, korai, kuchi and keora. trees can be
found. We get wood, rubber, glue, shan, oil, candles and honey from these trees.
D. Fish Resources

Various types of fish and fish products are obtained from the pond, river, haor
and ocean. These are divided into two groups, for example: fresh water fish and
sea fish. Fresh water fishes are- Ruhi, Chital, Koi, Shing, Magur, etc. and sea
fishes are- Rupchanda, Vetki, Loitya, etc. The fishery sector being huge
developed recently. The government has given this sector a seperate dignity.
Contribution of agriculture sector in GDP is given below:

The economic growth of Bangladesh economy is dependent on agriculture
sector to a great extent. The development of rural economy, food security that is
self-sufficiency in food, poverty reduction, development of standard of living,
and increase in employment all are directly related to the development of
agriculture. Thus the government is trying everything for the development of the
agriculture sector. For this purpose, these steps are taken for the development
and expansion of technologies, ensuring that every single person gets required
raw materials of agricultural products, easy loans, agro-insurance and subsidy in
agriculture etc. steps are taken. A total of 75% of our population is directly or
Forma-16, Economics Class 9-10

122 Economics
indirectly dependent on agriculture. A total of 381.74 lakh metric tons of food
grains was produced in the year 2013-14. Total 47.5% of the labor force is
employed in agriculture. Shan, golpata, straw, bamboo cane, and wood from
agriculture are used as fuel supply, furniture and employment. On the other hand
protein requirement of the people, raw material for industries and creating the
market for industrial products etc. are playing a vital role in the economic
development.
Task: The role of agriculture in the development of the Bangladeshi economy
is highly significant. Explain.
Sector/Sub-sector 2012-13 2014-2015
1. Agriculture and Forestry 13.09 12.32
a. Food Grains and Vegetables 9.49 8.87
b. Live stock 1.84 1.73
c. Forestry 1.76 1.72
Thus, in the fiscal years 2012-13 and 2014-15 the contribution of agriculture
sector in the GDP was 13.09% and 12.32% respectively. Main export products
of the agriculture sector are frozen foods, raw jute, jute-products and tea. The
growth of overall rate agriculture sector of our country is given below:
Sector/Sub-sector 2012-13 2014-2015
1. Agriculture and Forestry 1.47 2.45
a. Food Grains and Vegetable 0.59 1.83
b. Live stock 2.74 3.08
c. Forestry 5.04 5.08
ES

The Economy of Bangladesh 123
Industry Sector
The conversion of natural resources or raw materials or primary materials into
secondary or final goods through certain processes in the factory is called
industry.
In calculating the national income of Bangladesh, industry sector includes
minerals, manufacturing, electricity, gas and water supply, and construction
among the 15 sectors.
eo Vis a
‘4 ese ‘yy tn | “i :
awe em ea) | jel 4 aie / He i % (amen 5,
Gas Field Metro Railway Ship Industry
The short introduction to industry sector is given below:
1. Minerals and mining
The sub-sectors of this sectors are-
a) Natural gases and unrefined oil
b) Other minerals and mining (Coal, Limestone, Chinaclay, Sulfur, Chalk,
Silica, Bronze etc.)
2. Industry (manufacturing)
a) Large and Medium Industries: Large and medium industries are separately
mentioned below:
Garments industry, sugar industry, fertilizer industry, cement industry, ship
industry, jute industry, paper industry, etc are included in large industries.
e5
=

124 Economics
Leather industry, readymade garments industry, cigarette industry, plastic
industry and hosiery industry are the renowned medium industries of
Bangladesh.
b) Small Industry: Small industry is divided into 2 groups as below:
Industries that produce small parts of equipment such as match industry, wooden
industry, soap industry, cosmetics industry, vehicle servicing and repairing
industry etc. are included in small industry.

Silk, bamboo, cane, pital (brass) and kasa (white brass), weaving industry and
mrit shilpo are renowned cottage industries.
3. Electricity, Gas and Water: The subsectors of this sectors are three and

they are: (a) Electricity, (b) Gas and (c) Water
4. Construction Industry: Construction of bridges, roads, personal and
business, all types of housing are included here.

Industry sector is the combination of all four sectors mentioned above.
The contribution to industry sector was 29% of the GDP in the fiscal year
2012-13. For the year 2013-14 it is estimated to be 29.61% (provisional estimate
of BBS).

Overall growth of industry sector in GDP is listed below:

3. Electricity, gas and water resources

29
S

The Economy of Bangladesh 125

Bangladesh has established Export Processing

Zone (EPZ) for socio-economic development, “ dliacterz

poverty reduction, and quick expansion of “ a Se

industry sector. It has attracted many domestic ee

and foreign investors who have helped the ae >< ae

expansion of industry sector. ™ +e mital al

Wy - Ta G fia-EPZ

Till December 2012 a total of 412 industrial joorErZ

institutes are involved in production in 8 EPZs Wie p

[Chittagong, Dhaka, Mongla, Comilla, Ishwardi, ss fh ,

Uttara (Nilfamary), Adamji and Karnafuli]. _ kamephui

A total of 350263 people are employed here. It Regionals EPZ

has exported products that worth 4210.80 US dollar.

The government has announced industrial policy 2010 to speed up the progress

im industrial sector. The main purpose of this policy is to create employment,

involve women in the main stream of industrialization, reduce poverty and the

expand small and cottage industries. According to vision 2021 the industry

sector will emerge as a strong sector within year 2021 where its contribution to

the total GDP will be 40% and contribution to the industrial employment will be

25%.

In agriculture, industry, transport, household, service sectors, demands for

electricity, gas, oil and other natural resources are increasing day by day. For this

reason the government has taken various long term plans in sector. The

government has taken steps to include extra 14,773 megawatt electricity to the

national grid by the year 2010-16. The government is determined to ensure

electricity for everyone in the country within 2021. In the total use of our fuel

75% comes from the natural gases. Gas is mostly used in the production of

electricity. Gas is used as the raw material for the production of chemical

fertilizers, and factories, transport and households use it as fuel.

Limestone is used in the production of cement, glass, soap, bleaching powder

etc; chinaclay is used in the production of crockery sanitation and products;
5

126 Keonomica
silica in colors and chemical products; sulfur in gunpowder, matches and
Tefining oil. It is due to increase m investment for infrastructural development,
growth rate has increased in construction sector.
From the above discussion, it can be said that with development of overall
industry sector, it ia possible to increase national income, and per capita income,
to increase standard of living, to reduce trade deficit and dependency on others.
Task: The t of our country is possible through the overell
Service Sector
The non-material services that are produced through economic activities ic.
those activities are not visible as converted raw materials but they satisfy human
demand having an exchange value are called Sevice. Service sector provides a
service, which is not an actual product and could not be held in our hand but it
cen satisfy our needs and it also has an exchange value.
Snes aa ¢ — TVVTTTY VTE
f : : itn La “25 a i
ai A = oO) 3a est a
) p A i - Pe oe ; OY * Pe
In Bangladesh, wholesale and retail trades, hotels and restaurants, transport,
These services are provided to general people in exchange for money and people
buy these to meet their needs, As in other countries service sector is the single
largest sector in our economy. In the fiseal year 2012-13 the contribution of
service sector is 54%. =

The Economy of Bangladesh 127
The contribution of the sectors that are included in the overall service sector in
the GDP is given below:
1. Wholesale and retail trade 14.08
2. Hotel and restaurant
3. Transport, storage and communication 11.43
4. Financial intermediation
5. Real estate, renting and other business activities
6. Public administration and defense
9. Community, social and personal services
From the above list it can be seen that wholesale and retail trade has the highest
contribution and the second highest is transport, storage and communication
sector and sub-sectors of this sector are given below:
a) Land Transport
It includes roads and railway system. According to the estimate of 2012 the road
includes national highway of 3570 kilometer, regional roads of 4323 kilometer
and 13678 kilometer long district roads. The length of railway is 2877 kilometer
(broad gauge 659 km, dual gauge 375 km and meter gauge 1843 km).
b) Water Transport
Our main sea port is Chittagong. 97% of our export-import is conducted through
this port and our second sea port is Mongla. Our internal naval transport
corporation gives services to people through 188 water vehicles that include
ferry service, passenger service, cargo service and ship repairing service etc.
©
S

128 Economics
c) Air Transport
The authority of private airways is conducting 3 international and 7 internal
airports. There are also 2 STOL (Short Take Off and Landing) posts in use.
d) Post and Telecommunication
Bangladesh Telecommunication Company Limited (BTCL) is conducting
various projects for modernization, development and expansion of our
telecommunication system. The number of customers has increased after the
establishment of Bangladesh Telecommunication Regulatory Commission
(BTRC) since 2002. Number of customers has exceeded 5.47 crore in March
2011.
Postal department is at service through 9,886 post offices over the country. From
this sub-sector the growth rate has been 9.67% for the fiscal year 2012-13.
Sector-wise growth rate of overall service sector in the GDP is given below:
3. Transport, storage and communication
4. Financial intermediation 14.76
5. Real estate, renting and other business activities
6. Public administration and defense
a
9. Community, social and personal services
Government has taken different initiatives for the development of this sector.
Service sector plays an important role in raising the living standard of people,
public protection, marketing of goods, and in the development of healthy trained
and educated human resource and self-employment.
°9
S
AQ

The Economy of Bangladesh 129
Task: What steps do you think should be taken for the development of service
8.3 Relative Importance of Various Sectors
Our economy has 15 sectors in the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) on the basis
of production. These sectors are divided into 3 bigger sectors such as agriculture,
industry and service sector. In the context of Bangladesh agriculture is the main
component of growth and economic development as our economic infrastructure
evolves around agriculture. Ensuring food security, poverty reduction,
development of standard of living, increase in employment of this huge
population- all are directly related to the progress of agriculture. But dependency
on agriculture is not a sign of stable economy, because there is always an
uncertainty in the production every year due to flood, cyclone, tsunami, drought,
many other natural calamities. Therefore, it is required to establish industry
based economy facing the challenges of free market and globalization. Because
modernization of agriculture, efficient use of natural resources, less dependency
on foreign countries, earning more foreign currencies and development to a
strong defense system- all are possible through industrialization. Along with the
development of agriculture and industry through the various projects of overall
service sectors, for example, generating educated and trained human resources,
development women and children, youth development, sports development,
infrastructure development, the development of information
technology achievement of vision 2021 is possible which will ascertain an
economically stronger golden Bangla.
To implement this purpose and to achieve sustainable growth in agriculture the
government has taken various steps such as granting more subsidies, ensuring
continuous electricity for connection for irrigation, increasing supply of loans,
inventing new seeds that can cope with unfavorable weather and saline water
and promoting industry-based agriculture. Production in industry has increased
due to the increase in investment in electricity and other infrastructural sectors.
Almost all the sectors under overall service sector for maintaining some growth
rate. The growth rate of this sector has reached a satisfactory stage.
Forma-17, Economics Class 9-10

130 Economics
Growth rate of GDP is shown below through the bar diagram:
S Diagram 2.1 : Large sector wise GDP growth inconstat price (Base yeat : 2005-2006)
10.00 = a
8.00 ES a =oe ae Re x a
er hl EP FEY)
Basin erdi dr prpere
Pee eT
"ge gw gh? go gw or gor go
@ Agriculure wm Industry Service ™ GDP
The periodical growth of the years 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 has been
presented in the above bar chart. In the bar chart it has been shown that the rate
of GDP was 6.01% in the fiscal year 2012-13, 6.06% was in 2013-14 and 6.55%
in 2014-15 i.e. though it is slow, the rate of our GDP is increasing.
The main three sectors— agriculture, industry and service— have contributed to
the development of GDP. The information of the rate and the GDP has been
presented in the above bar chart. The growth rate of the agriculture sector was
respectively 2.46%, 4.37% and 3.33%. Similarly the growth rate of the industry
sector was respectively 3.64%, 8.16% and 9.67%. The growth rate of the service
sector was respectively 5.51%, 5.62% and 5.80%. Therefore, it is seen that the
high growth rate based on overall industry sector is leading to the growth rate of
our GDP recently.
The relative picture of the growth rate and the three years- 2012-13, 2013-14 and
2014-15 has been presented in the list below:
The sector wise contribution rate to the GDP on the basis of of the fiscal year
2000-06 in percentage: The growth rate of the service sector was respectively
5.5%, 5.62% and 5.80%.
S

The Economy of Bangladesh 131

Overall Sectors 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
16.77 16.50 16.01
29.00 29.55 30.42
54.23 53.95 53.57
ee
It is understood from the list that the service sector mainly has contributed to our
GDP in general (about 54%).

Task: Explain the contribution of agriculture, industry and service sector on

the basis of data that are easy to find locally.

8.4 Dependency of Agriculture and Industry Sectors on Each Other
Ramiz is a rich farmer. He produces more rice in his land by using seeds that
give high return, irrigation through deep tube wells and using required organic
fertilizers. He supplies the rice in the market which he keeps in the sacks made
of jute. Many people buy these to satisfy their food requirement.
From the above we can say that the industry sector supplies the equipments and
fertilizers for the development and modernisation of agriculture. Similarly raw
materials come from agriculture sector for the expansion of industry.

se tel 4 i Na in E. = tas
Se, gk corres 1 Pera <i. cae rhs Cl ht em =o |

Agriculture Based Industry (Sugar Industry) Industry Based Agriculture
2 Dependency of agriculture and industry sectors on one another is discussed
8 below:

132 Economics
Most of our industries are agriculture based. The main industries of our country
are jute, tea, leather, sugar and paper industries and all of these are dependent on
agriculture for the supply of raw materials. For this reason, region based
industries have been developed, for example, jute industry in Dhaka and
Narayanganj; tea industry in Chittagong and Sylhet; sugar industry in North
Bengal. With the expansion of these industries the production in agriculture will
increase due to the increased demand of raw materials and farmers will get
proper price for their products. This will increase the income and standard of
living of the farmers. Savings and accumulation of capital will increase as the
income of the people will increase and thus more investment will be possible in
the industrial sector.
In our country the base of small industries is agriculture. Bamboo and cane
produced in agriculture are used as raw materials for the cottage industries. On
the other hand the equipments for cultivation in agriculture, fertilizers,
pesticides, medicines, etc are produced in industries. Thus agriculture plays an
important role in marketing the industrial products. As the purchasing capacity
power of the farmers increases, the demand for other industrial products also
increases which helps the expansion of industrial sector. It is possible to achieve
self sufficieny in producing food grains through the modernisation agriculture.
The cost of import will be saved and the saved money can be used for the
development of industry.
From the above discussion it can be said that our agriculture and industry sector
are dependent on one another and complement for each other. Thus the
development in both sectors together is necessary for the economic
development, self-sufficiency in food and self-reliance of our country.
other.
The Source of all information of this chapter: Bangladesh Economic Review 2016.
ES
ES

The Economy of Bangladesh 133
Exercise
Short Questions
1. What are the characteristics of Bangladeshi economy?
2. What are the sub-sectors of agriculture?
3. Make a list of sub-sectors of agriculture based on examples.
Descriptive Questions
1. Explain the characteristics of Bangladeshi economy.
2. Discuss the relative importance of agriculture, industry and service sectors
of Bangladesh economy.
3. Explain the interdependency of agriculture and industrial sectors.
Multiple Choice Questions
1, What percentage of the total labor force is involved in agriculture?
a. 19.92% b. 30.30%
c. 43.60% d. 47.50%
2. The purpose of Bangladesh government to announce the Industrial Policy 2010 is to
increase
i. per capita income.
ii. women's participation in industry.
iii. investment by increasing tax.
Which of the following is true?
a. iand ii b. iand iii
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
Read the following passage and answer the question number 3 and 4.
Moti lives in a remote area with his family. There is no electricity and gas.
Everybody in the family lives on the packets they produce.
3. Which sector of industry includes the activity of Moti and his family?
a. large b. medium
x c. small d. cottage
=

134 Economics
4. For the development of manufacturers like Moti
a. loans on easy conditions should be given.
b. use of foreign goods should be reduced.
c. training should be provided.
Which of the following is true?
a. i b. ii
c. iii d. i, ii and iii
Creative Questions
1. Two sectors of the economy ,
cai ail Ss 2% _ — Bis “ a
A. Farmer was cutting jute in the field B, jute made bags
a. What is industry?
b. Why is the rate of capital accumulation low in our country?
c. How is economic growth dependent on the development of sector 'A'?
d. Sectors 'A' and 'B' complement each other- explain.
Fo
8

Chapter Nine
Important Economic Issues in Bangladesh

Bangladesh is a low middle-income developing country. There lies a huge
potential to develop. This development is possible through high growth rate,
poverty alleviation, equal distribution, development of human resources and
good governance.
- seie Pat fy) ike Z e POR api e fi pe 4: dhe ae x aa ee
Paes hal SE, “itn cual , ee sirletiaingte *) ) mney
After studying this chapter, we will be able to

e explain the relationship between economic growth and development.

e explain the characteristics of developed, less developed and developing countries.

e identify the stages of development of Bangladesh economy.

e makea list of obstacles to economic development of Bangladesh.

e explain the importance of development projects run by Bangladesh government.

e explain the importance of development projects run by non-government

Organizations for national development.

e explain the type, reasons and ways of reducing of poverty in Bangladesh.

e analyse the nature of unemployment of Bangladesh and the way to remove it.

e explain the concept of human resources.

bac)
Se explain the way in which the population of a nation can become its asset.

136 Economics

9.1 Economic Growth and Development

Though it seems the concepts of economic development and growth are the

same, they are not. There is a basic difference between these two words.

Economic Growth

In a particular time, the rate of increase of the total market value of the

produced goods and services of a country is called economic growth.

Generally, the annual rate of increase of GDP is known as economic growth.

Economic growth can be measured by the rate of increase of per capita income.

Economic Development

Economic development does not mean only economic growth. As a result of

economic development, people’s per capita income increases also. There occurs

qualitative change in economy such as the increase of people’s consumption,

increase of employment and overall development through the development of

technology.

So, for economic growth, only the increase in total national income is enough.

And when economic development occurs, it must be understood that there has

been a qualitative change in growth along with economic condition. For this

we can write, Economic development = Economic growth + Qualitative

changes in economy.

Task: Distinguish between growth and development.

9.2 Characteristics of Developed, Least Developed and Developing

Countries

Developed Country: The country whose economic development happens

which is sustained for a longtime is called a developed country. The standard of

living of the people of these countries is very high.

Least Developed Country: According to professor Ragnar Nurkse,

least developed countries are countries whose capital is less than their human

resources and natural resources. The people in these countries lead a poor life. .
S
AQ

Important Economic Issues in Bangladesh 137
Developing Country: The countries where per capita real income is less
than that of the developed countries but where a positive change is
happening in development indicators, are called developing countries. The per
capita income of these countries are increasing and their standard of living is
gradually increasing. They are advancing from low income to middle income
and from middle income to high income.

There are different characteristics for developed, least developed and

developing countries. Though the characteristics of least developed and

developing countries seem almost the same, they have different characteristics
from anticipatory perspectives.

Characteristics of Developed Countries

The characteristics of developed countries are given below:

1. Land and Natural Resources: Developed countries are enriched with
sufficient natural resources. These countries ensure the proper use and
protection of land and natural resources. Developed countries like the
United States, Japan, European countries are ruling the modern world
through the efficient use and protection of natural resources.

2. Capital: In the developed countries the supply of capital is sufficient. In
this economy capital is created through savings.

3. Skilled Manpower: The requirement of skilled manpower is a must for the
economic development of any country. Even if a country is rich in natural
resources, capital etc., it cannot be economically developed if it lacks
skilled manpower. Developed countries keep a special eye on the
development of skilled manpower. Skilled manpower can be built up
through standard education, training and research.

4. High Average Life Expectancy: The average age of the people of
developed countries is generally more because of advanced facilities of
health services.

Forma-18, Economics Class 9-10

138 Economics

5. Technical Knowledge: The production capacity of the workers in
developed countries has increased a lot and the main reason for this
increase is the development of technical knowledge. A county that has more
technical knowledge is more developed. People in developed countries
control nature through improved technical knowledge and get things that
are desired from nature.

6. Political Stability: Political stability is the prime requirement for the
economic development. Economic development is restrained in those
countries that do not have political stability. Political stability being
prevalent in the developed countries, economic development is possible i.e.
inspite of the change of the government. The contribution of economic
policy, plan and good governance remain stable.

7. Developed Infrastructural and Transportation System: More
production and development are possible where transportation systems are
more developed because the development of transportation system reduces
production cost and increases investment. Thus production increases.

Task: Make a list of characteristics of developed countries.

9.2.2 Characteristics of Least Developed Countries

Most of the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America are less developed. Most

of the people of the world live in these countries. The characteristics of least

developed countries are given below:

1. Less Productive Agricultural Sector: Most of the people in less
developed countries live in the rural areas. They are directly or indirectly
telated to agricultural production and dependent on agriculture. The
production procedure and technologies related to agriculture are primitive.

2. Agriculture Based Economy: A big portion of national income of these
countries comes from agriculture.

20
Ss
AQ

Important Economic Issues in Bangladesh 139

3. Unemployment: Since the economy of less developed countries is
agriculture based, disguised and seasonal unemployment problems are
severely noticed there.

4. Low Per Capita Income: Per capita income and savings are low in least
developed countries. For this reason investment and production are also
low.

5. Vicious Cycle of Poverty: In least developed countries income is low since
the production is low. It leads to low savings. Investment is low because
savings are low. Thus there is shortage of capital. Here the production
decreases. This situation is called the vicious cycle of poverty. Because of
this cycle the development process in least developed countries is slower.

6. High Population: In most of the least developed countries the population
is high and per capita income is low. Food, clothes, shelter, education,
transport, treatment and employment cannot be provided properly in least
developed countries due to high population.

7, Use of Land and Natural Resources: Least developed countries cannot
ensure efficient use of land and resources through the development of
technologies and methods. Therefore, economic development does not get
flow.

8. Inefficient Communication and Transportation System: The
communication and transportation systems in less developed countries
are inefficient. So, there exist the problems of product trans-shipment.
Production cost increases. Entrepreneurs are not interested in
investment.

9. Imbalanced Trade: The least developed countries are not developed in
manufacturing sector. Thus they have to export agricultural goods, raw
materials, primary goods and import manufactured goods. Agricultural
raw materials that are low in price are exported and the same products are

26 imported at high price when they are turned into manufacturing goods.
8 For this reason there is an imbalance in trade.

140 Economics
10. Weak Manufacturing structure: In less developed countries
manufacturing structure is primitive and they lack high capital based
industries. In this weak structure of manufacturing industries, the
employment is low and the skills of workers are also low.
Task: Compare an underdeveloped country with developed country.

Characteristics of Developing Countries

Some important characteristics of developing countries are given below:

1. Agro-based Economy: Most of the people are directly or indirectly
dependent on agriculture. A remarkable part of labour force is engaged
in agriculture. In agriculture primitive methods are used in the small
farms but development of modern technology is noticed here also. There is
always a disturbance from flood, drought and natural calamities.

2. Per Capita Income: The per capita income in developing countries is lower
than that of developed countries but more than less developed countries. So
the standard of living is not so high.

3. Incomplete Utilization of Natural Resources: Though most of the
developing countries have a lot of natural resources, they are not being
completely utilized.

4. Shortage of Capital: Per capita income in developing countries is low. So
savings is also low. Low savings creates problem in the formation of capital.

5. Primary goods producing country: Developing countries mainly
produce primary goods and use labour intensive technologies. Primary
goods mean the raw-materials of any industry. i.e. jute, leather, etc.

6. Development of Industries: In the developing countries, industries are in
the primary phase but the development of import based on labour intensive
industries are noticed some places.

7. Deficit in Foreign Trade: Every year in developing countries import
expenditure exceeds the exports earnings. For this reason these countries %
have to face trade deficit every year. &

Important Economic Issues in Bangladesh 141

8. Lack of Entrepreneur: Most of the products in developing countries are
from agriculture. The instability in the prices of these products is high.
This creates risk for the investors. As a result, development is hampered
due to lack of domestic and foreign entrepreneurs.

9. Weak Economic Infrastructure: Economic infrastructure like
communication and transportation, electricity bank, insurance etc. is
insufficient.

10. Dependency on Foreign Aid: The structural development of developing
countries depends mostly on foreign aids.

Task: Identify the type of Bangladesh economy.

9.3 Obstacles to Economic Development of Bangladesh

Because of many socio-economic and political reasons, developing counties like

Bangladesh cannot prosper quickly.

1. Dependency on Agriculture: Though the economy of Bangladesh
mostly depends on agriculture, its production capacity is low. Despite the
development in Bangladesh agriculture being necessary, its advancement is
slow.

2. Underdeveloped Agricultural System: The agricultural system in
Bangladesh is underdeveloped. The use of modern equipment in
agriculture is limited. And there is instability in the price of agricultural
products.

3. Lack of Capital: Since the per capita income in Bangladesh is low, rate of
raising savings and capital is also low. As a result it is not possible to
invest as much as is needed for quick development.

4. Lack of entrepreneur: Entrepreneurs are are main point for economic
development. In Bangladesh there is a lack of entrepreneurs who are

2 efficient, experienced and ready to take risk. Due to lack of entrepreneur
& obtained savings and capital are used less in the production section. And for

142 Economics
political and economical instability entrepreneurs are not ready to take
risks and do not come forward as the environment is not investment
friendly. Because of the interest tp foreign countries a good amount of
capital goes out also.

5. High Population: Bangladesh is a country of high population. It is not
being possible to use this population in production and work completely.
So a big portion of national income is used for this portion of population
which creates obstacles in development.

6. Vicious Cycle of Poverty: One of the main obstacles in the development of
Bangladesh economy is the vicious cycle of poverty. According to
Professor Narks, "A country is poor because it is poor." Low production,
low income, low demand and savings, low investment and low capital are
called the vicious cycle of poverty.

7. Political Instability: In Bangladesh there is political uncertainty and
instability. It is not favourable for domestic and foreign investment. Not
only this, the long term development plan is also hampered by this.

8. Dependency on Foreign Aid: The economy of Bangladesh is dependent
on foreign trade and relationship. It faces obstacles in trade for
imbalanced competition of developed countries and various conditions.
On the other hand dependency on foreign aid and investment on
agriculture, manufacturing and business create obstacles in the
development of self-reliant Bangladesh. But because of recent increase in
exportation of garments and huge remittance. The dependency on foreign
aid of Bangladesh is on decrease.

9. Weak Marketing: Weak marketing exists everywhere in Bangladesh.
Market price is not profitable for producer due to lack of awareness,
weakness in communication and transport system, and lack of fund. The
marketing system has not been yet developed in a developing country like
Bangladesh. The market price for the produces does not bring benefit «
because of the mischievousness of the middle interest. g

Important Economic Issues in Bangladesh 143
10. Obstacles in Application of Technology: Modem technologies cannot be
used in production due to lack of modem technology, costly imported
technologies and risks in implementation.
Task: Make a list of main obstacles in economic development of a
developing country like Bangladesh.

9.4 Development Programmes of Non-government Organisations

Non-government organizations mainly work for reducing poverty. Their work

increases in the time of natural calamities. In Bangladesh many non-government

organizations (NGOs) are working to reduce poverty by giving small loans.

Many rural foundations, banks and NGOs are working to help the government in

fulfilling its development plans. Main NGOs of Bangladesh are BRAC, ASHA,

Proshika, Shakti Foundation, Shwanirvar Bangladesh, TMSS, Karitas, Society

for Social Service (SFSS) and Bangladesh Bureau.

1. BRAC (Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee) : Established in
1972, BRAC is the largest micro-credit giving NGO in Bangladesh. It
works in 70 thousand villages and 2000 slums for the empowerment of the
poor specially women and girls.

2. Shwanirvar Bangladesh: Shwanirvar Bangladesh was established in
1975. At first it worked as an adjoin cell of Bangladesh agriculture and
forestry ministry. It started to work as NGO for the socio-economic
development of the people from 1985.

3. Proshika: Proshika started to work in a few villages of Dhaka and Comilla
district from 1975. For economic development of its members Proshika
gave microcredit of taka 5070 crore to 1 crore to 26 lakh people till 2013
for environment friendly agriculture, irrigation, increase of domestic
animals, bee breeding, fisheries, social forestry, gardening at homes,
production of seeds, small business and in many other sectors.

4. ASA (Association for Social Advancement): It has been conducting
microcredit programmes since 1992. It has emerged as the largest

S self-reliant microcredit giving organization in the world now.
g

144 Economics

5. Shakti Foundation: It was established in 1992. It gives loans to the poor
women in the slums of large cities such as Dhaka, Chittagong, Rajshahi,
Khulna, Comilla, Bogura, etc. Besides it also works for the development
of health, business and social welfare of these women.

6. TMSS (Thengamara Mohila Shabuj Shango): It is the largest
organization for women development in Bangladesh. This organization
has been working for women to reduce poverty and development of
socio-economic condition since 1980.

7. SFSS (Society for Social Service) : It emerged in 1986 for eradicating
poverty of the poor, neglected, and deprived men, women and children, for
making them aware of their rights, health, education, and for ensuring
integrated services in order to sustainable social development to happen
in the society. The purpose of this organization is to establish sustainable
development by alleviating poverty of the poor, neglected and
right-deprived men and women, children of the society and attaining right
for them by ensuring their education and health services.

8. Bureau Bangladesh: This organization has been working with sustainable
rural savings and loan programmes for poverty alleviation of the poor
people. Along with this organization is implementing the programmes
about health care, pre-primary education development and empowerment of
women, sanitation, family planning, social forestry and tree plantation,
disaster management, etc projects.

9.5 Poverty

Poverty makes a country and its people dependent on others and makes the base

of development weak. So it is necessary to know about the concept of poverty,

its measurement and how to reduce it.

Concept of Poverty

Poverty is a multi-dimensional and relative matter. The people who earn less,

consume less, own small amount of wealth, live in less peaceful condition and

consider themselves as powerless and distribute in the society are generally 8

Important Economic Issues in Bangladesh 145
considered as poor people. In Bangladesh we consider those people as poor who
can not manage necessary calorie and minimum ingredients for living. Thus the
family living under minimum earning limit is considered as poor family. The
poor people who are tremendously poor are counted as acute poor people. The
measurement of poverty, rate and movement tendency has been presented in the
list below:
Table-1
Poverty and Chronic poverty (%) according to calorie intake
Type of poverty aa 1995/96 2005
National 47.5 40.5 31.5
Poverty Rural 47.1 39.5 35.2
Urban 49.7 43.2 21.3
Chronic poverty | National 25.1 19.5 17.6
Rural 24.6 17.9 21.1
Urban 27.3 24.4 17
Poverty Trends of Bangladesh
In recent years poverty is measured in Bangladesh as the cost of meeting basic
needs. In this measurement both food and non-food products are included. In
this chapter mainly the information of income-expenditure survey of 1995/96,
2005 and 2010 conducted by BBS is presented.
From years 1995-96 to 2010, percentage of poverty is reduced from 47.5 % to
31.5% that means at average annual rate it is reduced by 3.3%.
Programmes Adopted for Poverty Alleviation
There are many government and non-government (NGO) programmes for the
employment and income and for the development of poor people. The
government of Bangladesh has under taken the following programmes to
reduce poverty.
Forma-19, Economics Class 9-10

146 Economics

1. Social Protection Programme

The main challenge of structural development is to include women, children

and disabled people in the main stream of development programmes. Total

of 64 ongoing programmes are being run under various ministries for social

protection and empowerment. In these programmes providing cash (special and

various pensions), food security, small loans and various funds are included.

Classification of Social Protection Programmes is given below:

a. Aid programmes through providing cash (various pensions)

b. Aid through providing cash (special)

c. Food security programme

d. Providing small loans for self-employment

A. Aid Programmes through Providing Cash

A large part of the poor community of the country is aged people, widow,

women deprived and abandoned by husbands. The Government has launched

allowances for aged people, widow, deprived and abandoned by husbands

to reduce poverty. Besides, the Government has also lauched allowances for

freedom fighters in recognition for participation.

B. Aid Programmes through Providing Cash (Special)

Some special aid through providing cash is running under the Social

Welfare Ministry of Bangladesh Government. Some of this type of aids

are- rehabilitation for the acid affected and disabled people, micro credit,

allowance for insolvent disabled people and maternal allowance for poor

mothers, etc.

C. Food Security Programmes

Food security is very important to reduce poverty. To ensure food security,

food for work programme, VGF under Ministry of Food and Disaster

Management, VGD under the Ministry of Woman and Child Affairs of

Bangladesh Government are running. co
Ss
AQ

Important Economic Issues in Bangladesh 147
D. Providing Small Loans for Self-employment
Creating opportunities for sef-employment is a good way to reduce poverty.
Initiatives have been taken for creating self-employment opportunities under
different Ministries of Bangladesh Government. Along with training on live
stock raising, poultry farming, pisciculture for the unemployed young men and
women. Micro-credit facilities have also arranged for them. Moreover,
initiatives have been taken to reduce poverty by creating employment
opportunities through organising co-operative societies, and training on
information and communication technology (ICT).

9.6 Unemployment

Defintion of Unemployment

A person who is able and interested to work at current wage rate, but unable to find

a job- is called an unemployed person. Some characteristics of an unemployee is

given below:

(1) Unable to get a job at current wage

(2) Interested to work at current wage rate

(3) Deprived of earning

(4) Suffers from economical and emotional stress

Types of Unemployment

1. Seasonal unemployment: This type of unemployment occurs at a certain
time of the year due to natural calamities. For example, rural workers do
not have job except the time of planting the seeds and harvesting i.e. in
the period of time when the rural workers remain unemployed during a
particular period of time are called seasonal unemployed workers.

2. Disguised Unemployment: Though it seems that there are a lot of workers
who are employed in agriculture sector, in reality many of them have
zero marginal productivity. People who have zero marginal productivity

S are called disguised unemployed persons. Suppose, a farmer has two bighas
g

148 Economics
of land. He works alone on that land and produces a certain amount of
crops. If two sons join him, it will seem that three persons are
working. But in reality three of them produce the same amount of crop
that the farmer alone used to produce. So the extra two people have the
zero marginal productivity. The reason for this is that three of them are
dividing the work load of a single persons. Thus these extra two people
are called disguised unemployed persons. Therefore, disguised
unemployment is a situation where it seems people are working but
actually they have zero marginal productivity.

3. Temporary Unemployment: Unemployment created due to change of
profession is called temporary unemployment. Such as a garment worker
starts a business after changing profession. At that time he remains jobless.
This time is considered as temporary unemployment. This type of
unemployment prevails in our country.

So, it is due to lack of work except farming in the rural society of
Bangladesh. Various types of Unemployment mentioned above are seen.

Reduction of Unemployment
For the reduction of unemployment development in agriculture and
non-agriculture sector is necessary. Huge scope for creating new sectors of
employment lies in agricultural improvement in irrigation, cultivation of more
than one crop, different types of agro-based activities like raising cattle,
forestation, raising poultry, fisheries etc. In non-agricultural sector there are
possibilities of employment in construction of roads, housing, expansion in
small and cottage industries, small businesses etc. Other than these, it is possible
to reduce unemployment by taking the following steps.

1. Reduction of Disguised Unemployment: Disguised unemployment
exists in the agriculture sector of less developed countries. To reduce
this unemployment higher wages can be given to workers of
manufacturing sectors so that labor supply in manufacturing sector
increases. Thus excess labor from agriculture will shift to manufacturing 3
sector. “

Important Economic Issues in Bangladesh 149

2. Investing Capital and Reducing Unemployment: For the reduction of
unemployment if more capital is invested in manufacturing sector the
marginal productivity of labourers will increase and thus employment will
also increase.

3. Establishment of Small and Cottage industries for Producing
Equipments of Farming: Small equipments that are necessary for
farming can be produced in small and cottage industries. And
establishment of these types of industries in rural areas will reduce
unemployment.

4. Establishment of Industries Based on Agriculture in Rural Areas:
Establishment of Industries Based on Agriculture in Rural Areas will
increase employment in these industries which will increase the
production and employment in agriculture. That is, unemployment will be
reduced.

5. Growing Multiple Crops: Apart from growing only seasonal crops if
other crops are also grown at the remaining times or one crop is grown
after another, no agricultural labourer will remain unemployed.

6. Farming Other Than Crops: In most of the areas in Bangladesh there
are lots of rivers, ponds and other lower lands. In these places lots of
fisheries can be established. On the other hand in the high lands where
crops cannot be grown, poultry can be built.

7. Compulsory Work Oriented Education Policy: To solve the unemployment
problem ina country like Bangladesh education policy must be changed.
Technical and practical training should be given at all levels to increase
the employment in agriculture and manufacturing. Technical and
vocational institutes should be established in every district to create the
opportunities for the less educated people.

8. Proving Enough Loans: After technical and vocational training if loans

<9 are given to the rural half literate people, it would be easier to raise
8 poultry firms, fisheries and animal breeding firms to reduce

150 Economics
unemployment. It can also be solved by establishing small and cottage
industries.

Case study : Make a report on the unemployment condition of your area.

9.7 Human Resource
Human resource is very important for economic development. It is required in
every sector of development and technology. The value of efficient and trained
human resource is very high. So, for the development of all developed and
developing counties the importance and value of human resources is very high.
Definition of Human Resource
The part of population which is included in the labor force through proper
education and efficiency is called human resource. But land and capital of a
country are called tangible resources. Supply of human resources is required for
the utilization of natural resources for economic development. For economic
development both tangible and human resources are necessary. Increasing
working capability and efficiency through proper education, training, healthy
shelter, treatment etc. is called development of human resources. Efficient
human resource is a necessary element for economic development.

Methods of Human Resource Development

For economic development it is necessary to increase the quality of human

resource. For this purpose the following steps can be taken:

1. Education: To make people workable and efficient it is necessary to
expand education and technical education. Education is necessary for
private and national development. Therefore, it is necessary to change
the whole education system and encourage vocational education. A person
can be illiterate but if he is given technical education, his human resource
is improved. An illiterate person being good and efficient farmer can
increase the production. Developing countries like Bangladesh lack
vocational or technical education. So, it is necessary to increase technical

S
aq

Important Economic Issues in Bangladesh 151
education everywhere. For this purpose, the number of technical education
institutes and their standard are to be increased. People educated with
technical knowledge can utilize their learning in real life.

2. Training: Educated and trained people of a country are able to increase
the production more. It is not possible to develop the quality of a
person who is not trained. Training is necessary for human resource
development. If trained people are utilized in more technical works, high
returns are possible. Moreover, trained people can take immediate and
timely decision for some works and bring good returns.

3. Development of Public Health: Balanced diet, healthy environment etc.
are the basic requirement for maintaining good health. Every person in the
country should be introduced to these requirements. It is possible to
improve the health condition of those people that have poor health,
physical weakness and reluctance to work by offering medical facilities at
any cost.

4. Food and Nutrition: To turn the population power into human resource it
is necessary to make the people aware about balanced diet and nutrition.
The government, political parties, doctors, scientists, farmers, labourers all
should come forward for this purpose.

5. Proper Shelter: Healthy environment is necessary for increasing working
capacity. Safe and healthy living place increases working capacity.
Therefore, the government should increase the housing facilities through
public and private sectors.

6. Women Empowerment: Human resources development can be achieved
by involving women in the work force through education and training.
Half of total population in Bangladesh is women. Economic
development is not possible while these people remain at home. It is
possible to increase human resources through technical education and

%0 training to women.
S
aq

152 Economics

7. Plan for the Development of Human Resource: To increase the working
capacity and quality of human resources of Bangladesh proper plan and
its application is required. Effective steps can be taken to implement this
plan for this purpose. That is, economic development is possible if human
resource is developed.

The Source of all information of this chapter: Bangladesh Economic Review 2016.
Exercise

Short Questions

1. Explain the concept of economic development and economic growth.

2. Is growth part of development? Explain.

3. Mention 6 characteristics of least developed countries.

4. Mention 6 characteristics of developed countries.

5. What are the obstacles to economic development?

6. Explain a few names of NGOs.

7. Explain the concept of poverty.

8. Mention a few methods of reducing unemployment.

Descriptive Questions

1. What are the characteristics of least developing countries? Describe.

2. What are the characteristics of developed countries? Describe.

3. Describe the main obstacles to economic development?

5. Discuss the programmes under taken by Bangladesh government for poverty reduction in short.

6. Describe the types of unemployment in Bangladesh.

Multiple Choice Questions

1. What is development?
a. part of growth b. per capita income
c. increase innationalincome d. development in other sectors with growth S

Important Economic Issues in Bangladesh 153
2. It is to instability in agricultural products-

i. farmers are discouraged in production

ii. disguised unemployment increases.

iii. small industries increase
Which of the following is true?

a i b. iand ii

c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
Read the following passage and answer the question numbers 3 and 4.
Karim drives a rented autorickshaw. His income from this does not allow him to
save anything after his expenditures on household chores. He is unable to save
money even after driving the auto rickshaw for a long time. Finally he purchased
a new scooter for himself by taking loan from the bank.
3. Which concept of economics is Karim’s situation related with?

a. trend of poverty b. reduction of poverty

c. vicious cycle of poverty d. decrease in poverty
4. By buying a new autorickshaw Karim's—

i. unemployment problem will be solved.

ii. capital will be formed.

iii. consumption will be increased.
Which of the following is true?

a i b. ii

c. ijand iii c. iand iii
Forma-20, Economics Class 9-10

154 Economics

Creative Questions

1.

y,
~ 900 =
e 700 7)
B00 ZY
& Y 7
© 300 Y
2 200 7 _
100
See 8
$5838 8
RRR RRR
Source : Bangladesh Economic Review (June/12)

a, What is human resource?

b. Explain the concept of vicious cycle of poverty.

c. Which characteristics of the economy does the graph show? Explain

d. What driving force, you think, is most responsible for the economic condition
shown in the graph? Explain.

2. Tamanna has done her M.A. from National University. But she is still
unable to find a job. Nowadays she helps her mother in handwork. She
passes a good time with her mother but their production or income from the
handiwork is the same as before.

a. What is unemployment?

b. Explain the programme Food for Work.

c. Explain the type of work Tamanna does according to economics?

d. Technical education can improve the situation of Tamanna. Explain.

S

Chapter Ten
The Public Finance of Bangladesh Government
Bangladesh government spends a lot of money to run the administration
properly, maintaining the rules and regulations within the country, protecting the
country from external attacks and running many projects for the social welfare.
The government has to earn revenue from different sources to finance these
costs. A budget is the financial plan and a list of all planned expenses and
revenues of the government. And these things are discussed in Public Finance.
— Foreign Grant Socks
ign 3.0 Seomety
8.0 —— ens,
fin avons 6 iy ted —s
~ | ional Health orgy &
Non-tex ‘ 2 . < it E
revenue wy, eeu: sir: af -, OSs. sreett
: é Education a Local government & 16.4%
Tax incorporated technology rural development
other than National 124% 21.8%
Revenue board
24
It can be expected that after studying this chapter, we will be able to-
e explain what public finance is.
e explain what the sources of government revenue are.
e explain what the sectors of government expenditure are.
e explain the concept of budget.
e differentiate between current budget and capital budget.
e compare between balanced budget and unbalanced budget.
e explain the budget of Bangladesh government and its classifications.
e identify the sources to finance the development budget of the Bangladesh
- government.
Se participate in the discussion of the national budget.

156 Economics
10.1 Public Finance

The branch of economics, in which the revenue and expenditure of the
government and things related to loans are discussed, is called the public
finance. Public finance discusses in which sectors, how and following what
principles the local government will spend for ensuring the maximum social
welfare and the economic development of the people. How much and from
which sectors it will earn revenues to finance public expenditures, or from
where it will borrow are discussed in public finance.

10.2 The Sources of Revenue of Bangladesh Government

Bangladesh is a low middle income developing country. The government has
to spend a lot of money for socio-economic development, public welfare,
running the administration and maintaining the country's defense system. To
finance these expenditures, the government has to collect revenues from
different sectors. The government of Bangladesh has two main sources of
revenue. For example: a) tax revenue b) non-tax revenue.

a) Tax Revenue

Tax is the revenue which the government =
necessarily collects from the public and for = lal = =

which the public cannot demand any direct

benefit from the government. The tax, pig. a

which is imposed on the residents of the ss wd
country or the non-residents of the country, alead’ Eg Shaan.

on different industrial companies and on : 1

the products is called the tax revenue. —
The sources of government revenues are: a. |
1. Taxes on Income and Profit Board of Reyenme

The tax that is imposed on the personal income of a person is called the income
tax. One of the main sources of the revenue of the Bangladesh government is
income tax. Currently the people whose income is above taka 2,50,000 (for
male); taka 3,00,000 (for female); taka 3,75,000 (for disabled) are bound to give
the income tax. Moreover, taxes are also imposed on the profits of the different =
enterprises. “

The Public Finance of Bangladesh Government 157
2. Value Added Tax (VAT)
Bangladesh, like other developed and developing countries, started the system
of value added tax from the year 1991-92. In the case of production, there exist
a lot of stages from producing the raw material to the final product. In the
case of this production process, the tax that is imposed at a certain rate on the
value added to different stages of production, is called the value added tax
(VAT). Recently, in our country value added tax has been imposed on
imported goods and locally produced goods and different service sectors. In
future, the areas of the value added tax will be expanded.
3. Customs Duties
One of the major sources of income of the Bangladesh government is custom
duties. The tax imposed on imported goods and services is called the customs
duties.
4. Excise Duties
The tax imposed on domestically produced and used goods is called excise
duties. Excise duties are imposed to earn the revenue and also to reduce the
consumption of harmful goods. In Bangladesh excise duty is mainly imposed
on the goods such as tea, cigarette, sugar, tobacco, kerosene, medicine, spirit,
matches etc.
5. Supplementary Duties
For many reasons the government imposes extra tax on some goods even
after imposing the excise duty or the value added tax orthe customs duty.
This extra duty is called the supplementary duty, i.e. supplementary duties
imposed on ceramic tiles.
6. Other Taxes and Duties
Other than the five taxes and duties discussed above, the government collects
some extra taxes and duties. For example: wealth tax, taxes on petrol and
gases, taxes on visiting a foreign country, vacation tax etc.

5

158 Economics
7. Narcotics and Liquor Duty
The government earns revenue from imposing duty on narcotics and liquor.
By doing this the government earns revenue as well as increases the social
welfare.
8. Tax on Vehicles
The taxes given for various vehicles are called the vehicle tax. The
government earns revenue fro m this sector every year.
9. Land Revenue
The tax that is paid by the land owner to the government for owning and using
the land is called the land revenue. Bangladesh government has imposed
development tax on land.
10. Non-Judicial Stamp
Non-judicial stamp is used on wills and the application forms of the cases.
The government earns a lot of revenue from this sector every year.
b. Non-Tax Revenue
The government earns a lot of revenue other than taxes and duties. Revenue
collected from these sources is called non-tax revenue. The sources of non-tax
revenue of the government are-
1. Dividend and Profit
The government gets dividend and profit at the end of the year from its
organizations such as insurance companies, non-financial organizations (for
example: nationalized industries, parks, zoos etc.).
2. Interest
The government gives loan to the public service holders, many financial
and self-governing organizations. So it earns some revenue as the interest of
those loan.
sy
S

The Public Finance of Bangladesh Government 159
3. Administrative Fee
The government earns different types of fees from the public for grvmg them
administrative services such as court fees.
4, Fine, Penalty and Confiscation
The government collects some revenue through fine, penalty and confiscation
for committing misdeeds that are against the rules and regulations of the
country.
5. Economic Services
The government gives services to the people through its various organizations.
Among these services the important sources are- the fees received from
import-export as per law, the registration fees from commercial organizations
and companies, income insurance law and audit fees from co-operative
societies registration and revenual fees from co-operative societies, etc.
6. Rent and Lease
By giving public property on rent and lease, the government earns a lot of
revenue each year.
7. Toll and Levy
The government also collects revenue through toll and levy imposed on various
bridges.
8. Non-Business Sell
Sometimes the government sells products without any profit for the wellbeing
of the people.
9. Railway
Bangladesh railway earns money through the services of transportation of
public and products. The profit in this sector has increased due to the
expansion and modernization of railway service.

20

Ss

aq

160 Economics
10. Postal Department

Bangladesh postal department is run by the Bangladesh government. For this
reason it is a revenue source of the government. This department gives varieties
of services, thus its income has slightly increased from the fiscal year 2001-02.
For giving varities of services the income of this department has increased
slightly.

The revenue sources of the government mentioned above are not enough
to finance its expenditures. For this reason the government has to depend on
foreign loans, aid, grant.

Task: Make a list of revenue sources of the Bangladesh government.

Task: Find out the ways of increasing revenue sources of the Bangladesh government.
10.3 The Sectors of Expenditures of Bangladesh Government
Bangladesh is a low income people’s welfare state. developing country. For
socio-economic development, human resource development, poverty reduction,
protecting the country from external forces and running it and for the wellbeing
of the people, the government has to pay a lot of money every year. The field of
work of the government has increased with the rise of democracy. For this
reason many new sectors have been included in the expenditure sector of the
government.

The main sectors of expenditures of Bangladesh government
1) Education and Technology
For increasing human resources the government has to pay a lot of money in
increasing primary education, quality development, and expansion of technical
and vocational education, development of female education, increasing the
number and amount of scholarship to encourage the students and and increasing
the tertiary education. The government spends a good amount of money on
information and technology to develop the socio-economic condition by
associating technology with education.
°9
S
AQ

The Public Finance of Bangladesh Government 161

2. Defense

To protect the country from external forces

the government has to spend a huge amount ‘3 ¢

of sone | to buy WE pONS for wars, i “as a rininn ce

facilitate proper training for the people in We ai ae

defense with proper training, salary, shelter mee Oe a va

and treatment. Some expenditure in this ~  « Tee

sector remains hidden for the national a

Naval-craft

safely. 7 noe.

3. Public Administration Cot a x 2 et SPAS

To rule the country the government has to ee be Me.

Pitta: 2 3 a Pe ac

accomplish the work related to public hon ma ae : rave

administration. It has to spend a great Ja ssalae ess al : icalh RS

amount of money for the people working in a \ shthh pen bay | ae

the administration as it has to provide salary Ls = oral il Ne — ota a

and bonus to them and to manage the office. Bangladesh ‘Secretariat Building :

4. Public Control and Protection

The government has to bear a great expenditure in maintaining the peace and

protection inside the country and for this it has to pay a lot of money to the police

and other security workers for the public protection.

5. Agricaltare, Agro-based Industry and A we se
Agricultural Research eer | BLN y

The allocation of subsidy on agriculture and loan has 4 ES

been increasing gradually by the government to a f mili Bi Fat go?

enhance and develop the agriculture and agro-based o a 9 ED

industries. Bangladesh government has started to ras =, Bhat

contribute to the agricultural research since the year r 1] SY

2007-08. Agriculture

Forma-21, Economics Class 9-10

162 Economics
6. Public Health
To ensure public health, the government has to establish hospitals and medical
colleges, give free medicine, prevent plague, train the doctors and nurses etc.
and so it has a great expenditure in this sector. To ensure the health services in
the rural areas health complexes have been built and one M.B.B.S doctor and
health instructor have been appointed. For this reason the expenditure has
increased.
7. Social Security and Welfare
Bangladesh government spends a lot of money for social security as per its
ability for the livelihood of the helpless and destitutes such as providing
allowances for elderly people and widows, rehabilitation of the acid-wounded
women and disabled people, national honour allowances for the freedom
fighters, allowances for the reduction of unemployment because of natural and
geographical reason, providing fund for the skill development of the readymade
garments employees and homeless, for one hundred day work creation
programmes, for Ekti Bari Ekti Khamar and for rationing for the destitute
people.
8. Electricity and Fuel rae aR
To meet the increasing demand for electricity the a5) f 5: Ti
government spends a lot of money to distribute and RA eae {
produce more electricity, to make fund for the renewable Sh f e F |
energy and in many other sectors. KARE ote
Electricity Supply
9. Transport and Communication
To develop the transport and communications system in Bangladesh the
government spends a lot of money through the different projects of the
ministries of communication like road, railway, navy, private airways and
tourism, postal and telecommunication department.
=
S

The Public Finance of Bangladesh Government 163
10. Poverty Alleviation and Employment
Our current government has started to give various kinds of technical training to
the little educated and physically powerful youths for two years through
‘National Service’ project to solve the unemployment problem. It distributes
more than 10 lakh metricton of food grain through the projects of T.R, G.R,
B.G.F, and V.G.D. The government has given small loans different ministries for
the creation of employment for te poor people. The government has to spend a
lot of money in these sectors.
11. Repaying the Loan and Interest
The government takes a lot of money as loan from both the domestic and foreign
sources to finance its development projects. So it has to pay a huge amount of
money to repay these loans and the interests of these loans.
12. Industrial and Economical Services
For the develo ‘ i ae
! pment ot the country S various =e ’
industrial and economic service sectors the fee rgccem yernT aNO WT
government spends a lot of money. It spends money eee Papa i ait
through the ministries of industry, business, labor § wh i ag oy
and employment and ministry of expatriates. To ik =p ee of
Le _ le PS BRT A

distribute loans to the small entrepreneurs for small» 7s} [ } ne: sik
and moderate industry sectors. Bangladesh Bank has bet y |
taken a reinvestment plan by encouraging backs and P.. y hf
financial institutions. ae D> sa Mp i
13. Environment and Forestry Garments Industry
Protecting the environment and increasing its standard, saving it from industrial
pollution, establishing refinery for industries that produce liquid wastage etc.
cause a huge expenditure to the government and it spends this money through
ministry of forestry.
14, Entertainment, Culture and Religion

co Every year government spends a lot of money on information, culture, religion

Sand youth and sports development.

164 Economics
15. Local Government and Rural Development
To run the local government division rural development and co-operation
division and Chittagong Hill Tracts ministry the Bangladesh government spends
a lot of money.
Other than above sectors, the Bangladesh government also spends money on
women and children, water resources, fisheries and animal resources, housing,
food and disaster management. According to the government statement, the
government of Bangladesh spends revenue on non-development expenditures in
55 sectors and under the development projects nearly in 18 sectors. In the light
of modern social welfare, the government should spend more on development
projects and reduce expenditures on non-development projects.
Source: Finance Department, Finance Ministry.
Task: Make a list of expenditure sectors of the Bangladesh government.
Task: Find out the reasons for increasing expenditures of the Bangladesh government
in recent years.
10.4 Budget
The planned estimate of income and expenditure is called a budget. If a person
designs systematically the income he/she gets from different sources and how
he/she spends them, it is called the personal budget. In the same way the
government's revenue of a particular year, how much revenue it expects from
different sources and how much it wants to spend in different sectors is called
the government budget. The fiscal year of Bangladesh is from July to June.
The budget is the main instrument of the economic system. It shows the political
view of the government and also the economic condition of a country. It not only
reflects the actual calculation of the income and expenditure but also the
systematic plan of the income and expenditure of the government. It also lists
the way how the deficit will be covered if expenditure is more than income and
the way of using the surplus money if income is more than expenditure.When
the budget is ready it has to be passed in parliament and with the permission of =
the president the new fiscal year starts according to the new budget. R

The Public Finance of Bangladesh Government 165
Types of budget
According to the types of income-expenditure of the government the budget is mainly
of two types:
Current Budget Capital Budget

Current Budget
The budget which shows the current income and current expenditure of the
government, is called the current budget. Current income is collected from tax
and non-tax revenue. Value added tax, income tax, wealth tax, land tax, etc. are
important in tax revenue. The dividend and profit of various companies and
interest on loans are the main sources of non-tax revenue. The income from this
budget is used to finance the expenditures of the administrative jobs properly
and for national defense. Main expenditure sectors of this budget are education,
public administration, police department, health and family planning etc. Since
these sectors remain unchanged, reallocation in these sectors every year is
required. Usually there is always surplus in the current budget.
Capital Budget
The budget which shows the capital income and expenditure of the government
is called the capital budget. The main purpose of this budget is the
socio-economic development. For this reason the government plans a yearly
development programs and collects revenue from various domestic and
international sources to finance it and to put it in action. The sources of income
from the country are surplus revenue, private savings and charging extra tax etc.
and the sources of income from outside the country are foreign loan, grants etc.
Under the annual development programs, agriculture, industry, current and fuel,
woman and youth development, transport and communications, rural
development housing, etc. are important. The main purpose of this budget is to
attain economic development and growth.

2

S | Task: Differentiate between current budget and capital budget.

166 Economics
According to the balance between income and expenditure, the budget is
mainly of two types:
Unbalanced Budget
Surplus Budget Deficit Budget

1. Balanced Budget
At a certain time, if the expected income and expected expenditure of the
government are equal, it is called the balanced budget. In this budget if
expenditure is coordinated with the income, there is a less possibility of inflation
or rise in price level and thus there is stability in the economy. But in a
developing country like ours, this type of budget is not helpful to reduce
unemployment problem, develop the economy and to fight the emergency
situation.

Formula: Balanced Budget = Total Income - Total Expenditure = 0

Therefore, Total Income = Total Expenditure
2. Unbalanced Budget
At a certain time if the expected income of the government is not equal to its
expected expenditure, it is called the unbalanced budget. There are two types of
unbalanced budget according to the inequality of income and expenditure of the
government.

a) Surplus budget

b) Deficit budget
a) Surplus Budget
In a fiscal year if the expected expenditure of government is less than its |
expected revenue, it is called the surplus budget. s

The Public Finance of Bangladesh Government 167
That is, in this budget income is more than expenditure.
Formula: Surplus Budget = (Total Income - Total Expenditure) > 0
Therefore, Total Income > Total Expenditure

b) Deficit Budget
In a fiscal year if the expected expenditure of the government is more than its
expected revenue, it is called the deficit budget. To cope with deficit the
government borrows money from the public, creates new money, borrows
money from the central bank, takes foreign loans and grants.
This type of budget is useful for developing countries like ours for the efficient
allocation of resources; for the increase in employment, per capita income and
for raising the level of standard of living of the people. But the creation of new
money may cause the rise in price level and inequality in income.
Formula: Deficit Budget = (Total Income - Total Expenditure) < 0
Therefore, Total Income < Total Expenditure

Task: Write down the differences between surplus budget and deficit budget.

Task: Write down the differences between balanced budget and unbalanced budget.
10.5. Budget of the Bangladesh Government
Bangladesh is a developing country. The Pee
fiscal year of this country is July-June. Every 75. ; Re C
year in the first week of June the finance gp Pts ee

_ . . foo)
minister presents primary budget in the ae oe 1
parliament which is finalized after being " ee ae taal
discussed, criticized and changed if it is gala abe eee Sa
required and then passed in that very monthin
2 Jatiya Sangsad

the parliament.

In our country the budget is represented in two parts.

« 4) Non-development budget
5S b) Development budget

168 Economics
a) Non-Development Budget ;
Several oecovelopment” and ates

The part of the budget in which the aes AS esate
government's regular income-expenditure is subsidy 104
shown and the expenditures are not directly *° aie al
involved with the development is called the ;
non-development budget. The main oo | “33
purpose of this budget is to maintain the — wean a
country's defense system and to conduct ““"35"°° Goods nd Aid grant
the economy properly. Economical plans AOR :
are not part of this budget. Expenditure sectors of non-development budget
The income of Non-Developmental budget is collected from Revenue from the
Tax and Non-Tax Revenue, which are as follows:

Tax on income and profit Dividend and profit from state owned enterprises

Value added tax Interest

Custom duty Administrative fee

Excise duty Fine, penalty and confiscation

Sopplementarydtuty Revenue from various services

Rent and lease
Land tax
; Toll and levy

Tax on vehicles Railway

Selling stamps Postal department

Narcotics and liquor duty Wire and telephone department

Other taxes and duties Other non-tax revenue

Education and technology Social security

Public administration Repaying loan and interest

Defense Health and family planning

Public control and protection Entertainment, culture and religion

Transport and communication Unexpected expenditure

5

The Public Finance of Bangladesh Government 169
b) Development Budget
The part of the budget which shows
the imcome-expenditures of the Social protection
. . and welfare Others
development projects is called the 5.3% 68%
decelapirient budget. It shows the | Public
details of the government's annual 5.0%
development projects and the sources 93 ows
of expected income and expenditure... ‘ if 11.5%
. . . ee rw ‘Transport &
The main purpose of this budget is to ; fe Communication
¥ 3 Education and 16.4%
achieve economic development and technology {cal government and
. . 12.4% elopment
growth in a planned way. For this 21S
reason, it is necessary to draw up new
projects every year.
Revenue sources and expenditure sectors of development budget
Internal sources: 1. Agriculture and industrial development
1. Surplus of non-development budget | 2. Local government and rural development
2. Revenue from charging extra tax 3. Transport and communications development
3. Loan from internal banking system | 4. Electricity and fuel
4. Borrowing through bonds 5. Education and technology development
6. Water resource and flood control
External sources:
. 7. Housing
1. Foreign grants
. 8. Labor and human power
2. Foreign loans
9. Woman and youth development
10. others
Task: Identify which part of the budget of the Bangladesh government is in the non-
development sector and which is in the development sector.
Forma-22, Economics Class 9-10

170 Economics
10.6 At a glance the budget of year 2017-2018 and Revised budget
2016-2017 of Bangladesh government (Takadircrore}
Revenue and foreign grant Revenue receipt 2,87,990 2,18,500
Taxes 2,56,812 1,92,261
NBR Tax revenue 2,48,190 1,85,000
Non NBR Tax revenue 8,622 7,261
Non-tax revenue 31,179 26,239
Foreign grant 5,504 4,694
a
Non-development expenditure 2,34,013 1,92,932
Non-development expenditure of revenue of which 2,07,138 1,78,154
Interest of domestic loan 39,511 33,495
Interest of foreing loan 1,946 1,863
Non development capital expenditure 26,875 14,778
Food account operation 361 561
Loan and advances (net) 6,879 7691
Development expenditure 1,59,013 1,15,990
Development program finance from revenue budget 249 370
Non ADP Projects 3,512 2,987
Annual development programm 1,53,331 1,10,700
Food for Work project 1,921 1,933
317A
[Financing
Foreign Borrowing 46,420 24,077
Domestic Borrowing 63,352 69,903
Financing from banking sector 28,203 23,903
Loan apart from banking sector 32149 46,000
Source: Government of Bangladesh budget-2017-18 s
&

The Public Finance of Bangladesh Government 171
There are mainly two parts in this budget. For example, non-development
budget and development budget. According to the balance between revenue and
expenditure, the budget of the Bangladesh government of the year 2016-17 is a
deficit budget.
Task: Give your opinion about the funding of the development budget of Bangladesh.
The Source of all information of this chapter: Bangladesh Economic Review 2016.
Exercise
Short Questions
1. What is public finance?
2. What do you mean by value added tax?
3. What is meant by budget?
4. What do you mean by current budget and capital budget?
Descriptive Questions
1. Explain the revenue sources of the Bangladesh government.
2. Explain the expenditure sectors of the Bangladesh government.
3. What is budget? Explain the types of budget according to pattern of revenue-
expenditure of the government.
Multiple-Choice Questions
1. Income tax is imposed on-
a) personal income b) income of the company
c) income from the vehicles d) income from the land tax
S

172 Economics
2h — —
Interest, Rent, Lease Toll & um \ (raw
Administration, Toll, Levy, Railway Administration, |
Rent & Lease Tarul Narcotics (peti)
Fiqure : A Fiqure : B Figure : C Fiqure : D
Which figure has the non-tax revenue sources?
a) figure-A b) figure-B
c) figure-C d) figure-D
Read the following table and answer the questions 3 and 4.
Budget of the governments of two countries in a fiscal year:
Expected Expected Expected Expected
Income (taka) | Expenditure (taka) Income (dollar) | Expenditure (dollar)
3. Which kind of budget does country-B have?
a) balanced b) unbalanced
c) deficit d) surplus
4. Due to the budget of country-A
i) natural resources will be completely utilized
ii) the standard of living will be increased
iti) there is a possibility of increase of the price of goods quickly
Which of the following is correct?
a. iand ii b. iand iii
ce. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii ES
N

The Public Finance of Bangladesh Government 173

Creative Questions

1. Ishrat goes shopping in a departmental store. She has to a pay more than the
actual price. When she asks the salesman about this, he replies,

"It is charged by the government upon sales from the customer."

a) What is land tax?

b) Explain supplementary tax?

c) Which revenue source of the government is extra tax charged from
Ishrat a part of?

d) Compare excise tax with the tax given by Ishrat.

2. Jahid studies in a school. Everyone in their school is happy because a new
building is being constructed. He finds out that this year the government
has sponsored a big budget for their school. He does not know what budget
is. So he asks his teacher and the teacher tells him that, this is also
expenditure of the government like their salary which is also provided
through the budget.

a) Give a definition of budget.
b) What do you mean by public finance?
c) Which budget of the government does it contain the construction of
Jahid’s school building? Explain.
d) The budget of Jahid’s school will help the overall development of the
country. Analyse.
The End.
x
&

ff
ATR MTC AW COPA Sy AMATO VMSry Ps
TA aera Cte BAT
frogat Sans viky Sl AT
alist ¢ fre frttecaa Ybat wort afSery @ aferatces Gay AAT CBs Croc
se Wi
ys
& ES
TUS:
Tee
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh

