ENGLISH FOR TODAY
Classes Nine-Ten
Kt
Vy Val fy
NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
asa textbook for classes Nine and Ten from the academic year 2013
English For Today
Classes Nine and Ten
Revised and Re-edited by
Syed Manzoorul Islam
Writers
Raihana Shams
Md. Zulfeqar Haider
Goutam Roy
Surajit Roy Majumder
Md Abdur Razzaque
Naina Shahzadi
Editor
MS Hoque
NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH

Published by

National Curriculum & Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka

[All rights reserved by the publisher]

First Publication : October 2012
First Revised Edition : September, 2014
Second Revised Edition : September, 2017
Design
National Curriculum & Textbook Board.
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Printed by :

Preface
The aim of secondary education is to make the learners fit for entry into higher
education by flourishing their latent talents and prospects with a view to building the
nation with the spirit of the Language Movement and the Liberation War. To make the
learners skilled and competent citizens of the country based on the economic, social,
cultural and environmental settings is also an important issue of secondary education.
The textbooks of secondary level have been written and compiled according to the
revised curriculum 2012 in accordance with the aims and objectives of National
Education Policy-2010. Contents and presentations of the textbooks have been selected
according to the moral and humanistic values of Bengali tradition and culture and the
spirit of Liberation War 1971 ensuring equal dignity for all irrespective of caste and
creed of different religions and sex.
The present government is committed to ensure the successful implementation of
Vision 2021. Honorable Prime Minister, Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina expressed her firm determination to make the country free
from illiteracy and instructed the concerned authority to give free textbooks to every
student of the country. National Curriculum and Textbook Board started to distribute
textbooks free of cost since 2010 according to her instruction.
In the era of globalization, English is one of the most powerful tools for pursuing higher
studies, using technology, inter- cultural and inter-personal communications, and job
markets at home and abroad. The curriculum makes it explicit that language learning
will be graded and contents will reflect real life situations as the ultimate purpose of
language learning is to communicate. The English for Today textbooks have been
developed to help students attain competency in all four language skills, i.e. listening,
speaking, reading and writing. The contents and illustrations of this textbook have been
developed in order to suit the learners’ age and cognitive level.
The textbook has been revised and re-edited by a prominent educationist to make it
learner friendly in 2017. I thank sincerely all for their intellectual labour who were
involved in the process of revision, writing, editing, art and design of the textbook.
Professor Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

Contents
are [ome
ee

Unit One
Good citizens
Kh g
© —
Learning outcomes
After we have studied the unit, we will be able to
e narrate incidents
® participate in discussions
e listen to and understand others
e describe something in writing.
Format 1, English For Today-9-10

2 English For Today
Lesson 1: Can you live alone?
A Look at the pictures below and discuss in pairs the following
question and suggestion.
1 Can you live alone in a house?
2 Make a list of the problems you think you will have if you live alone
ina house, e.g. having accidents, feeling lonely, etc.
\ \ Salt | | NG ji | Ya Wy
1\ pL LUN pecee™ || ah Wom SSS
hee Oe) BE Ce
SW a » iz : | " ye
Picture 1 Picture 2
B Read the story and answer the questions that follow.
Long ago, a young man who lived in a village, found his life full of problems and
sufferings. Quarrels, ill-feelings, jealousy, enmity— all were part of everyday life
there. So he left his house and went to a jungle to live by himself. There he made
a nice little hut with wood, bamboo and reeds. "Ah, how happy I am here!" said
the man to himself.
But one day he found some mice in his hut. The little creatures soon made holes
in his blanket. So he brought a cat to kill the mice. The cat needed milk. So he
brought a cow. The cow needed grass and hay. So he brought a cowhand.
The cowhand needed food. So he took a wife to cook meals. Then children were
born to them, and the man found himself again in a family.
So nobody can live alone, unless that person is either an angel or a devil. People
need food, shelter, companions and help. They need to look after each
other. And if they live in a family or community, their needs can be fulfilled.
Hence living in society can make people good and happy citizens. %
S
AQ

English For Today 3
C Close your book and answer the question. What five things did the
young man do in the jungle? Now divide into groups of five. Tell the
story to the groups sequentially.
D_ Answer the following questions. First discuss in pairs, then write
the answers individually.
1 Why did the young man leave his house?
2 Where did he make a hut? What did he make the hut with?
3. Was the man happy in his hut?
4 How did he find himself again in a family?
5 Where and how can a person be happy?
6 What is the moral of the story?
E __ Look at the pictures (a—-j). Read the texts that follow (1---10). Match
the pictures with the texts. Write the numbers of the texts next to
a, b, c, etc. The first exercise is done for you.
etl \ > (Re. KAA i
ey , WS QW y ag 6)
an ha aw) __ i
a A oe. Oceans D veces:
i wn A SLT NY :
pS M\\\) IN | )\y el /
i iN) iit VY
im a — S n ~| \ hy

4 English For Today
i ’ \ a
‘ 4 :
1 People living in a community or society often have problems. A family
may have a problem with a particular member (a son / daughter) who
keeps bad company. So they talk to each other to solve the problem. x
Q

English For Today 5

2 To prevent theft or robberies, constant security measures are

often necessary within the village / city area.

3. Acommunity may have a problem-like it doesn’t have a primary
school in the village or locality. So the community members need
to discuss the issue in a meeting and find out how to set up a
school for their children.

4 Cooking should not be exclusively a woman’s job.

5 Young learners must cultivate virtues and acquire knowledge and
skills to prepare themselves to carry out their roles as good citizens.
So they need to study formally in institutions.

6 To establish peace and harmony among the people in a locality /
village, experienced and elderly people often mediate between
quarrelling parties.

7 Only studying at school is not enough for young learners. They must
also acquire knowledge and skills at home as well as from the
media, clubs, games and sports, libraries and so on.

8 People in a society / locality often need to buy things at home. So
there are vendors who sell necessary things.

9 Ina village or locality roads often need repairing for easy
movement of people and transport.

10 Along with acquiring knowledge and skills, the youth must cultivate
good qualities like genuine sympathy for the weak and the poor.
They should help the needy, show respect to others and have a
strong sense of dignity of work.

F Discuss in pairs and write the answer to the following question:
20 What can we do at home and in the locality to become good citizens?
S
N

6 English For Today
Lesson 2: Knowledge, skills and attitudes
A Discuss in groups the possible answers to the following question.
Then read the text in B and answer the question.
What else do you need in addition to food, shelter and company to
become a good citizen?
B Read the text.
To be a good citizen, you have to prepare yourself to do good work in society.
Well, then how can you prepare yourself?
First, you need knowledge. Today’s society is knowledge-based. Without
having knowledge of modern sciences, technologies including ICT and
other necessary subjects, you will have difficulty living a good life. The
other areas you, as a good citizen, should have knowledge about are:
¢ our country, its constitution, geography and people
e our state, its executive and legislative powers
e our judicial system
e our government and its structures and functions
e our history, cultures, traditions, literature, moral values and religions
e our socio-economic activities and educational system
Second, you need skills to do things. Knowledge is not enough. You must be
able to apply your knowledge to do things practically.
Finally, knowing and doing things will bring about a change in your behaviour
towards others. This behavioural change will show your attitudes towards
others, that is, it will show how you think and feel about a person or thing.
Let's take an example. Suppose you, as a student, need to know about 'group
work' in the classroom. So you ask yourself or your teacher or anyone else,
"What is group work?" Or you may find about it in a book. In this way, you may
know, or you may have the knowledge about group work. To do group work, the
class has to be divided into groups. Each group is to do some tasks given by the
teacher or in the textbook. The group members will discuss and share ideas and
points, and finally one member will write the answers.
Then you start working in groups. In each group you take turns discussing points
and answering questions. In this way you can actually do the task. Your teacher
may monitor and help you to do the work. 6
S
aq

English For Today 7
Lastly, through regular group work it is expected that there will be noticeable
changes in your behaviour. Possible changes are:

e You will develop the skill of speaking freely in English with your

classmates and teacher.

e Your shyness will gradually disappear.

e You will develop the attitude of helping and cooperating with each other.

e You will learn to behave in a democratic way.

Most importantly, these behavioural changes taking place in you inside the

classroom will be carried over outside the classroom in real-life situations.

C Suppose you have learned at school how to make your drinking water
safe and when and how much you should drink it in a day. Now write a
short paragraph about how to make drinking water safe and its
importance.

D_ Read the text below. Then discuss with your partner and write K (if
the text is knowledge based) or S (if the text is skill based) or A (if
the text refers to attitude) against each text.

1 According to Abraham Lincoln, the 16 president of the United States,
a democratic government is a "government of the people, by the people,
and for the people." This means that the people have the right to control
their government.

2 Two students are making a kite with coloured paper, sticks, glue and
string.

3 Tisha's room was always messy. She could not find things easily. Recent-
ly she visited her cousin Ritu in Chittagong. She saw that Ritu's room
was very neat and tidy. Everything was exactly in its place. Ritu could
instantly find what she wanted. After getting back home, Tisha spent a
whole weekend making her room well organised.

4 "It is the duty of every citizen to observe the constitution and laws to
maintain discipline, to perform public duties and to protect public
properties." (The Constitution of The People's Republic of Bangladesh)

5 Students in pairs are acting out a dialogue in a class.

- 6 Mouli is back from school. She is very hungry and looks exhaust-
s ed. "What's wrong, Mouli?" asks her mother anxiously. “Don't

8 English For Today
worry, Mom. I'm OK. I just didn't have my tiffin today." "But why?"
"Our peon died this morning. With other students I gave my tiffin
money to the widow."
7 The students of physical education class are practising stretching
exercise in the school yard.
8 The affairs of Dhaka city were run by the Dhaka Municipality until
1978, when the city came under Dhaka City Corporation.
E Discuss in groups. Write how K S A can be shown in the following topics:
Orsaline Debate E-mail
Lesson 3: Good character
A Ask and answer these questions in pairs.
1 What do you understand by character?
2 What does a person with a good character usually do to others?
B Listen to the Audio and answer the following questions.
Questions: Tick the best answer.
1 Which is the correct statement according to the information in the listening
text?
a Good character does not mean special qualities.
b Good citizens must have good character along with other qualities.
c Character means a tool to curve wood.
d Character traits are distinctive marks always seen on a person’s face.
2 The red crest of a rooster
a is a symbol of power and strength.
b_ enables it to crow in the morning.
c makes the bird tall and beautiful.
oo
d__ shows how it is different from a hen. S

English For Today 9
3 The expression ‘distinctive qualities’ means those qualities of a person, which

a are the same as others’.

b emphasise honesty in him/ her.

c make him/her different from others.

d he/she gets from their parents.

4 Character traits are

a naturally gifted.

b personally learned.

c God given.

d__ physically visible.
C _ Fill in the blanks in the following passage with appropriate words

from the box.

harmonious allow behaviour respect good doing family
Citizens possessing good character live a life of virtue. They may belong to any
social 1) , upper or lower. Their thoughts and 2)
show high moral values. That is, they have a strong 3) of
right and wrong. So what they do is 4) for themselves as
well as for others in the 5) and in the society. In fact,
they cannot even think of 6) any wrong to others. One
of the most positive 7)__——=————SSsé f these people is tolerance towards
8) . Suppose a group of people in your community 9)
or practise something which you do not like 10) . But as a
good citizen you should 11) them to perform their activities.
Thus tolerance can generate 12) for people of other cultures.
Tolerance and respect together can make life 13) and
peaceful in society.
Format 2, English For Today-9-10

10 English For Today
D Read the completed passage and tick the best answer.
1 People with moral values
a can do anything they like.
b belong to upper social class.
c do good only for themselves.
d cannot do anything wrong to others.
2. ‘Tolerance’ means
a allowing others to say and do what they like.
b having a good character.
c having disagreements with others.
d a quality that every citizen has.
3 What can make life harmonious in society?
a performing religious rites
b encouraging cultural values
c respecting others’ beliefs and opinions
d fulfilling religious obligations
E Find the opposites of these words. If you do not know any, look it
up in your dictionary. Then make a meaningful sentence with
each of these opposites:
right --- wrong
If you have moral values, you cannot do any wrong to your fellow beings.
tolerance me nnn nnn nnn
respect pene enn nena nnn nn nnn nnn nnn nn nnn nnn nnn n nnn nnn
allow wren nn nanan nnn nnn nnn nnn neces nnn
enjoyable _—-----------------------------------------------------------------
F Write a paragraph about how tolerant or intolerant you are towards
your classmates. Give reasons. s
g

English For Today ll
Lesson 4: Responsibilities
A Read the text.
Rony's mother gave him 50 taka to buy salt and chillies. On his way to the
market, Rony found a poor passer-by trying to hold a boy up, who was lying on
the road, groaning. Coming near, Rony saw that it was his classmate Tanim, who
was hit by a speeding motorbike. Immediately he stopped a baby taxi and took
Tanim to a clinic. From there he phoned Tanim's parents. When they came to the
clinic, Rony returned home without the salt and chillies. He had used the money
to pay the taxi driver.
Now discuss in groups the following questions.
1 Did Rony do right or wrong? Why ?
2. What do you think his mother did when Rony returned home
without the salt and chillies?
3 What else could Rony do in the situation?
4 What do you understand by responsibility?
B Read the text and answer the following question:
What is responsibility?
A responsibility is a duty or an obligation TO DO something. For example, you
have the responsibility to attend school and pursue your studies properly, to take
care of your parents in their old age, and so on. You also have responsibility to
your society and the government, e.g. to help a neighbour in trouble or to cast
your vote if you are 18 or over.
A responsibility is also an obligation or a duty NOT TO DO something. For
example, you have the responsibility not to steal a book from a public library or
not to pile up your building materials on the footpath. These are your
responsibilities as citizens. But there are responsibilities of the government as
well. Our government has the responsibility to provide for its citizens "the basic
necessities of life, including food, clothing, shelter, education and medical
care"! . The government also has the responsibility to protect the fundamental
rights of its citizens which include freedom of speech and expression, freedom
co of the press, freedom of religion, equality of all before law? etc.
S
x)

12 English For Today
The knowledge, skills and attitudes you have gained at home, at school and in
society will help you to be aware of your responsibilities and to carry them out
effectively. Remember, discharging your responsibilities will be good for you,
good for your family and friends, and good for your society and country as a
whole.
Notes
1 The Constitution of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, Part II.
2 Part Il, ibid (Ibid : abbreviation from Latin ibidem which means in the same book or|
Cc Discuss in groups and write answers to these questions.
1 Which persons and institutions do ou have responsibilities for? Make a
list. The first in the list is done for you.
a. parents
2 Make a list of responsibilities you have as a student at home, school and
in society.
3 Make another list of things you shouldn’t do at home, school and in society.
4 Who do you get help from to discharge the responsibilities you have
listed in C1? How do they help you?
5 Are there any difficulties in fulfilling the responsibilities? Briefly describe
them.
6 Make a list of responsibilities other people have towards you. Briefly
describe what might happen if they fail to fulfill the responsibilities.
7 (a) What rewards are you likely to get if you fulfill your responsibilities?
(b) What penalties or punishments may you get, if you do not carry =
out your responsibilities? S

English For Today 13
8 What responsibilities do you think you can perform well when you go
on a class picnic or when your school stages a play as part of its annual
prize-giving ceremony?
D Look at the picture. Work in pairs.
Suppose this road is near your school. As students of this school, what
responsibilities do you think you have to get rid of this nuisance? Make
a list of things that you will do.
s ta ‘| ae | i died y, p I~
— Py Vis = Jaa a a ee ae
6 GES cok BR aria z le
- See a Oren | hi BS
cI
oD
S

Unit Two
Pastimes
S @
60@
2 OO
Learning outcomes
After we have studied the unit, we will be able to
* narrate incidents and events in a logical sequence
® participate in conversation, discussions and debates
* read maps, charts, graphs, etc.

English For Today 15
Lesson 1: Have you any favourite pastime?
A Look at the pictures. What are the persons doing here? When do they
do these kinds of activities?
le 4
ote = hid
f Wi WZ
oe Wages
Ce Ce a ag)
ques ee, Pa Se
B Read the conversation and answer the questions.
Tiya : Anusha, what's the matter? You’re wearing sports trousers, T-shirts,
sports shoes and carrying a bag! Where are you coming from?
And you look tired!
Anusha _ : Not exactly, Tiya. I’m great because I’m just coming back from
the gym.
Tiya : Do you go to the gym regularly?
Anusha _ : Yes, I do. I go twice a week. It’s one of my favourite pastimes.
Tiya : Really! Going to the gym is your favourite pastime! You make
me laugh!
Anusha —_: Why not? I like sports because I like to be fit. I’m not a lazy
person like you!
Tiya : What do you do there?
Anusha _ : I do yoga.
Tiya : Don’t you have any other pastimes?
Anusha =: Hmm... yes, Ihave. I like playing chess, painting, and reading
books when I’m free. I also like photography but I’m yet to learn
co it. What do you doin your pastime?
S
QQ

16 English For Today

Tiya : [like watching TV, listening to music, reading books and
magazines, and playing games on the computer. I do like
gardening. But we don’t have sufficient space. So I do pot
planting. By the way,I don’t know much about yoga. Would
you please tell me about it?

Anusha — : Sure! I’ll give you an article on it. It will help you know about yoga.
Okay?

Questions

1 Why does Anusha like going to the gym?

2 What are her pastimes?

3 Make a list of Tiya’s pastimes.

4 How will Tiya learn about yoga?

Cc Read the following texts. Then check (1) ) the statements below:
Yoga: Tap into the many health benefits

Understanding yoga
Yoga is a kind of posture and breathing exercise. It brings together physical and
mental disciplines to achieve peace of body and mind, helping you relax and
manage stress and anxiety. Traditional yoga puts emphasis on behavior, diet
and meditation. But if you're just looking for better stress management—and not
an entire lifestyle change—yoga can still help. Youga trainers gradually choose
easier to complex activities for practitioners. However, all practitioners do not
necessarily need the same kinds of practice.

he health benefits of yoga

e potential health benefits of yoga are numerous and may include:

e Stress reduction. With its quiet, precise movements, yoga draws your
focus away from your busy, chaotic day and towards calm as you
move your body through poses that require balance and concentration.

ES
8

English For Today 17

e Increased fitness. As you learn and refine new poses, you may enjoy
improved balance, flexibility, range of motion and strength. And this
means you're less likely to injure yourself in other physical endeavors or
in your daily activities.

e Management of chronic health conditions. Yoga might help in a
variety of health conditions, such as cancer, depression, pain, anxiety and
insomnia, fatigue and mood shifts. Yoga can also help reduce heart rate
and blood pressure.

e Weight loss. If you're overweight or have eating disorder, yoga may help
you make the healthy lifestyle changes necessary to gain control of your
eating and reduce weight.

While you shouldn't expect yoga to cure you or offer you 100 percent relief, it
can help some health conditions when combined with standard treatment. And
if you already enjoy good health, yoga can be an enjoyable supplement to your
regular fitness routine.
D_ Work in pairs. Discuss these questions. Give your own opinions.
1 How does exercise work on our memory?
2 What other benefits can you think of from exercise?
3 What is the most important benefit of exercise to you and why?
E Complete the sentences.
a Yogais a practice Of ..........cececsecececneeeeeeeeeeeeen ens
b_ Traditional Yoga works through .............cscceceeneeeeeeeeneeteneneneenen
c Yoga is very effective in managing...............ccsceeecneeeee
d Through the poses of balance and concentration Yoga .............000000e
Co eeeeceecesceeeeeeeceeessrtsttsteeseeeeeee reSults in increased fitness.
f Yoga can reduce or work for ......... 0... ceeeeeeeecneceeeeeeeeeeneaeaeenenees
g@ Yoga-can control ssscsoraeseseuvrermeeer
h Yoga cannot cure 100 percent, but .............c ce ceceee none nee eeee
Format 3, English For Today-9-10

18 English For Today
F Check (1) the statements about yoga below.
. Yoga improves fitness. my It works both on body and mind. | [1]

Yoga has little to do with f| It helps practitioners undergo

eating habits. similar level of difficulty.

c | It may differ according to If you know yoga, you have better) [_]

practitioners’ levels. control over your real life hazards.

It helps people shake off all oO hj It also helps you live longer. oO

types of physical and mental

disorders.
G Read the text.
Hi, I'm Shyam. I'm from Magura. Although it’s the district headquarters, it's a
small town. I'm in grade 9 now in Chander Haat Bidyaloya. I love games and
sports very much. My father was an athlete in his student life. He inspires me to
follow his footsteps and take part in games and sports or do some exercise
besides my studies. So I get up early in the morning and take a walk with my
father almost every day. We walk for about an hour. At school, during break I
play kabadi, gollachhut, badminton, table tennis, and carom. Sometimes I prac-
tise the high jump and the long jump outside the school campus. Playing football
is a passion for me. I like watching television too.
I watch sports programmes on different TV channels during my free time. I'm a
fan of National Geographic, Discovery, and Animal Planet for their
documentaries as they are quite interesting as well as educative. Recently my
father has presented me with a camera as he was very happy with the result of
my Junior School Certificate exam. When I hold the camera, I feel so excited! I
wish I could be an amateur photographer in future - not to take only personal
photographs at different parties but to shoot our beautiful Bangladesh. I'm sure
that soon photography will be my most favourite pastime.

=
Rg

English For Today 19
H Work in pairs. Read the statements of the following grid. First
match the parts in Column B with Column C to make complete
sentences. Then make questions for the statements in Column A.
What ------------------------- | Despite the fact that] besides his studies|
Magura is a _ district
iti all town.
When ------------------------- | headquarters, wis a smam town
His father was a | imhis student life.
How --------------------------
sportsman .
during break at
When w--ee-eveeeeeeneeneeneee He encourages him for] gchool.
games and sports
on different TV
Who -------------------------- | Shyam enjoys _ playing
: channels.
different games and sports
How long -------------------- | He walks with his father.
They walk for their educative
Why --------------------------- | He prefers programmes on_ | values.
nature and life
for about an hour.
What -------------------------- | He watches sports
programmes
I Write about your own pastime following the model in G.
2
R

2 Englieh For Today

Lesson 2: Reading really helps!

A —_— Read the conversation and tel] what Anusha is going to read.

Anusha : Tiya, hope you enjoyed the article on yoga.

Trya : Yes, it’s great. By the way, Anusha, how did you enjoy
London Olympics as a sports lover?

Anusha : People rightly say that it is the greatest show on earth. I'm still
thrilled to remember what Michael Phelps and Usain Bolt
have shown. Amazing!

Tiya : Right you are. They are incredible. However, I’ve got an
interesting article on the Internet on Michael Phelps and
Usain Bolt. You might like it end take part in the debate on who
ig better between these two greats. Please read it.

Anusha : Abh... Michael Phelps and Usain Bok! Thank yon Tiya! I wonld
love to read it.

B Read the text published in a newspaper in 2012, amd answer the

questions that follow.

Michael Phelpa, Usain Bolt are great, but who's better?

With the curtains closing on the 2012 London Olympics, it's impossible not

to look back and reflect on the greatest performances by Olympic athletes.

P| ; - _ ae
Se i ‘ ‘=
Aus ‘ ' | : Ae 7
[Phoin: Kirby Lee, USA TODAY Sports] 3

English For Today 21
The Olympics have many memorable moments and athletes we'll remember by
name alone. The list is quite big. Michael Phelps and Usain Bolt are the latest
addition to this list of the bests. They made London Olympics stand apart. If
there is any question like this: "What is the standout performance of London
2012?", perhaps the answer is "The London Games gave us Michael Phelps vs.
Usain Bolt." The first one is an already decorated Olympian, who put the
finishing touches on his great athletic careers. And another came up with a new
definition of fast. Two of the most popular Olympic sports, sprinting and
swimming, saw their two biggest stars captivating audiences. They'd also domi-
nated the 2008 Beijing Games, but Phelps and Bolt cemented their legacies in
London. Phelps, the American swimmer, passed gymnast Larissa Latynia for the
most Olympic medals ever. Bolt was the third man to repeat as a 100-meter gold
medalist and the first as a 200-meter gold medalist, and he broke his own Olym-
pic record by running the 100 meter in 9.63 seconds. Once Phelps and Bolt were
back in their pool and track, the story lines changed.
Phelps is the most-decorated Olympian ever, with 22 overall medals: 18 gold,
2 silver, 2 bronze. Bolt is the most accomplished Olympic sprinter, with the
unprecedented double, making clear that he's the fastest man in the world.
But there's a debate: Who had the better Olympics? It'd be tough to top Phelps’
eight gold medals in Beijing, but what if we're only talking London?
London was Phelps' grand finale. He won four golds and two silvers in seven
events, and he says he'll never race again.
London was Bolt's chance to prove he's still the greatest. Bolt won six gold
medals in six Olympic finals. He is the first man ever in the history of the modern
Games to sweep the 100 and 200 in back-to-back Olympics. Not to mention the
addition of back-to-back relay golds.
And Bolt became a legend, in his own words. Phelps already was. Bolt is just 25
years old, so there is no telling how long he can be on top of the sprinting world.
What if he decides to "retire" from sprinting to focus on the 400 meters, just to
break another world record or two? It would be amazing—and entirely possible
for him to accomplish.
Who had the better 2012 Games? You tell us, let the debate begin.

© [Adapted from USA Today, Sports, London 2012]

S

N

22 English For Today
Questions
1 What makes London Olympic 2012 exceptionally sensational?
2 How are Phelps and Bolt brilliantly similar and different?
3 Between these two Olympians who has bagged the highest honour within
the same time frame?
4 What is special in Bolt so far?
5 How does Bolt evaluate himself ?
Cc Make two flow charts on Michael Phelps and Usain Bolt. The first
two are done for you.
Michael Phelps
the
greatest
swimmer —»> —>
ever
Usain Bolt
the most
—— —_ ——
successful
D Read the following text and complete the blank spaces with the
appropriate words from the box below.
answer sprinter Olympians speed Olympics swimmer
debate legends retired prove histories biggest
These are the stories of two most successful Olympians of history. While
one is famous as the fastest .........., the other is celebrated as the fastest
...... Of the world. However, both are unparalleled for their ........... in their
own field. They made history in the Beijing .......... They have made newer
seseeeeeeee in’ the London Olympics too. They are the living .............. now.
Though Phelps has .......... from his race, Bolt has prospects to ........ himself
in the next Olympic as well. After the .......... show on earth is over in London, «
this .......... will go on— who is better. Only time will ............ this question. &

English For Today 23
E Work in pairs. Decide who is better between these two champions.
Give arguments in favour of your decisions.

Lesson 3: Change in pastime
A Read the text,
Childhood outdoor pastimes ‘in decline‘
Traditional childhood pastimes of climbing trees and playing conkers are in
decline, according to survey by the RSPB (Royal Society for the Protection
of Birds). It’s a charitable organisation registered in England and Wales.
The survey shows that people under 34 recall far fewer such childhood
outdoor experiences than people over 55, according to a survey by RSPB.
People were asked which of the twelve Childhood outdoor experiences they
could remember. The answer included making dens, daisy chains, climbing
trees, playing conkers and feeding birds. Four out of five boys climbed trees
and the same number of girls made daisy chains. But the survey showed the
numbers declining among the newer generations.
Some 15% more of those aged over 55 had these —
outdoor experiences in their childhood,
compared with those between 15-34 years old. \ ew
Some 92% of the public agreed that experiences | ¥ AER ad Bm.
of nature were still important to children, and Piao Ny ae es
82% agreed that schools should play a role in b a mn) ..
providing them to all children. se SAY fa Ace:
The survey has highlighted the positive impact of ))) Shs a ee A
contact with nature on a child's education, health, “====asRaLiese td
wellbeing and social skills. At the same time, there has been a decline in these
opportunities, with negative consequences for children, families and society—a
condition now known as nature deficit disorder.
Mike Clarke, chief executive of the RSPB, will meet parliament members to
urge the government to join other organisations in providing children with first-
hand experiences of the natural environment. ..."We believe this guidance
should include the many positive impacts to children of having contact with
nature and learning outside the classroom."

% [Adapted from BBC news 6 September 2010]

S

g

24 English For Today

B___ Read the following words and write their meanings as you understand
them from the context. If you don’t understand, check the words
from a dictionary.
CODKETS ween ecuses ss eoereoees ne es ereeeemmsmemesew eu ene ememuereseemeacueeneevens
CONS cacsssisavnosawensneeeresenertieawiet saa vb we ae MEIEREERINERIIS
Aecline 0... ceeccec see ee eee eeeeeeeeeeceen sense eebeneceeenieeeeeeeeanen
IMPACl seeeveverseexsexsireswrerecenas exer ERE
CONSEQUENCE 2.0... eee cee cc cece cece neces cece nen eeeeeeeeeaeneeseeeee eee ees
Gisorder ...... 0... cece eee eec seen ee eeceeeeceeeeeeeea eee eeeeeeeaeeeaeeeeeeeeeees
UC e we we wey 6 6 6 O aE ars

Cc Read the following statement taken from the text in A and say
what the subject of comparison is. Find out the other comparison in
the text above.

The survey shows that people under 34 recall fewer such childhood

outdoor experiences than people over 55, according to a survey by Ipsos

Mori for RSPB.

D Do you agree that if children have more contacts with nature, these
will have a positive impacet on them? Make a list of the benefits
or harms they may have if taken to nature frequently.

E Speak to the senior citizens in your home or community. Ask them
about their pastime activities and take notes on them. Then write a
paragraph in the style of the text given in Section A to show the
differences. Also mention why these differences have taken place.

Lesson 4: Change in pastimes in Bangladesh

A Tiya and Anusha decided to make a survey on students’ pastimes
in their class. After the survey they presented their findings ina ,
chart. Look at the chart and read how they explain their findings. S$

English For Today 25
For classes 9-10 For classes 5-6
Playing games and sports 22.3% | Watching television 31.2%
Watching television 17.2% | Playing games on 20.9%
| | computers |
Chatting with friends 13.7% | Reading books or 11.7%
| | magazines
Reading books or 12.9% |Playing games and sports | 9.2%
magazines |
Gardening 10.7% | Attending social 7.8%
programs such as music,
| recitations or debates |
Attending social programs such | 9.1% Chatting with friends 6.7%
as music, recitations or debates |
Playing games on computers 8.2% Gardening 6.1%
Others 5.9% Others 6.4%
Tiya: Hello everyone! My name is Tiya. My friend, Anusha and I are going to do
a presentation on Pastime Habits of Classes 9 and 10 students in our school.
There are 120 students, 60 in class 9 and 60 in class 10. The classes have gender
equity. Each class has 30 male and 30 female students. The survey shows that
22.3 percent of students in classes 9-10 like games and sports as their most
favourite pastime, which is the 4" option given by classes 5-6 students.
Watching television is the second choice (17.2%) by the first group in contrast to
31.2% of the second group. It is noteworthy that watching television is the first
choice of the second group. A considerable number (13.7%) of 9-10 students
like to chat with their friends and thus it becomes the third popular choice in the
chart while this becomes one of the less important choices by the younger kids.
Only 6.7% of the kids take it as their first priority. It's interesting that both the
groups like reading books. 12.9% of students of classes 9-10 take it as their
favourite pastime. The number is 11.7% for Classes 5-6 students. Besides,
gardening is voted (10.7% of students) to be the 5" preference by the grown up
group though it is not that much liked by the younger group. Only 6.1% of the
young kids are involved in it. This is interesting that though the higher number
of students in classes 9-10 prefer attending social programs (9.1%) than
students of classes 5-6 (7.8%), yet as a choice it is preferred by the latter group.
It is the 5" choice for them while to the older group it is the 6". Young kids
Format 4, English For Today-9-10

26 English For Today
have greater fascination for playing games on the computers (20.9% like it as
their first choice). The chart shows that as the kids grow up, they lose their
passion for computer games. According to the chart the ratio declines to 8.2%
from 20.9% when the kids are students of classes 9-10. Finally, it can be said that
the influence of television has impact on both the groups but the more students
grow up, the more they opt for fields/ gym.
Questions
1 What are the gender policy of the surveyers?
2 What are the survey findings regarding watching television?
3 Which age group is more interested in socializing with others?
4 According to the chart, how do the kids change their pastimes when they
are grown up? What changes does the chart for 9-10 reflect?
B_ Work in groups. Make a chart on the pastimes of the students in your
class and present it to your class.
Lesson 5: Pastimes vary
A Read the conversation. What is it about? Do you agree or disagree?
Tiya : Anusha, I really wonder how pastimes vary from generation
to generation.
Anusha : Oh yes. I can tell you how.
Tiya : Although I don’t know exactly, I think time is a big factor.
Anusha : You are right. Time changes many things. It changes our tastes
and abilities. Technology has roles too. Look, there was a time
when playing in the fields was very popular because we had many
open fields around. Going to neighbours’ houses and hanging out
in groups were popular pastimes as well. You won't see these
activities now. The process of urbanization, the aggression of
satellite television and people's dependence on technology have
changed our lifestyle. Now boys and girls of urban and semi-urban
areas are more dependent on the computer for social networking,
video games, or computer assisted programmes.
Tiya : Right. But how do you know all these things, Anusha?
Anusha : Oh....[ read an interesting article on people’s changing
pastimes. It analyses the issue through a graph. Here it is. Read, 20
and I’m sure you will enjoy it. R

English For Today 27
B_ Read the article. Underline the words/expressions used in the article
to show the changes in the data. The first one is done for you in the
text.
Young people's changing attitude to pastimes
mWatching TV Games and sports —Online/computer assisted programmes
50% 4R% 52%
41% 58%
25% 93%
14%
3% [1
1990 2000 2010

There is change in people's preferences for pastimes. A recent survey shows that
during the last twenty years, teenagers have gone through significant changes in
choosing their pastimes. The survey results are presented through a graph which
shows that there is a steady rise in young people's tendency to watch TV. In
1990, 41% of teenagers liked watching TV which increased to 48% in the next
ten years and it further increased to 52% in the next decade. Unfortunately, the
picture is grim in terms of young people's attraction to field games and sports.
While 50% of youngsters opted for games and sports in the 1990s, the figure was
12% less after a decade at 38%. Unfortunately the falling tendency persisted
through the next ten years and by 2010 it came down to 25%. Though the young
people have dissociated themselves noticeably from games and sports, there is a
sharp and steady rise in their association with online or computer assisted
programmes. In 1990 when the users of online or computer for pastimes were
only 9%, in 2000 the number nearly doubled and reached 14%, and with a rapid

increase in the next ten years it shot up to 23%.
The survey also explains the reasons for this change. It says that television has
become a part of everyday life even to the underprivileged section of society.
This has resulted in larger number of young people opting for watching
« TVas one of the most favourite pastimes. The increasing urbanization has
§ reduced the number of open fields. Therefore, there is a fall in selecting games

28 English For Today
and sports as favourite pastimes, though it's not a good news for the country.
And the reason for selecting the computer assisted or online programmes
is that computer technology is getting cheaper, easier and more popular
every day. Indeed our young generations are stepping into the e-world.
Cc Now work in groups and analyse the following graph.
Elderly people’s changing attitude to pastimes in a community
a a
“ ; 49%
wt sa AP 36% | 39% m Watching TV
oO ;
# Playing cards
a 17%
17% = ~ Drawing room
at 6% chats
# 11% F
- sed z @ Others
1990 2000 2010
=
&

Unit Three
Events and festivals
= ahes
» ee hee, Ys \ , exis
: ae F MF Happy Me.
So — cA “j SJ Gaol te ld
- a os : i SD —
Learning outcomes
After we have studied this unit, we will be able to
* talk about events and festivale
* ask and angwer questions and give opinions in a logical sequence
° infer meanings from the context,
=
a

30 English For Today
Lesson 1: Mother’s Day
A Look at the picture and discuss the questions.
1 What do you think the woman is to the | ge |
child? ! Said i
2 Why is she holding the child on her flank?|} é ro *|
3 Cana mother be compared to anybody? | Qh sosh | i
“She can be compared with no other; : x Nt vee
This lovely lady is none but my mother.” a x \ \ \ r @:
B Listen to the audio and answer the questions that follow.
C ‘Choose the correct answer.
1 According to ancient Greek myths Rhea is the
a motherofgods. b goddess of love.
c goddess of wealth. d goddess of health.
2 The name of Jesus Christ’s mother was
a Rhea. b Mary.
c Anna. d Anna Junior.
3 Julia Ward Howe was
a Dutch. b_ English.
c Australian. d American.
4 Mother's Day was first announced as a formal holiday in the USA in
a 1872. b 1905.
ec 1910. d 1914.
5 In 1914 the American president was
a Roosevelt. b Ford.
c Nixon. d Wilson.
6 Which country doesn’t celebrate Mother’s Day on the 2™ Sunday of
May?
a Denmark b TheUK 855
c Italy d Turkey s

English For Today 31
D Listen to the text again and answer these questions.

1 What country first observed Mother’s Day as a national holiday?

2 When is Mother’s Day now celebrated by most of the countries in

the world?

3 How is Mother's Day usually observed?

4 Why should we observe Mother's Day?
E Write a paragraph by answering each of the following questions.

1 Do you help your mother with her housework? How?

2 Do you celebrate Mother’s Day? If yes, when and how?
Lesson 2 : May Day v f
A Look at the picture and talk about it. b a

1 What do you see in the picture? -_ i:

2 Can you relate any historical event to this M AY

picture? What happened on this day? A A
B Read the text and answer the questions that follow. y
May Day or International Workers’ Day is observed on May 1 all over the world
today to commemorate the historical struggle and sacrifices of the working
people to establish an eight-hour workday. It is a public holiday in almost all the
countries of the world.
Since the Industrial Revolution“ in the 18 and 19 centuries in Europe and
the US, the workers in mills and factories had been working a long shift,
fourteen or even more hours a day.
On May 1* in 1886, inspired by the trade unions@, half of the workers
at the McCormick Harvesting Machine Company in Chicago went on strike
demanding an eight-hour workday. Two days later, a workers’ rally was held
near the McCormick Harvester Machine Company and about 6000 workers
joined it. The rally was addressed by the labour leaders. They urged the workers
to stand together, to go on with their struggle and not to give in to their bosses.
At one point of the rally, some strikebreakers started leaving the meeting place.
The strikers went down the street to bring them back. Suddenly about 200
policemen attacked them with clubs and revolvers. One striker was killed
e instantly, five or six others were seriously wounded and many others were
§ injured.

32 English For Today
The events of May 1, 1886 are a reminder that workers will continue to be
exploited until they stand up and speak out to gain better working conditions,
better pay and better lives.
Notes
1. Industrial Revolution: the period, especially in the 18 and 19" centuries Europe,
when machines were invented and first factories were established.
2. Trade Union: an organisation that represents workers of mills and factories.
Questions
1 What does May Day refer to?
2 How long did the workers have to work in a day before the May 1 strike?
3 Why did the workers in Chicago go on a strike?
4 What do you learn from the events of May 1, 1886?
Cc Fill in the blanks with the verbs given in the box. Put them into their
correct forms.
add arrive begin do hear live
send support tread work
Tania is a poor garment worker. She in a big garment factory in Gazipur.
She in a slum with a few fellow workers. She works eight hours a day
onamonthly salary of Tk. 3000/-. She does overtime to some more
money to her income. If she can save something, she it to her father to
the family.
One day Tania was busy her work in the factory. Suddenly she
——— someone shouting “Fire! Fire!” The workers were panic-stricken
and everyone to rush to the stairs. There were not enough staircases
in the factory building. So some workers were under the foot and
others were injured in some other ways. However, the fire brigade eo
there in minutes and nothing serious happened. ES

English For Today 33
D Now read the completed passage in C silently and answer the following
questions.
1 ‘Do you think Tania’s monthly salary is enough for her work?
2 Is the factory safe enough for workers? Why do you think so?
3 Do you have any suggestions for safety of factory workers? If so,
what?
Lesson 3 : International Mother Language Day - 1
A Look at the picture and talk about it. ————e
1 What’s the picture about? ; ee i
2 What’s the place in the picture? 5 a
3 Why was it built? l\ | we ee
B Read the text. my ty i 5 i]
i
21 February is a memorable day in our te ia! ig
national history. We observe the day every [t @\jem ae ofan) =! “¥!
year as International Mother Language Day. po ae
The day is a national holiday.
On this day, we pay tribute to the martyrs who laid down their lives to
establish Bangla as a state language in undivided Pakistan in 1952,The
struggle to achieve our language rights is known as the Language Movement.
The seed of the Language Movement was sown on 21 March 1948 when
Mohammad Ali Jinnah, the Governor General of Pakistan, declared in a public
meeting in Dhaka that Urdu would be the only state language of Pakistan.
The declaration raised a storm of protest in the eastern part of the country.
The protest continued non-stop, gathering momentum day by day. It turned into
a movement and reached its climax in 1952. The government outlawed all sorts
of public meetings and rallies to stop it.
The students of Dhaka University defied the law and brought out a peaceful
protest procession on 21 February 1952. When the procession reached near
Dhaka Medical College, the police opened fire on the students, killing Salam,
Rafig, Barkat, Safiur and Jabbar. As a result, there were mass protests all over
the country and the government had to declare Bangla as a state language. This
kindled the sparks of independence movement of Bangladesh.
Format 5, English For Today-9-10

34 English For Today
Cc Complete the chart.
Time What happened
a
D Match the words with their meanings.
tribute e to cause or to stimulate
climax e to refuse to obey
outlaw e to give in
defy e the ability to keep increasing or developing
provoke e —_an act to show respect or admiration
relent e —_ the most exciting point in time
momentum | , to ban
E Answer these questions.
1 Why do we observe 21 February as the International Mother
Language Day?
2 What happened when Urdu was declared as the only state language
of Pakistan?
3 “The seed of independence was sown on 21 February 1952”. Do you
agree? Why?
Lesson 4 : International Mother Language Day - 2
A Discuss these questions.
1 When did the International Mother Language Day celebration begin?
2 What does the abbreviation UNESCO stand for?
3 What is the other name of 21 February? 2
S
AQ

English For Today 35
B Read more about International Mother Language Day.
21 February is observed as Shaheed Dibosh every year throughout the country
in remembrance of the martyrs of language movement of 1952. The comme-
moration begins at the early hours of the day with mourning songs that recall the
supreme sacrifices of our language martyrs. People wear black badges and go to
the Shaheed Minar in barefoot processions, singing mourning songs. They
place wreaths at the Minar. Many of them visit the graves of the martyrs at
Azimpur graveyard and pray for them. They also attend various programmes
organised in remembrance of the language martyrs.
The UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation) on 17 November in 1999 proclaimed February 21 as the
International Mother Language Day in recognition of the sacrifices of the
martyrs for the rightful place of Bangla. The day is now annually observed
worldwide to promote awareness of linguistic and cultural diversity and
multilingualism.
Cc Match the words/phrases in the table with their meanings.
wreath e encourage
in remembrance of |e in appreciation of
proclaim e practice of using several languages
promote e an arrangement of flowers in the shape of a circle
diversity e declare
multilingualism © in memory of
in recognition of ° variety
D Read the text in B again and answer these questions.
1 Why is 21 February called Shaheed Dibosh?
2 Why do people go to the Shaheed Minar? How do they go there?
_ 3 Why is 21 February now observed throughout the world every
S year?

36 English For Today
E Complete the passage with suitable words.
On 21 February 1952 was shed ata place between Dhaka
Medical College and Dhaka University to establish Bangla as
astate______ of Pakistan.
All subsequent movements struggles for independence had their
origin in the historic language... Shaheed Minar is the
of the supreme sacrifice the mother tongue.
F Write briefly how you observed this year’s 21 February at your school.
Lesson 5 : Independence Day ee
A Look at the picture and ask and a4
answer the questions about it. : f
1 What can you see in the picture? te f| +
2 Where is it? Sag jt #
3 Why was it built? y/ ™ ,
B Read the text. ee
“de |
26 March, our Independence Day, is the
biggest state festival. The day is celebrated
every year in the country with great enthusiasm and fervour. It is a national
holiday. All offices, educational institutions, shops and factories remain closed
on this day. The day begins with a 31 gun salute,
Early in the morning the President and the Prime Minister on behalf of the nation
place floral wreaths at the National Mausoleum at Savar. Then other leaders,
political parties, diplomats, social and cultural organisations, educational institutions
and freedom fighters pay homage to the martyrs. People from all walks of life
also go there in rallics and processions. There are many cultural programmes
throughout the day, highlighting the heroic struggle and sacrifice in 1971.
The country also witnesses a spectacular parade of defence forces, border
guards, police, ansars and the VDP (Village Defence Party) at the National
Parade Ground near the National Parliament. In Bangabandhu National Stadium,
school children, scouts and girl guides take part in various displays to entertain
thousands of spectators. Educational institutions also organise their individual
programmes. Sports meets and tournaments are also organised on the day, s
including the exciting boat race in the river Buriganga. R

English For Today 37
In the evening, all major public buildings are illuminated with colourful lights.
Bangla Academy, Bangladesh Shilpakala Academy and other socio-cultural
organisations hold cultural functions. Similar functions are also arranged in
other places in the country.
C Match the words with their meanings.
fervour e acts of performing skills
alike e to light up
spectator |e  inasimilar way
displays e ~—_ a strong feeling of excitement
illuminate |e aperson who is watching an event
D_ Choose the best answer.
1 Our biggest state festival is
a Victory Day.
b Shaheed Dibosh.
c Pahela Boishakh.
d Independence Day.
2 The celebration of Independence Day begins with
a processions.
b gun salute.
ce placing wreaths at the National Mausoleum.
d__ parade by defence forces.
3 The National Mausoleum is
a on Dhaka University campus.
bat Ramna Park.
c at Savar.
5 d__ near Dhaka Medical College.

38 English For Today
4 On Independence Day a National Parade is held
a at the National Parade Ground.
b in the streets.
cin the decorated vehicles.
din Bangabandhu Stadium.
E Write in brief, how you have celebrated this year’s Independence Day
at your school.
Lesson 6: Pahela Boishakh
A ___s Look at the picture. Then ask and answer the questions about it.
Beh 2 a vase Ne) ; ‘lee ia
Te om Sin Nice My ere i Oe 1 e i
Cae ON AT eo oe BY: 38 4 ie
EN BE EINE Oe ace SO riK |
ia ee ir ay beigy Qin Ad 4-4 a Ar
1 What’s the picture about?
2 Where do you think the picture was taken?
3 What are the people doing?
=
8

English For Today 39
B Read the text.
‘Pahela Boishakh' is the first day of Bangla new year. The day is a public holiday.
This day has a special significance for us as it is a part of Bangalee culture and
tradition. People from all walks of life, irrespective of their ethnic identity or
religious beliefs, celebrate the day with traditional festivities. On this day, the
whole of Bangladesh is in a festive mood. The day inspires people to start life
with renewed hopes and inspirations.
Every year the day is celebrated traditionally. People wake up early in the
morning, have a bath and wear traditional clothes. Women wear white sarees
with red borders and adorn themselves with colourful churis and flowers, while
men dress themselves in pajamas and punjabis. It is a day when people love
eating traditional food.
One of the most colourful events of the day is held in Dhaka. Early in the
morning, people in hundreds and thousands pour in from all directions to attend
the cultural function at Ramna Batamul organised by Chhayanaut. The cultural
programme begins just at sunrise and the renowned artists of the country take
part in the programme that starts with the famous Tagore-song
Esho-he-Boishakh, Esho Esho .....Artists also sing traditional folk songs, and
perform classical dances to the rhythm of musical instruments.
People also come to join the colourful processions, the biggest carnival of the
country, organised by the Fine Arts students of Dhaka University. The
procession usually displays the traditional practices of Bangalee culture. The
masks and wreaths worn by the people are so fascinating! Often they symbolise
contemporary worries or happiness in the national life. It attracts an increasing
number of foreign tourists every year.
The day is also observed all over the country. Different social and cultural
organisations and educational institutions celebrate the day with their own
cultural programmes.
On this day, newspapers bring out special supplements. There are also special
programmes on the radio and television.
The celebration of Pahela Boishakh marks a day of cultural unity for the whole
nation.

%

g

40 English For Today

Cc Ask and answer these questions in pairs.

1 Do you go out in the morning of Pahela Boishakh? If you do,
where do you go? If not, what do you do?

2 What kind of food do you eat in the morning of Pahela Boishakh?

3 Do you wear any special clothes on this occasion?

D Complete the passage with suitable words.

The word Pahela means the first and Boishakh is the month of

Bangla calendar. The day is observed not in Bangladesh but in

some other parts of the world. It is celebrated in West Bengal, Assam and

Tripura. It is also in Australia and the UK. In Australia, the largest

for Bangla new year is the Sydney Boishakhi Mela held

Sydney Olympic Park. In England, the Bangalees celebrate the

day with a street in London. It is the _____ Asian festival in

Europe, Bangladesh and West Bengal.

E Describe your own cultural or religious festival that you celebrate.
You can use the following words. You canalso use other words
relevant to the festival.

colourful special traditional religious dance
cultural flowers food songs festive
ES
Rg

Unit Four
Are we aware?
—_ a — |
Ena AYE
Ae A Mh SS pe > ae
= a 7 =
= &)
Learning outcomes
After we have studied the unit, we will be able to
e ask and tell about problems
e seek and give suggestions
e listen for specific information
e narrate something in writing
e read charts and do a project work.
Format 6, English For Today-9-10

42 English For Today
Lesson 1: The ferry boat
A Look at the picture and answer these questions.
7 —
~ é us j
. > oe . Fe im ®
~a! 73 = ete \{ A ‘
’ a Nod be ik "
>) 2" \ ye ia” &
. -— — hit = 4 ’ y

= — i t : _ ty em ' — —*

1 Where can you find this kind of boat?

2 Why does the boatman carry passengers across a river?

3 Why do people use country boats?
B Read the text and answer the following questions.
“Ts there anybody here who has ever crossed a river by a country boat?”
“T have, teacher,” said Jamil. “And I clearly remember what happened
in that journey.”
“Would you please tell us what happened?” the teacher asked.
"Okay, teacher. It happened when I was in class 6. On a weekly bazar day, people
were coming back with their shopping bags and baskets in hands, on shoulders
and heads. They had to cross the river. It was not a big river. There was a ferry
boat plying on the river. The boat could cross it in 8-10 minutes. It was just after
sunset. The weather was getting bad. The wind started blowing from the ~
north-west. Black clouds were moving fast in the sky. 3

English For Today 43
Everybody was trying to get into the boat. ‘No more, no more, please wait,’
shouted the boatman. But nobody listened to him.”
“What happened then, Jamil?” asked Rumi.
“With too many people on board, the boat sank in the middle of the river,”
replied Jamil.
“Oh no! What happened then?” asked the teacher. “Thank God. There were
no casualties. All the passengers swam to the other side. But some of them lost
the stuff they were carrying such as oil, salt and milk,” said Jamil.
“Were you on the boat?” asked the teacher. “No, teacher. Seeing the
boat overcrowded, I waited for the next trip,” replied Jamil.
“You did the right thing, Jamil.”
Questions
Tick the best answer.
1 A ferry boat was plying on the river.
Here ‘plying’ means
a playing with other boats.
b sinking in the river.
c travelling along a route.
d waiting for passengers.
2 Why was everybody trying to get into the boat?
Because
a it was a weekly bazar day.
b after sunset no ferry would ply on the river.
c everybody had shopping bags with them.
d it was going to be a dark and stormy evening.
3 The boatman requested the people to wait, because
a his boat was very small.
b the boat had already too many people.
c there were other boats they could take.
S d he would not ferry people with bags and baskets.

44 English For Today
4 “With too many people on board , the boat sank ...”
Here the phrase ‘on board’ means
a on the boat.
b on the wooden board.
c outside the boat.
d on the notice board.
5 There were no casualties.
The statement tells us that
a nobody died.
b nobody was rescued.
c nobody accepted their fate.
d nobody lost anything.
6 The boat was overcrowded.
Here ‘overcrowded’ means
a people were quarrelling on the boat.
b the boat was unable to carry any more people.
c the boatman did not like a crowd.
d people were sitting on the boat’s bamboo hood.
Cc Discuss in groups and write answers to these questions.
1 Why did some people have little or no patience when the ferry
boat was in danger of sinking?
2 ‘No more, No more, please wait! who said this? Explain in 2/3
sentences.
3 Answer the questions below:
a If we have too many buyers of fish in the market, what is likely to
happen?
b If we have too many passengers at a bus or train station, what may
happen?
c If we have too many people in a village / town/ city, what will
happen? -
ES

English For Today 45
Lesson 2: Are we too many?
A Read the text and do the following project work.
The next day when the teacher came to the class and was about to start the
lesson, Shanti Barua stood up and said, “Teacher, can I ask you a question,
please?”
“Go ahead, Shanti,” said the teacher.
"In our last class, we heard Jamil's story of how too many people made the ferry
boat sink. I have also seen crowds of people at the bus stand, railway station,
launch and steamer ghats. It is not uncommon to see people travelling on top of
a bus or train and meeting with tragic accidents. My question is: Are we really
too many people in the country?"
“Thank you, Shanti. Please sit down.”
The teacher then looked round the class and asked,“How many of you have the
same question in mind?”
Almost all the hands went up.
"Okay," the teacher continued. "Finding the right answer to this question is very
important for us— for our national development. So we will look at this issue with
some facts so that we can find out if we are really too many or not."
Project work: Discuss in groups and carry out a survey on the topic: "Too many
people" You can do the following things:

e Select only one small area such as your village or locality in the

town / city where you live.
e Find out its area. (You can do it by walking around it. At normal
speed you can cover about one kilometer in ten minutes. )

e Find out the number of people living in it.

e Find out about the people’s occupations, unemployment and poverty.
B_ Listen to the Audio. Listen how the teacher talks about the population

of Bangladesh and answer the following questions.
&

46 English For Today
Questions
Tick the best answer.
1 Bangladesh is a small country, because
a_ its land area is small.
b it has about 150 million people.
c itis the 8 most populous country in the world.
d_ it has limited resources.
2 Density of population in any country means
a all the people in a country.
b number of people living in one square kilometer.
ce 1000 people living in one square kilometer.
d too many people living in one square kilometer.
3 Our yearly population growth rate is
a 1.9% b 1.40%
c 2.1% d 1.1%
4 Our birth rate is per thousand.
a 6.1 b 1.40
ce 20.1 d 14
5 What will be the size of our population in 2050?
a 150m b 197m
c 217m d 250m
Cc Listen again and answer these questions.
1 How do you get the population growth rate of a country?
2 Why will the population of Bangladesh be so large in 2050?
=<
ES

English For Today 47

D Read the chart and fill in the gaps with information from the table
Use comparatives and superlatives where necessary. The chart
shows facts about some countries including Bangladesh.

Bangladesh Sri Lanka India China
ee
144,000 sq km (approx) | 65, 600 sq km_ | 3,287,590 sq km_ | 9,600,000 sq km

Density of 332 382 143
population
Birth rate | 20.1 17.42 22,22 12.29
per 1000
Death rate 5.92 748 7.03
(per 1000)
In terms of land area Bangladesh is (1) (larger) than Sri Lanka, but (2)
than India. China is, of course, (3) of all the four countries.
Sri Lanka has the (4) population among the four countries.
However, China has the (5) population shown in the chart.
In fact, China has the (6) population in the world and India
has the (7) highest population in the world. On the other
hand, China has the (8) growth rate among the 4
countries. Bangladesh has (9) growth rate than India, but
higher birth rate than (10) and (11) ——________.
E Write a paragraph about the population situation of any of the
countries above. Use the facts given in the chart in D above.
20
S

48 English For Today
Lesson 3: Our food and shelter
A Look at the pictures and answer these questions.

1 What do the people do in a tree or a boat?

2 Why do they do so?
 H died 43 i” = Pig Se
EZR ai — are

4 a ENE IFPRI a “ ‘om { -
; fs Ne | eee i “ (@) .

a he Py = een BY = aa
B Discuss what will be our problems if our population becomes double

the size it is now.
Cc Read what the teacher Ms Choudhury and her students are talking

about.
The class comes up with different problems. One group leader says, "The
scarcity of food will be a serious problem in the years ahead. It is true that our
agriculturists have developed new varieties of rice and its per acre production
has definitely increased. But the rate of increase in food production cannot keep
pace with the rate of population growth. This is because our land is fixed, i.e. we
cannot increase it, while our population is increasing rapidly."
Another group leader comes up with the housing problem in the country, which
he says adds much to the food problem. He says, "Families are growing larger
in size and at the same time breaking into smaller families. Each smaller family
needs a separate house to live in. Also the arable fields are being divided by
these smaller families among themselves. Mills and factories are being set up,
which occupy a considerable portion of our land. So while we need more land
to grow more food to feed more mouths, our land is shrinking day by day. If our
population grows at the present rate, a day will come when many people will not
find any land to build a house on. And, as a result, many of them might liveon
trees or on the floating boats in the rivers." s

English For Today 49
"No way," another student argues. "Trees are being cut, hills are being cleared
and water bodies are being filled up --- all to meet the needs of too many
people."
"Thank you students," Ms Choudhury says, "You're quite right. Let me tell you
about this village where I was born and brought up. Things were not like this in
the past. I remember as a child, the village was so beautiful! The green paddy
fields and yellow mustard fields seemed to be unending. They used to wave and
dance in the breeze. There used to be a wood in the northern side of the village.
There was a tall tamarind tree in the middle of the wood. Also there was a big
banyan tree which looked like a huge green umbrella, with its aerial roots
hanging down. I often used to go there with my friends. We would often have
picnic there. While the boys would climb the tamarind tree and pick some
tamarinds, I and my best friend Rima used to swing from the hanging roots. But
now, look, the wood is gone. The beauty of the crop fields is spoiled by the
unplanned houses built here and there."
D Tick the best answer.
1 The rate of increase in food production cannot keep pace with the
rate of population growth.
The sentence means that the food production
a is as much as needed.
b is less than what is needed.
c is more than what is needed.
d is sufficient for the population.
2 How can our housing problem add to our food problem?
a After making houses, farmers do not have enough time to
work in the field.
b After making houses, farmers do not have enough money
to buy food.
c If you do not have a house, you cannot store your food.
d For making too many houses, people are using the crop land.
3 What makes our land shrink day by day mentioned in line no. 13?
a Families are growing larger in size.
b Houses and factories are being built on it.
Format 7, English For Today-9-10

50 English For Today
c Smaller families need smaller houses.
d Land grabbers are occupying portions of our land.
4 Many people may have to live on trees, because
a they would like tree houses.
b making houses on trees is less expensive.
c they may not find land to make houses.
d tree houses are safer during floods.
5 People are cutting trees to
a plant more trees.
b keep the environment clean.
c make articles of furniture.
d grow crops or make houses.

E Make a list of things Ms Choudhury saw as a child in the village. Why
do you think she liked them?

F Write a composition about your village or locality. Describe any
change in the things you have noticed over the years, such as houses,
fields, trees, plants, etc.

Lesson 4: The story of Lipi

A Discuss in groups and suggest how we can control the high growth
rate of our population. Check whether your suggestions include
any of the following:

1 Raise awareness among the people, particularly in the rural areas, about
the bad consequences of having more children in the family.

2 Stop child marriage.

3 Keep the size of the family small with two children.

B Read the story of Lipi and answer the questions.

In the next class Ms Choudhury tells her students the story of Lipi.

The year before last, Lipi, a 14-year old girl was in class 9 in a rural school in

Rangpur. Lipi is the eldest of five children---three daughters and two sons. Their

father is a day labourer working on other people's land and mother is a x

homemaker and a part-time worker at other people's homes. The parents, §

English For Today 51
particularly the mother, found it real difficult to raise five children on the small
income the father could earn. Perhaps that is why Lipi's father wanted to marry
her off. But Lipi was not ready to accept what her parents wanted to impose on
her. She wanted to pursue her education. Her mother stood by her, though secret-
ly. When her father arranged her marriage with Tara Mia, the only son of a
farmer in the same village, she became greatly upset. Tara Mia was a widower-il-
literate, but well off. His father had a few acres of arable land and was influential
in the village. The marriage seemed to be inevitable.
Question 1
Discuss in groups and agree upon an answer to this question:
What do you think Lipi should do? Why?
Lipi first talked with her classmates and then with the Headteacher, who was
very sympathetic to her. He called a meeting of the teachers and students of the
school. He also invited the school managing committee members and some
respectable persons of the village to attend the meeting. The Headteacher
explained in detail the serious consequences that would follow Lipi's marriage.
She would be having children from very early age —15 or 16. It would create
constant health hazards to her. Her education would stop. On top of all, her
marriage against her will might shatter her future dream. At one stage, Tara Mia's
father stood up and tried to argue, "You are all making mistakes. Lipi would be
very happy if she got married with Tara Mia. She would have
everything— money, clothes, home and status in the society. Why are you trying
to deprive her of this opportunity?"
But no, the big majority, who attended the meeting, supported the Headteacher.
Lipi’s marriage was called off. She is now studying at Carmichael College,
Rangpur.
Question 2
Make predictions. One is done for you.
If Lipi had married Tara Mia that time, ...
a she would have become a mother of one or two children.
b
= c
8 d

52 English For Today
@; Fill in the blanks in the passage with will / would.
Ms Anjali Barua, a retired college teacher, is a widow who lives in her own flat
in Dhaka. At this stage of her life, she wants to do something for the people of
her village in Sherpur district. Her only daughter lives in Khulna with her
husband and children. Right now she is in her village home. She is writing about
her future plan in a diary.
“J don’t exactly know how I should go about my plan. But one thing I know for
sure,I (1) _ will need a lot of money for the work. If I had 5
million taka, I (2) start an adult education centre. Then if I
found an expert on adult education, 1 (3) prepare learning
materials for the people. If you ask him what the materials (4)
look like, he (5) be able to explain in details. I know if the
people attended the classes at the centre, they (6) learn
how to read, write and count. I (7) definitely give time to
this project. But to carry out the project successfully I (8) ———___
have to live in the village almost permanently. Here is a problem. Who
(9) take care of my flat in Dhaka? If I had a good, reliable man,
I (10) make him caretaker of my flat. But where
(11) I find such a man?
D __ Read the beginning of the story. Write ten new sentences to complete
the story in a way you would like.
Nahar, an 18 year old garments worker lives with her family in a slum. She
dreams of having a life full of joy. One day while going to her work place, she
found a piece of gold in front of the factory gate.
Lesson 5: Let’s become skilled workforce
A In groups discuss the following question and give your opinion
to the whole class: Why should we learn English?
B Read the conversation between Ratan and Rumi to find out
about the importance of English.
Rumi: You remember my brother Raihan, don’t you? He applied for a front
desk job in a 5-star hotel.
Ratan: What happened? Has he got the job? S

English For Today 53

Rumi: No! He couldn’t answer most of the questions in the interview.

Ratan: Why? He did well in the HSC, didn’t he?

Rumi: Yes, he did. But the recruiting officer in the interview asked him questions
in English and he couldn’t understand most of them.

Ratan: Sorry, but I have a different story to tell you. My cousin Sheela did
her HSC from a college in Mymensingh. She couldn’t do as well as
Raihan in her exams, but she got a job as a crew member in Biman
Bangladesh. She said she had answered all the questions in English
both in her written test and interview.

Rumi: Great! She must be good in English. Well, then the key to getting some
jobs is English, isn’t it?

Ratan: Yes, you’re right.

Cc Discuss in groups.

1 Try to find out why English is needed for a good hotel front desk
job and a flight crew member.

2 Choose two / three other jobs where English is needed and write
why and how English is used in those jobs.

D Read what Ms Choudhury says to her students about learning English.

"Today there are many jobs where you need English. This is because the world

has become smaller. Vast distances are shortened by speedy transports. We can

talk to a person thousands of kilometers away on the phone or the Internet. So we
can communicate with the whole world easily. English has made this
communication easier.

There are many countries in the world with many languages, but to communicate

with them, you cannot use all the languages. So you need a common language

that you can use with more or less all the people in the world. English is that
common language. You can talk to a Chinese toy maker, a French artist, an Arab
ambassador or a Korean builder in one language—English.

English for us in Bangladesh is all the more important. As we have seen earlier,

we are too many people in a small country. So if you learn English, you have the

best opportunity to find a good job, both within and outside the country. And that
S is good news for millions of our unemployed youths."
N

54 English For Today
"But Miss, we learn English for 12 or 14 years, yet we do not find good jobs, "
says Rumi. She then tells the class about what happened to her brother. "Could
you please tell us why?" Rumi asks.
"This is a very important question, Rumi. We should learn how to use English
both orally and in writing for doing things as needed in our work, such as
communicating with others at personal, social, national and international levels.
But unfortunately, at the moment we are learning English mainly for our exams,"
continues Ms Choudhury. "Remember, English can greatly help you become
skilled workers."
"But where and how can we learn this kind of English, Miss?" asks Ratan. Ms
Choudhury says, "We can learn English both in and outside the classroom.
Besides your textbooks, the radio, television, newspapers, magazines,
computers and other supplementary materials will greatly help you. During our
classroom activities, we'll see how we can learn English."
E Write a paragraph by rearranging the following sentences or
sentence parts.
1 You can learn a common language in and outside the classroom.
2 You cannot speak all the languages of different people of different
countries to communicate with them.
3 For example, you can do businesses with a Chinese, a Japanese, a
French, an Arab or a Nigerian if you know English.
4 _ Also other things like the radio, TV, computers and newspapers can
help you learn English.
5 Therefore you need a common language, i.e. English, which is
understood by people more or less all over the world.
F Discuss in groups and write answers to these questions.
1 Describe briefly the things that have made the present world smaller.
2. Give reasons why a common language is needed in today’s world.
3. Why is English needed all the more in Bangladesh?
4 How can our youths become a skilled workforce?
G Project: Find out how many people in your village or locality can
speak or write English for communication. State their age, education
and what they do. S

Unit Five
Nature and environment
i , -™ 8 : J j =
i —
Learning outcomes
After we have studied this unit, we will be able to
¢ comprehend and summarise texts
® ask and answer questions
© take part in debates on given topics
« take part in role playing and conversations
« draft and deliver lectures on given topics
¢ write letters to newspapers highlighting certain problems
® write slogans for posters.
x
g

56 English For Today
Lesson 1: The greed of the mighty rivers
A Read the following text and answer the questions.
Meherjan lives in a slum on the Sirajgonj Town Protection Embankment.
Her polythene-roofed shelter looks like a cage. She is nearly 45 but looks more
than her age. In front of [RG co he ie ie
her shelter, she is trying to ss eid hm } <i -e | — Die,
make a fire to cook the yy d Sey qt il we vas
day’s only meal. Her Seam oo SS  ——
weak hands tremble as BEV ype | As —
she adds some fallen i j 4" te a ai v- AWW \
leaves and straw to the Sasa a SN = lS
fire. The whispering wind from the river Jamuna makes the fire unsteady. The
dancing flames remind Meherjan of the turmoil in her life.
Not long ago Meherjan had everything—a family, cultivable land and cattle. The
erosion of the Jamuna gradually consumed all her landed property. It finally
claimed her only shelter during the last monsoon. It took the river only a day to
devour Meher's house, trees, vegetable garden and the bamboo bush. She had a
happy family once. Over the years, she lost her husband and her family to
diseases that cruel hunger and poverty brought to the family. Now, she is the
only one left to live on with the loss and the pain. The greedy Jamuna has
shattered her dreams and happiness.
There are thousand others waiting to share the same fate like Meherjan.
Bangladesh is a land of rivers, some of whose banks overflow or erode during
monsoon. Erosion is a harsh reality for the people living along the river banks.
During each monsoon many more villages are threatened by the mighty rivers
like the Jamuna, the Padma and the Meghna. It is estimated that river erosion
makes at least 100,000 people homeless every year in Bangladesh. In fact, river
erosion is one of the main dangers caused by climate change. If we can't take
prompt actions to adapt to climate change, there will be thousands of more
Meherjans in our towns and villages every year.

3

&

English For Today 57
B For each phrase below choose the meaning that is closest to the
meaning used in the text above.
1. In paragraph 3 'mighty rivers' mean
a_ rivers that have huge volumes of water and very strong currents
b rivers having many rowing boats in them
c rivers that make people cry out
d rivers that have strong banks
2. landed property
a arented piece of land
b apiece of land on the bank of a river
¢ property in the form of a source of income to its owner
d property used only as an agricultural farm
3. whispering wind
a wind that blows from across the river
b_ wind that blows with a hissing sound
c wind that helps someone make a fire
d wind that blows in summer
4. dancing flames
a a traditional form of folk dance
b flames that make people dance around them
c flames that are made unstable by the blast of air
d flames made by people to remember their past
Cc Ask and answer the following questions in pairs.
a What does Meherjan use to make fire for cooking her meals?
b What property did Meherjan lose due to river erosion?
c What do you know about Meherjan’s family?
d In which season is river erosion most likely to occur?
e Why is the phrase ‘greedy Jamuna’ used to describe the river?
What greed do you notice in the description?
Format 8, English For Today-9-10 :

58 English For Today
D Complete the summary of Meherjan’s life with words/phrases from
the box.
Meherjan is a typical (1) ..................... woman who lives in a slum. She
lost her shelter and properties (2) ..................... the erosion of the river
Jamuna. She also lost her family. Her husband had died of diseases
caused by poverty and (3) .................. Now, she is only a (4) .............
Like Meherjan there are many people who have become the (5) ............
of river erosion. River erosion is still posing (6) ..................... to the lives
and properties of thousands of people. People living (7) ..................... the
rivers are the most likely victims of river erosion. Each year about
(8) ...ccseeeeeeeeeeees. People become homeless due to river erosion in
Bangladesh. Meherjan’s life is just one (9) ..................... of how climate
change (10) ..................... the lives of thousands of people
victims affects close to slum dweller homeless
threats example due to shortage of food —_ one lakh
E Debate: Form two groups of 3/4. Decide which group will speak
for/against the motion given below. In your group, first, discuss and
note down five/six points to support/oppose the motion. Then select
the speakers from each group to start the debate.
Motion: Humans can’t do anything to control the course of nature.
Lesson 2: Environmental pollution
A Look at the pictures below and discuss the questions.
1 What do you see in each picture?
2 What are some of the common sources of environmental pollution?
20
3 Which of these sources are most threatening for your environment? S

English For Today 59

i =68 eS Sore a. ee as a Ae ORs ro “2 , Y at

eee: PS ee ee te Som

See eee ee ee

 Picturel ~ *Picture2
i wl ys
=e ’
: ra is ae A ‘ed
Picture 3 Picture 4
B Now read the following passage to know more about environmental
pollution in Bangladesh.

Bangladesh is now in the grip of all sorts of pollution like air pollution, soil

pollution and water pollution. The dwellers of the urban areas are the worst

sufferers of such pollution. The indiscriminate industrialisation process in

Bangladesh over the past decades has created significant environmental

problems. We will now read about some of the most common types of

environmental pollutions and ways of coping with them.

Air pollution

Air pollution comes from a wide variety of sources. In Bangladesh poisonous

exhausts from industrial plants, brick kilns, old or poorly-serviced vehicles and
» dust from roads and construction sites are some of the major sources of air
S pollution.

60 English For Today
We can minimise this type of pollution by making less use of motor vehicles and
avoiding the use of vehicles older than 20 years. We may also use proper
lubricants to lessen the level of emission and pollutants. We can encourage
people to use Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) or Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG)
for fuelling their cars. The government may relocate hazardous industries like
brick kilns to areas away from human habitations.
Water pollution
Water pollution can occur in oceans, rivers, lakes, ponds and underground
reservoirs. As different water sources flow together, the pollution can spread
easily and quickly. Causes of water pollution include:

¢ increased sediment from soil

e erosion

¢ improper waste disposal and littering

e leakage of soil pollution into water supplies

organic materials that decay in water supplies
In fact, polluting the land means polluting the water. Throwing away a toxic
substance on the ground near a water source means it eventually reaches the
body of water. As a result, the water is polluted. Industrial wastes must not be
disposed in rivers or lakes. We need to be more careful about disposing
household wastes too. Use of pesticides means that when it rains, chemicals
used in the lawn or garden wash into the water bodies. Therefore, we must be
aware of the dangers of using pesticides as they may pollute our rivers, canals
and lakes.
Soil pollution
Among the most significant causes of soil pollution is the enormous volume of
industrial waste which is being produced every day but not disposed properly.
The mismanagement of household wastes, particularly the polythene shopping
bags, has caused serious threat to the soil and the drainage system. Another
cause for soil pollution is the use of agricultural pesticides, fertilizers, etc.
Sometimes fuel leakages from automobiles may get washed away by rain and
seep into the nearby soil.
Pesticides and fertilizers are useful for plant growth but their overuse has led to
soil pollution. Natural fertilizers and compost can be used instead of their x
chemical alternatives. Recycling is another way to reduce and control soil “%

English For Today 61
pollution. Recycling papers, plastics and other materials reduces the volume of
refuse in landfills. De-forestation also causes erosion, pollution and the loss of
fertility in the topsoil. Planting trees and re-forestation help prevent soil erosion
and pollution.
C From your reading of the above text complete each blank space in the
table with no more than two words and/or numbers.
e Toxic smokes from e Don’t drive motorcars
teteeeeeeeeeeees Plants which are older than
; ; e Vehicles which are old seeceseseseeeeeees YOArS.
Air pollution and poorly ............ e Use car lubricants of good
e Smoke from the quality to keep the
seseeeeee fields seeeeeeeeee level minimum.
e Industrial wastes not e Use compost for
seveeeeeeeeeeeee properly. agricultural purpose.
© Use of ..ccccevcrevens ® hice and othe paper,
3 : j tics, and other
Soil pollution shopping bags Pass;
P e Use of agricultural materials.
pesticides and - Plant more trees to help
ccc cecceeseceecee prevent loss of fertility in
thE secoremenenenoseweees
D In groups of four, prepare a summary in 100 words of the topic
below. First, work together to prepare a draft. When the draft is
complete, select a group member to read it to the class.
Topic: Polluting the land means polluting the water
x
&

62 English For Today
E Look at the three posters below. What messages do they give? Which
one do you like the most? Tell your friend why you like it.
WY ; 'TTRASH —
PLEASE DONT THROW TqlIs LAKEIS NOTFOR | |” yOUDONTTRASH
TRASH IN MY MMING YOUR OWN HOMES,
PLAYGROUND FAMILY SWI WHY TRASH MINE?
ers : | | aang coe a
a HBF Se
Fase ||| aes] | eet
GA iis - wo PY Aaah
Lesson 3: Man and climate
A __ Discuss the questions in pairs.
1 Can man influence the climate? If the answer is yes, explain how?
2 Which human activities are responsible for increasing carbon dioxide
in the atmosphere?
3 How can trees help save our environment?
Now read the text below and find answers to the above questions.
Humans can neither change the sun's radiation nor the earth's orbit around the
sun. But they can control the increase in the amount of greenhouse gases and its
effect on the atmosphere. Only during the last hundred years the carbon dioxide
concentration has been raised alarmingly in the atmosphere and we humans can
be held responsible for this.
The main cause of the increase in carbon dioxide level in the atmosphere is the
burning of fossil fuels. Since the end of the 19" century, industrial activities
increased rapidly giving rise to many factories. These factories required energy,
which was produced through the combustion of coal. Besides coal, other sources
of energy such as mineral oil and natural gas were also burned to heat our
houses, run cars and airplanes or to produce electricity. Nowadays, about 85
million barrels of crude oil are burned daily. Every time a fossil raw material is %
burned, it releases carbon dioxide into the air. &

English For Today 63
Therefore, it is clear that more and more greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide
are being generated worldwide by humans. Moreover, we are also strengthening
the greenhouse effect by deforestation, which means cutting down trees. Every
year enormous areas of forests are destroyed by people to obtain wood and to
clear regions for mining and to create pasture. This loss of the forest causes dual
problems. Trees that are burned up release large volumes of carbon dioxide gas
into the air. On the other hand, as forests absorb a lot of carbon dioxide from the
air and deliver oxygen instead, we also destroy an important storehouse of
carbon dioxide when we clear forests.
B__ Read the statements below and say if they are true/false. If false, give
the correct information.

1 Fossil fuels are burned at an alarming rate due to industrialization.

2 Coal is the only fuel used for generating energy.

3 At present, nearly 85 million barrels of crude oil are used weekly.

4 Deforestation is caused by nature.

5 Forests help consume carbon dioxide gases from the air.

Cc Match the meanings in column B and the words/phrases in column A.
ee ee
1 Sun’s radiation a. energy that is transmitted from the sun in the

form of rays or waves or particles
: b. the process used by plants to convert light
2 Fossil fuels :
energy captured from the sun to chemical
energy
3 Combustion of coals | °: 2 basic material or substance used in the
production or manufacturing of goods
d. non-renewable sources of energy that come
= |4 Crude oil from the remains of plants and animals
g

64 English For Today

5 Raw materials e. intentional destructions or removal of trees
and other vegetations for agricultural,
commercial, housing or firewood use

6 Deforestation f. a naturally occurring, unrefined petroleum
product that can be refined to produce usable
products such as diesel, gasoline, heating oil,
jet fuel, kerosene, etc.

7 Photosynthesis g. burning of coal usually in industrial plants.

D Write a letter to the Editor of a newspaper expressing your concern
about growing deforestation in your area. Describe how deforestation
is changing your environment. Also suggest what actions could be
taken to stop cutting down trees. Follow the clues below.

e dangers caused by deforestation

e increase of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere

e the greenhouse effect

e making people aware of the adverse effect of deforestation
e making an action plan to stop deforestation

E Look at these posters below. They are made to make people aware
of the dangers of deforestation. In groups, design a poster to show
the dangers caused by deforestation. Then write a slogan for the poster.

al
a colour ee Tey
asmie — coporesiion: g ne Au

Gee cate ole Deforestario

a life | G4 re ) | te hast \.
far Saal, == youre a part of this too =
OM ead N

English For Today 65
Lesson 4: Putting our fish in hot water!
A Spend one minute thinking about your @ SMD,
life as a fish. In pairs, talk to another => :
: Mim Z&X/ 82)
“fish” about your life as a fish. £62 OSS
B Do you agree with the following OO oS ed
statements on fish and fishing? Discuss [eS Sore
with your partner(s). ~~ @ LG
a Fish will never disappear. There will CP Oa
always be enough fish to feed the
world.
b In many ways, people are like fish.
c The hobby of fishing should be banned to help protect fish
population.
C_ Read the text below and say if the statements that follow are true/
false. If false, give the correct information.
Fish population is in serious danger from global warming. Climate change is
increasing the water temperature in rivers, lakes and seas. This means there is
less food and oxygen available for fish. It also means the fish may not grow fully
and may have fewer offsprings. Some fishes will become extinct if temperatures
rise even by one or two degrees Celsius.
Climate change increases the pressure on fish population. Fishes are one of the
world's most valuable biological assets. Forty percent of people in the world eat
fish as their main source of protein. If we fail to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions, we will increase the pressure on fish. As a result, people who depend
on fish will suffer from hunger and poverty.
Statements:
1 Global warming will kill all the fishes within ten years.
2 Some fishes can not reproduce if the water is too warm.
3 Atwo degree Celsius rise in temperature will make some species extinct.
4 Fishes are valuable economic investments.
Format 9, English For Today-9-10

66 English For Today
5 Nearly 14% of people depend on fish for their basic food needs.
6 People will suffer a lot if greater pressure is put on fish.

D_ Role play: Student A is a fish. Student B is a fisherman. First write a
dialogue between the two. Then act it out. Change roles and repeat the
role-play

? Role A— A FISH ;
=I am a fish. I know things are getting serious. Ice is melting, rivers are :
: drying up and millions of my cousins have disappeared because of :
: over-fishing. I heard it is because of humans’ carelessness and greed. :
: Let the humans know what is really happening in the oceans and rivers. :
SCUNEC SORES SOREN TOURS YOURE NSSREY SORE YSSRESSSEEE SORES SOREN EBS EEE DS
Role B — A FISHERMAN :
: I am not worried about my future. I have seen no change in the number :
© of fish I catch each year. There will always be plenty of fish. The *
: oceans are too big to be changed by global warming. I think that :
: scientists produce reports just to become famous. :
E You are a nature lover. Write a letter to the organizers of the
National Climate Change Conference in Bangladesh. Tell them
about how global warming is changing your environment. Also
suggest what they can do to help save fish population.

Lesson 5: A friend of the Earth ? 4%

A Discuss the questions in pairs, & OY % \

1 Do you throw away empty cans and bottles? | ©

2 What do you do with your old newspapers? \ va C7 /

3 What happens to the garbage after you throw it enagete 4 :
away? - ae 8

English For Today 67
B Read the following text carefully to know about how we can save our
environment.
LET’S SAVE OUR PLANET!
Everyone must play a part in protecting the environment. There are many
things you can do on your own every day to help save the planet. Here are some
suggestions.
REDUCE!
Really, the best thing we can do for the planet is to use its resources properly.
Our consumer society is mainly responsible for the environmental crisis. Here
are some questions you can ask yourself before buying something, "Do I really
need this?" or "Is there another product which would do the same thing but is
more sustainable?" Or ask the question, "Will this last a long time?" Some other
questions may be, "Do I know how this item was made, how it will be used and
how it will be disposed of?"
REUSE!
What do you think of using your own ceramic cup or mug at your school or local
club? It means there are no plastic cups to throw away. You can wash it and reuse
it every day. Unfortunately, we are encouraged to buy a new "improved" item
even if the one we have can be repaired or reused. When we buy things, we
should buy those that are durable; we should use them properly, and have them
repaired when necessary. If we practise this, many things will not only last a
life-time, but also be passed on for future use. However, if something is truly
unusable for its original purposes, try to be more creative and think of how else
it might be used. When you're done with it, think of whether someone else might
be able to use it. You can donate some of the things to the poor. You may also sell
some of your used items through personal ads in a local newspaper.
RECYCLE!
Rather than throwing an item out when neither you nor anyone else can make
use of it, have it recycled. And if recycling is not possible, it is better to send
goods to a landfill or have them burned up. Find out what types of materials can
be recycled in your area. Clean and sort the materials before putting them out in
the bin. Recycling your drink and food cans means there will be less trash in a
2 resource recovery facility or landfill. Moreover, a company can use the old cans
Sto make new ones.

68 English For Today
Cc Now ask and answer these questions in pairs.

1 How can you cut down your shopping list?

2 What can you do to reuse things?

3. What kind of household goods, clothes and toys, can be donated?

4 Howcan you sell your used items?

5 How recycling may help save our environment?

D Complete the blank spaces in the table below.
Teen
Reduce To create less wastes, so Using a towel for drying hair
that there are fewer items that| instead of using an electric hair-

must be recycled or dryer.
weniewaea sna. AWAY:

Reuse To buy things that can be Using your own ceramic cup at
used again and again, orto | your school or club means there
find out another way of are nO ................ Cups to
seeeeeeeeeoee them, throw away. You can

sesesseseeeeeeeee it and reuse it
every day.

Recycle Instead of throwing an item | Giving/selling used plastic bottles
in the garbage, to give it to a | to someone to make something
person or company who will | else from them.
sesessseeeeeeee it, Or make
something else with it.

S

English For Today 69
E_ To do this exercise, you will need information about recycling in your
local community. If you don’t know, ask your teacher to help you
learn what you can recycle from your home. Then choose one item
from the box to talk about it following the model below.
A: What are you going to do with these old magazines?
B: I don’t know what to do with these.
A: Why don’t you reuse/recycle them?
B: How can I do that?
A: It’s easy. Take them to a shop that buys old newspapers and magazines
for recycling.
Household items
glass bottles and jars, containers and toys,
aluminium foils or trays, aerosol cans, box
boards, magazines and catalogues, old CDs
5

English For Today
Unit Six
&
Our Neighbours
LT” ian
Za |
a rd
| sa
Fi
ae ®
Learning outcomes
After we have studied this unit, we will be able to
e read, comprehend and summarise texts
® ask and answer questions
e read travel ads and talk about them
e select and write headings
e write letters to friends describing places of interest.
=
8

English For Today n

Lesson 1: Nepal, the land of Everest

A Read the following passage on Nepal.

a Known as the Land of Everest,

Nepal is one of the most

charming countries in Asia. The

Kingdom of Nepal is a small |». 43 Agen

land of sublime beauty. It has} << —_—
some of the world’s best and|Me > yeaterepadl
very important temples. It is a sal al het "a y
country that is rich in scenic wide ae eS
beauty and cultural heritage.

b Nepal lies between India and the Tibetan part of China. This small country
has an area of 147,181 square kilometers. Southern Nepal is tropical low
land known as the Terai Plains . This part of Nepal has hot summers and
warm winters. Here the temperatures reach up to 40°C in April and May
and monsoon rains drench this region from June to September. The central
hill-lands including the) aX com f*
Kathmandu and Pokhara valleys} f0- YAN 3 —_
have a temperate climate and | Bee = , a
are also influenced by the 7 an et : cn, s 2
monsoon. North of that is the ™, ~ NEP A se WW ee
slope of the main section of the| 5) Wie aap rs
Nepal has some of the highest] 0 win will
peaks of the world including} 9 J
Everest, — _

=
&

72 English For Today

€ Nepal is home to nearly 29,000,000 people. The population is primarily
rural.Kathmandu, the capital city, has less than one million inhabitants.
Nepal's demographic features are complicated not only by dozens of ethnic
groups, but by different castes. In total, there are 103 castes and ethnic
groups living in this small country. The two largest of such groups are known
as Chetri and Bahun. Others include Magar, Tharu and Tamang, Newar,
Muslim, Gurung and Damai. About 48 percent of the people speak Nepali.
Among other languages spoken are Maithali, Bhojpuri, Tharu and Tamang.

d Nepal is the holy land of Lord Pashupatinath and Gautam Buddha where the
Hindus and Buddhists have lived together in harmony for centuries. The
Temple of Pashupatinath is the most sacred Hindu shrine and one of the four
most important sites in the world for Shiva worshippers. Lord Buddha, the
light of Asia, was born in Lumbini in Nepal's southern plains, which makes
this a sacred pilgrimage destination for the Buddhists as well. In fact, many
Nepalese combine Hindu and Buddhist practices; many temples and shrines
are shared between the two faiths, and some deities are worshipped by both
Hindus and Buddhists.

e The Kathmandu Valley is the richest cultural heritage centre of Nepal. The
three ancient cities of the Valley - Patan, Kathmandu and Bhaktapur -
represent an epitome of harmony in urban design, elegant architecture and
refined culture. These cities are famous for religious monuments unequalled
in the world. The seven monument zones situated within the Valley have
been named as World Heritage Sites by UNESCO.

f Many festivals add dazzling colour to Nepal's vibrant culture, which are
celebrated throughout the year. Dasain or dusherra is celebrated nationwide
in October. This is the most important of all Nepalese celebrations and
includes the biggest animal sacrifice of the year. Tihar is celebrated in
November. Other festivals include the Holi and Chaitra Daisan. Some Hindu
festivals are the Haribodhini Ekadashi, Maha Sivaratri and the Krishna
Jayanti. There are Buddhist celebrations too and those include Mani Rimd,
Buddha Jayanti and Losar, which marks the Tibetan New Year.

B_ The passage has six paragraphs (a-f). Choose the most suitable
headings for paragraphs (a-f) from the list of headings below. There
are more headings in the box than the paragraphs, so you will not use,
all of them. 3

English For Today B
List of headings
1. Climate that varies from place to place
2. A land of religious coexistence
3. A land of high peaks and Everest
4. Asmall country witha huge population
5. A blend of natural beauty and cultural heritage
6. The temples of Nepal
7. Many occasions to celebrate
8. A rich spot of cultural heritage
9. Asmall population with huge diversity
Cc For each phrase below choose the meaning that is closest to the
meaning used in the passage.
1 tropical lowland
a an area of land having humid climate
b a land situated on the hill
c a low land close to river
d a land that lies at the foot of a hill
2 temperate climate
a a weather condition of high temperature
b a moderate climate
c a climate with high rainfall
d a climate that is uncomfortable to live in
3 ethnic groups
a groups based on their religious faiths
b groups of people living in the hills-tracts
c groups having distinct racial and cultural features
d groups who believe in Buddhism
4 pilgrimage destination
a asacred place where people travel to perform religious rites.
b ahistorical place with many old buildings.
c a tourist spot of great scenic beauty.
d_ the birthplace of a famous person.
Format 10, English For Today-9-10

74 English For Today
5 elegant architecture
a_ temples of gods
b_ graceful work of building crafts
c buildings of historical importance
d_ well-designed area of cultural acts
D Answer the following questions.
1 How many ethnic groups are there in Nepal?
2 What do you know about the weather of Nepal?
3 “Many Nepalese combine Hindu and Buddhist practices.”- Explain this
statement with examples from the passage.
4 Which three cities of Nepal will you visit in order to see the rich samples
of Nepal’s cultural heritage sites?
5 Make a list of the festivals that are celebrated in Nepal.
6 Give at least three reasons why you might be interested to visit Nepal.
Also make a list of the places you would love to visit in Nepal.
E Look at the advertisement of a package tour to Nepal.
Dhaka-Kathmandu-Pokhara Package Tour
Price: BDT 39,999/
Duration: 4 nights and 5 days
Package includes:
* Return air ticket with Bangladesh airport taxes &
Kathmandu departure taxes
* 2 nights’ accommodation in Kathmandu
* 2 nights’ accommodation in Pokhara
* Buffet: Daily Breakfast and Dinner
* Both way airport transfers in Kathmandu
* Kathmandu-Pokhara-Kathmandu by AC bus
* Half day sightseeing in Kathmandu Valley
20
Rg

English For Today 75
raya : oer et able Aum aa Sore ee heh yr’ s jjeme
ie ur ee

Now, discuss if the following statements are true/false. Give the correct

information if a statement is false.

a The package includes the cost of travelling from Kathmandu airport
to the hotel in Kathmandu.

b The tourists will be provided with breakfast, lunch and dinner.

c The tourists do not have to pay extra for a half-day sightseeing in
Pokhara.

d_ The tour operators will bear all visa related costs.

e The tourists will go to Pokhara from Kathmandu by domestic airlines
flights.

F Imagine that you have chosen the package tour shown in E to visit
Kathmandu and Pokhara. Now, write a letter to your friend
highlighting the main attractions offered by the package. In your
letter you should cover the following points:

=
Rg

16 English For Today
e Duration of travel
e Means of transport used:
1) Dhaka-Kathmandu-Dhaka
2) Kathmandu-Pokhara-Kathmandu
e Accommodation facilities
° Breakfast, lunch and dinner
e Total cost of the package
e Any other cost that is not covered by the package offer
Lesson 2: Sri Lanka: The pearl of the Indian Ocean
A Discuss these questions in pairs.
1 Which country is often known as the Pearl of the Indian Ocean?
2 Which country is the world’s largest tea exporter?
3 Which country did the spice cinnamon originate from?
4 Which country was mentioned in the great Indian epic the Ramayana?
5 Which country has the highest literacy rate in South Asia?
B_ Nowread the following passage to find your answers to the questions
in A
a Anyone visiting Sri Lanka may often hear the word Ayubowan. This
word means "May you have the gift of long life’. It is with this traditional
greeting that everyone is welcomed to Sri Lanka. Sri Lanka is
variously known as: Serendip, Ceylon, Teardrop of India, Pearl of the
Indian Ocean, etc. These names reveal the richness and beauty of this
island nation. Many travellers, from ancient mariners and merchants to
present day tourists, have been attracted by the beauty of this island.
°0
Ss
N

English For Today 77
b Sri Lanka is located in the Indian -
Ocean, just off the south-eastern Fete, co ey,
coast of India. Shaped like a E E X L
teardrop, the island of Sri Lanka ae
measures about 415 kilometers { ; ey : 4
from north to south, and about met CNKA .
220 kilometers from east to west, | , Sa “ae |
with a total land area of about ie
65,600 square kilometers. It has Dow
more than 1340 kilometers of —
coastline.

c Despite its modest size Sri Lanka has a —
population of about 20 million. Sri Lanka is Oe
amulti- religious, multi-racial and multi- =
lingual country. The four major ethnic ri =
groups are the Sinhalese, Sri Lankan Tamils, = : =
Indian Tamils and Sri Lankan Moors or = 3):-y==5} fo
Muslims. A fifth group, the Veddhas are the = "ga ee
original inhabitants of the island. The fy "= Hod
ancient history of Sri Lanka is depicted in [Is Rag? [= a oe
the Hindu epic the Ramayana. But the most bi Ss == j
important work on Lankan origin is related Colombo: The capital city
in Mahavamsa or ‘The Great Chronicle’.

d Sri Lanka's economy has traditionally been based on agriculture. The
emphasis is on exporting crops such as tea, rubber, and coconuts. In fact, Sri
Lanka is the largest tea exporter of the world. The country is also a major
producer and supplier of a variety of spices such as cinnamon, cardamom,
pepper, cloves, and nutmeg. Cinnamon first originated in Sri Lanka and was
introduced later to the world by the Arab merchants.

o © Sri Lanka's archaeological treasures may be compared to other civilizations
s of the past like the Golden Age of Greece, the Roman Empire and Mayan

78 English For Today
citadels. The culture that followed those glorious pasts has been enriched by the
more recent influences of Western colonizers and Eastern traders. That resulted
in developing a unique mix of races and religions, arts and crafts, festivals and
costumes in this small country.
Besides the man-made riches, one may find the God-given blessings of nature in
Sri Lanka. The island is circled by azure seas and is blessed with sandy beaches,
green hills, cascading waterfalls, abundant wildlife and a variety of flowers and
fruits. The country abounds with coconut groves, spice gardens, tea estates and
many other gardens and woods. Travellers from all over the world come to Sri
Lanka. Here, a weary traveller can pass a relaxing day by a palm-shaded lagoon
looking at the endless ocean. And for the adventurous, days can be full of
excitement snorkelling, swimming, fishing or sailing.
Cc From your reading of the above text complete the table with no more
than two words and/or numbers.
There are ................ | Agriculture is a Sri Lanka is blessed with
four main ethnic traditional form of awesome natural beauty.
groups. They are economic activity in | There are blue seas, sandy
Sinhalese, Sri Lankan Sri Lanka. The beaches, green hills, and
Tamils, ...........0.048 country exports many | flowing ................
and Sri Lankan Moors _| crops and............... | The country has a very
who are also known as__| Sri Lanka tops the rich wild life. A wide
werner The world in tea export. variety of fruits and
earliest residents of Sri | The spice seteeeeeeeceees are also
Lanka are known as seseeeeseteneeee WAS available there. Traveller
ce eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeen found first in Sri can enjoy the ...............
Lanka. view sitting by the palm
shaded lagoons. ~
S
N

English For Today 79
D___s The passage in B has six paragraphs (a-f). Choose the most suitable
headings for paragraphs (a-f) from the list of headings below. There are
more headings in the box than the paragraphs, so you will not use all of
them.
List of headings
1. A beautiful island with natural richness
2. Teardrop of India
3. Geographical features
4. Arich multicultural setting
5. Some religious groups of Sri Lanka
6. A traditional economy
7. The land of cinnamon
8. A melting pot of the past civilizations
9. Tourist attractions and leisure activities
10. A country with beautiful beaches
E __ Read the brief descriptions of some of the best tourist places in Sri
Lanka. Then discuss the questions that follow.
Anuradhapura R one
Anuradhapura is one of the ancient capitals of Sri (azseenreue=sseaa
Lanka. The old city is today surrounded by monasteries, | ey)
covering an area of over sixteen square miles. The city ee wae
is also significant in Hindu legend as the capital of King| _ Araapare << ;
Ravana.
Bundala National Park
Bundala National Park is one of Sri Lanka's leading -
destinations for birdwatchers. The park is also home to! s s
large populations of elephants, crocodiles, turtles and

80 English For Today
Hikkaduwa-—Coral reef & sandy beaches _
Hikkaduwa is a little town on the south coast of Sri
Lanka. It is well-known for its beach and corals. It is 7 "4 PO ie
principally a tourist destination, and serves as a great, =
beach with options to surf, snorkel and enjoy the sun. ———
Dambulla
Major attractions of this city include the biggest and, =
greatest potted cave temple complex of Sri Lanka. It is J " r yx ee
also famous for the Rangiri Dambulla Global Stadium, [igi en
which was built in just 167 days. The city also boasts of “= Jac eS ny
the biggest rose quartz mountain range in South Asia [i= Bamba au
and the iron wood forest.
Now discuss the following questions in pairs.
1 Which of the following tourist places do you like to visit?
e Places with beaches
e Places of historical importance
e Places that preserve wildlife
Explain why you like such a place.
2 Ifyou are given an offer to visit any two of the four Sri Lankan cities
above, which two cities will you choose. Explain why.
F Write a paragraph on some of the interesting places to visit in Sri
Lanka. Use your own words and the information given in section E.
Lesson 3: The Maldives
A Discuss the questions in pairs.
1 Have you ever visited any island or seen any island on TV?
2 Have you ever heard of a coral island? Is there any coral island in Bangladesh?
a
3 What do you know about the Maldives? &

English For Today 81
B Now read the text below and answer the questions that follow.

The Republic of Maldives is an island country in the Indian Ocean. It has 1199
islands that are clustered into 26 major atolls. An atoll is a ring-shaped coral reef
or a string of closely spaced coral islands. The natural coral reefs of the
Maldives are surrounded by the sea all around and stand out as a pearl in the
Indian Ocean. The Maldives is the eighth smallest country in the world with an
area of only 300 square kilometers . It is the smallest Asian country in terms of
population and size.

People have been living on the islands of the Maldives for nearly 3000 years.
They set sail from different parts of the world— Asia, Arabia, Europe and
America —to come to these islands. The earliest settlers of the Maldives were
probably from southern India and Sri Lanka who came to these islands in the
fourth and fifth centuries BC. In the 12th century AD, sailors from East Africa
and Arab countries came to the Maldives. As a result, the Maldivians who were
originally Buddhists were converted to Sunni Islam in the mid-12th century. In
1344 Ibn Batuta, a famous Arab historian and scholar travelled around the
Maldives.

In the 16th century, the Portuguese conquered the Maldives and ruled the
country for 15 years. Although governed as an independent Islamic sultanate for
most of its history from 1153 to 1968, the Maldives was a British colony from
1887 to 1965. Following independence from Britain in 1965, the sultanate
continued to operate for another 3 years. On November 11, 1968, the sultanate
was abolished and replaced by a republic and the country assumed its present
name.

The Maldives is famous as a tourist destination because of its pleasant weather,
heavenly beaches and lagoons, luxurious holiday resorts and the peace-loving
people. The Maldives was ranked as the best country for beautiful beaches and
Format 11, English For Today-9-10

82 English For Today
facilities for recreation in 2008.
The Maldives is well known for being the lowest country in the world.
Unfortunately, this small country with idyllic natural beauty is under threat from
rising sea levels due to global warming. Most of the country is just 1.5 meters
above sea level with the highest point of 2.3 meters! Many predictions have been
made with respect to Maldives being swept away by the rising water level in the
Indian Ocean. when the power tsunami of 2004 hit the island nation, many of the
island's dry parts were flooded by the sea water. The government of the
Maldives has begun to purchase land from nearby countries for resettling
its people in case the islands go under water! In order to highlight the
threats of global warming to its low lying possesses: seca
islands, the government of Maldives held (OR 9) ie: cua
a cabinet meeting underwater in 2009. (Pi gimeman same co tO  §
That was the first ever underwater cabinet “a a) alia y-
meeting in the world. The meeting took p<” “ Jen “a maa
place about 5 meter underwater, in a blue- : peal fe >”
green lagoon on a small island. While ‘ i NS
underwater, the cabinet signed a document SS Sa oY
calling on all nations to cut their carbon Underwater meeting
emissions.
Cc Ask and answer the questions.

1 What is an atoll?
7 2 How many countries in the world are smaller than the Maldives

in size?

3 When was Islam introduced in the Maldives?

4 What makes the Maldives an ideal place for the tourists?

5 What dangers of climate change might affect the Maldives?

6 Do you support the idea of having a cabinet meeting underwater?

What could be the reason for holding such a strange meeting?
=
8

English For Today 83
D Complete the table with no more than two words and/or numbers.

4" and 5" centuries | The early inhabitants of the Maldives arrived and

settled from Southern India and Sri Lanka.

12” Century The sailors from African and Arab countries started
to settle in the islands. Buddhism was
sqeeeeemsavereneee DY Islam,

A famous scholar and historian named Ibn Batuta
—— entrees
16th century the Portuguese occupied the Maldives and became
geste p00
ee el

1968 End of Islamic sultanate and ................0.0202e0e

ee
E Say if the statements are true or false. Give the correct information
in case of a false statement.
1 Only seven countries in the world are smaller in size than the
Maldives.
2 No other South Asian century has a population smaller than the
Maldives.
3 The islands of the Maldives were inhabited in the 12th century.
4 The Maldives was an independent Islamic sultanate from 1153 to
1968.
a 5 The Maldives was ranked as the second best country for natural
ES beauty in 2008.

84 English For Today
Lesson 4: India: Unity in diversity

A Read the following text and answer the questions.

India is our closest neighbour. It is the largest ——_ —
among South Asian Countries. In fact, India is ee ;

the seventh largest country in the world with| ee

an area of 3,287,590 square kilometers. India Sree >. F Bulan

is bounded by the Indian Ocean on the South, | v= si a Ae ect
the Arabian Sea on the West and the Bay of} =, "™" (tanag
Bengal on the East. It is bordered by Pakistan | “ 7 ht

to the West; China, Nepal, and Bhutan to the ee i ee oo
North; and Bangladesh and Myanmar to the}... me
East. India is the world's second most nee ota) Lak arr
populous country after China. Its population is around 1.5 billion. New Delhi
is the capital of India and about 13 million people live in the city.

India is a land of ancient civilization. The social, economic and cultural diversity
of this vast country is the result of invasions by different races in the process of
history. Indian history begins with the birth of the Indus Valley Civilization and.
the coming of the Aryans. During this period, Aryan culture flourished in this
part of the world. The fifth century saw the unification of India under Ashoka,
and it is in his time that Buddhism spread in many parts of Asia. In the eighth
century, Islam came to India for the first time and by the eleventh century it had
firmly established itself. In 1206, Qutbuddin Aybeck founded the Delhi
Sultanate. This was finally succeeded by the Mughal Empire in 1526, under
which India once again achieved a large measure of political unity.

It was in the 17th century that the Europeans came to India. This coincided with
the disintegration of the Mughal Empire, paving the way for supremacy of the
English, the French, the Dutch and the Portuguese who were vying with each
other to gain control of India. The English emerged as the ‘victors’. In 1774,
Warren Hastings was appointed the first Governor General of India by the East
India Company. In 1876, Queen Victoria was given the title ‘Empress of India’ by
the British Parliament and India came under the British rule . The British ruled ,,
India for nearly two hundred years. This period was marked by India's struggle S

English For Today 85
for independence. Through a series of heroic and patriotic movements to restore
freedom, India got its independence in 1947.
The culture of India is one of the oldest and the most unique in the world. There
is amazing cultural diversity throughout the country. The South, North, and
Northeast have their own distinct cultures and almost every state has carved out
its own cultural distinction. There is hardly any culture in the world that is as
varied and unique as India. There are 17 major languages and 844 dialects used.
by the people of India.
t
India is a tourists’ delight. The Taj —
Mahal, Fatehpur Sikri, the Qutb j *
Minar and the Red Fort are a few of i nN rs = at : t I '
the many wonders which attract | e | s ie |
people from all over the world. "a ry fk Jen
Kashmir has been described as a EE Tete ¢
fy |, etal 7 Pe
paradise on earth. The country of "Rs A ; \ I Wy
mountains, valleys, deserts, rivers = / : . “eae
and lakes offer the richness of a mini The Tajmabal ;
world within a single country. The Nilgiri mountains, hill stations like Ooty and
Darjeeling and the temples of South India, Ajanta and Ellora caves are the
places one can explore in India.
B Discuss the following questions in pairs.
1 What do you know about the population and geographical area of
India?
2 When did Buddhism spread in India?
3 What happened to India during the Mughal Empire?
4 What are some of the tourist attractions in India?
Cc Complete the flow chart below to show the history of India. Use one
word to fill in each gap.
is)
3
N

86 English For Today
Indus Valley Civilization and the coming of the Aryans.
8" century: ...................... came to India for the first time.
1206: Establishment of the Delhi Sultanate by ..................00
15" Century: the ............cc0.cc000006.. Of India under Ashoka
and spread of Buddhism.
1526: Beginning of the ........................ Dynasty
1774: Warren Hastings was ........................ the first
Governor General of India by the East India Company
In 1876 Queen Victoria was given the title,‘Empress of India’, by
the British ..................
1947: India achieved its .............. eee
Lesson 5: Bhutan: The land of happiness
A_ Read the following text and answer the questions.
Bhutan is called the Jewel of the Eastern Himalayas. This small, landlocked
country is located along the southern slopes of the Himalayan range, bounded
by Tibet in the North and India from the other sides. The official name of Bhutan
is Druk-yul which means ‘land of the thunder dragon’. It earned this name ,,
because of the fierce storms that often roll in from the Himalayas. The country $

English For Today 87
has an area of 38,394 sq km and a Ene ———
population of 716,896. Since it is cat
cut off from the rest of the world by sf China
the Great Himalayas, a unique s
culture and tradition based on Pakisidn Nerd, SO
gentle Buddhist beliefs have ie: cS 07
evolved there over time. India 8 RC x
Bhutanese men wear Gho — a knee i
length robe — and women wear 1 y .) ‘A
Kira—a sheet like cloth piece. A 7 ®
Bhutanese houses are built from mud and stone, with wooden shingle roof. The
Bhutanese never use iron nails in their buildings. Usually, the Bhutanese build
each other's houses by exchanging labour within the community. Different
Festivals are celebrated all year round in Bhutan. Colourful masks are used in the
festivals which reflect the rich Bhutanese culture. Dances are performed by the
Buddhist monks to protect the valleys and ward off evil spirits. The main
religious festival is called Tshechus. The teachings of Lord Buddha are enacted
through mask dances for three to five days in the courtyard of the monasteries.
People attend these events in their best clothes, carrying picnic baskets. Another
major festival is called Losar. It is celebrated on Lunar New Year. People cook
special dishes and wear new clothes. It is a time for family get-together. Men
play archery or darts while women sing and dance.
Pure mountain air, crystal blue skies and | Ut i alll be
pristine vegetation cover have made this small iaefassaee € A:
country an ideal destination for the environment Faas 43 a Ae V0 )
lovers. The ecosystem of this small nation yaa) 7 a i
supports the existence of rich flora and fauna f: ie i re, A
which are protected by strict laws. Anyone es ai rr)
found guilty of killing even a black-necked [9 ¥=|=eqq “Bp |
crane could be sentenced to life in prison. = | =
The government of Bhutan has taken a F B.S =

« number of steps to protect its bio-diversity. =

s A Bhutanese family in traditional clothes

88 English For Today
Bhutan is the first country in the world with specific constitutional obligations
on its people to protect the environment. According to the constitution, at least
60 percent of the country must remain under forest cover at all times. Efforts are
also taken to protect the nation against the intrusion of foreign cultures and
values. The first foreign tourists were allowed into Bhutan in 1974. Now,
tourism is encouraged but is controlled and limited to about 6,000 visitors a
year. Bhutan is one of the last countries in the world to introduce television and
the Internet to its people. The government lifted a ban on TV and the Internet
only in 1999. The Bhutanese government has made it mandatory for all
Bhutanese to wear only their national dress in public.
Finally, the most interesting fact about Bhutan is that they are the only country
that measures success in Gross National Happiness rather than Gross National
Product! In 2006, Business Week rated Bhutan as the happiest country in Asia
and the eighth happiest country in the world.
B Choose the most suitable answer for each of the questions below.
1 A unique culture and tradition has evolved in Bhutan because
a fierce Himalayan storms often hit the country.
b it is cut off from the other parts of the world.
c it has a very small area.
d it is called the Jewel of the Eastern Himalayas.
2 Bhutanese houses are built from
a mud, stone, woods with iron nails.
b a sheet of cloth and wooden roof.
c mud and stone with wooden roof.
d bamboo and wood.
3 Which of the following activities is mentioned as a way of celebrating
Losar.
a cooking special dishes and wearing new clothes
b playing chess and badminton
c having a trip to the neighbouring households
d harvesting crops %
S
AQ

English For Today 89
4 According to Bhutan’s constitutional obligations
a 60% of the country must remain under forest cover.
b foreign nationals are not allowed to visit Bhutan even now.
c citizens can not use the Internet in their houses.
d people must always wear traditional Bhutanese clothes.
5 The progress of Bhutan as a nation is measured by
a Gross National Income.
b Gross National Happiness.
c Gross National Product.
d Per Capita Income.
Format 12, English For Today-9-10

English For Today
Unit Seven
People who stand out
Oa a
Learning outcomes
After we have studied this unit, we will be able to
® read and understand texts through silent reading
* ask and answer questions
* listen to an audio text for specific information
e write a dialogue. $

English For Today 91
Lesson 1; Zainul Abedin, the great artist
A_ Read the text and answer the questions that follow.
The pioneer of Bangladeshi modern art Zainul F,
ike
Abedin is widely acclaimed for his Bengal ‘Famine _ ae
Sketches’. Through the series of sketches, Zainul not a 12 =
only documented the harsh famine of 1943 but also : Z
showed its sinister face through the skeletal figures ae. t
of the people destined to die of starvation in a man- “ A
made plight. He depicted these extremely shocking Ne A Me
pictures with human compassion. He made his own Vi
ink by burning charcoal and used cheap ordinary os
packing paper for sketching. Using the ink and ; ron
applying the brush where necessary, he produced —
the drawings and sketches which later became iconic images of human suffering.
Zainul developed a knack for drawing and painting when he was a high
school student. After completing high school, he took admission in the
Government School of Art, Calcutta (now Kolkata). He graduated with the first
position in first class in 1938. He was appointed a_ teacher of the Art School
while he was still a student there. He also attended the Slade School of Arts,
London during 1951-52.
Zainul Abedin is considered the founding father of Bangladeshi art. He was an
artist of outstanding talent and earned international reputation. For his artistic
and visionary qualities, he is referred to as Shilpacharya meaning ‘great teacher
of art' in Bangladesh. He was the first Principal of the first art school in Dhaka
in East Pakistan (now Bangladesh). He organized the Nabanna (harvest)
exhibition in 1969. The exhibition included a 65 feet long scroll portraying the
rural East Pakistan in phases from abundance to poverty. This intensified the
already heightened non-cooperation movement against the Pakistan regime. The
exhibition was symbolic of the Bangalee artists’ protest and a milestone in our
struggle for cultural and political freedom. Zainul's dynamic style of work is
evident in a 30 feet long scroll painting called Manpura, which was done to
¢ commemorate the death of hundreds and thousands of people in the devastating
& cyclone of 1970.

92 English For Today
He designed the pages of the Constitution of the Bangladesh. He founded the
Folk Art Museum at Sonargaon, and also Zainul Abedin Shangrahasala, a
gallery of his own works in Mymensingh in 1975.
The river Brahmaputra played a vital role in his paintings and was a source of
inspiration all through his career. Much of his childhood was spent near the
scenic river Brahmaputra. A series of water colours that Zainul did as his tribute
to the river earned him the Governor's Gold Medal in an all-India exhibition in
1938. This was the first time that he came into spotlight and this award gave him
the confidence to create his own visual style.
Zainul Abedin was born in Kishoreganj on 29 December 1914 and died in Dhaka
on 28 May 1976,
[adapted from The Daity Star: Thursday July 16, 2012]
Questions
1 Write in detail how Zainul Abedin portrayed the sufferings of people.
2 What influence did the river Brahmaputra have on Zainul Abedin? How
did he show this influence in his works?
3 What did these works earn him in his life?
4 How did his art help to intensify the noncooperation movement against
the Pakistani regime?
B Look at the series of pictures below. Work in groups and talk about
them. Now briefly write about what each picture portrays.
a | N i : =
SO SS ~_
Picture 1 Picture 2 Picture 3
Cy
R

English For Today i
Whip il ¥ : i i?
ae 7 , |
. 7 “A « ‘en A |
. >
mF) 7," \ eg Oe
Picture 7
C —_ Listen to the Audio and tick the word/s you hear.
1 The US Ambassador to Bangladesh considered Zaiml in 4
a great painter, b popular painter.
2 —‘Zainul’s art gallery was set up in ——-—.
a 1972. b 1973.
c 1974. d 1975.
3 Thenumber of Zainul’s artworks preserved in the gallery is ——
a 53. b 62,
c 65. d 75.
=
&

94 English For Today
4 The US Ambassador commented that the museum is a global
a wealth. b asset.
c gift. d treasure.
5 The US Ambassador was in the gallery for
a 3 hours. b 2 hours.
c 1 hour. d ‘hour.
D Listen to the text again and answer the questions.
1 Where is Zainul’s art gallery situated?
2 When did the Ambassador visit the gallery?
3 Who else were there with the Ambassador during his visit?
4 Which artworks of Zainul did the Ambassador specially mention?
5 How did the Ambassador feel after visiting the gallery?
Lesson 2: The art of silence
- Peay
Lf = & \
V7 { “4 %
A Look at the above pictures of Partha Pratim Majumder. Work in
pairs and discuss the following questions.
1 What is Partha Pratim Majumder doing in the two pictures?
2 Describe his facial expressions.
3 Describe his physical features i.e. his age, how he looks, what he is
wearing, his hair style, etc. %
Now write a short description of Partha Pratim Majumder. S

English For Today 95
B Read the text and choose the correct answer.
Before the beginning of human language,communication took place between
humans through signs and gestures. As humans began to use their vocal chords,
these silent gestures were no longer used as the primary means of
communication. But these did not completely disappear. They evolved as a form
of art which came to be known as 'mime'.
In a Bangladeshi village, a little boy came to know about mime as he watched a
performance in his village. He was so fascinated by the show that he was
determined to master this art. The name of that little boy was Partha Pratim
Majumder.
Majumder is undoubtedly a forerunner in the field of mime in Bangladesh. He
started as a musician and his keen sense of rhythm helped him to let his limbs
move and express his thoughts through gestures.
Partha Pratim Majumder is the first Bangladeshi to take up mime as a profession.
He performed in a number of television shows in Bangladesh and gained
popularity. In his mimes, Majumder depicted the day-to-day life of the people—
their sadness, tears as well as their happiness and laughter.
Majumder's turning point came in 1979, when he was asked to give a solo
performance at Bangladesh Shilpakala Academy. The French ambassador to
Bangladesh at the time, Mr. Loic Moreau happened to be among the audience.
Mr. Moreau noticed the talent in Majumder. In 1981, the French Government
offered him a scholarship so that he could get professional training in mime.
This was the first time that a student was granted a French scholarship in mime.
Majumder started his training under the legendry maestro, Etiene Decroux.
Through Decroux, he met another celebrated mime artist named Marcel
Marceau. Marceau has transformed modern mime by taking it to an
unimaginable height.
Marceau was very impressed by the young Bangladeshi talent and offered him a
place in his school for mime, named 'Ecole Internationale de Mimodrame de
Paris Marcel Marceau’. This mime school is the biggest and the best in the
world.
During his three year training period, Majumder practised 16-18 hours daily till

e each and every bone in his body would feel like breaking.

Ss

aq

96 English For Today
After his time with Marceau, there was no looking back for Majumder. He
staged solo performances in England, Belgium, Germany, Spain, Italy and the
USA. French, Canadian and American TV channels enthusiastically aired his
shows.
In 2009, a French play featuring Majumder won the "Moliere Award" which is
the highest distinction in the French Theatre.
As a pioneer of the art of mime in Bangladesh and for popularizing the artistic
genre, Bangladesh Government honoured the artiste with the "Ekushey Padok"
in 2010.
The Government of France has also honoured him for his contribution to the art
of mime throughout the world with one of the highest cultural awards of France
titled "Chevalier de I' odre des Arts et des Lettres" (Knight in the order of Arts
and Letters) in the year 2011.
[Sources: The Star Magazine, a weekly publication of The Daily Star, 27 January
2012 and Partha Pratim Majumder’s Letter to Chairman NCTB, 2 February 2013]
Questions: Choose the best answer.
1 Before the use of speech, communication took place through
language.
a) written b) sign
c) spoken d) art
2. In what form have the silent gestures evolved into?
a) drama b) cinema
c) mime d) dance
3. In olden times the actors who performed mime used to put white paint
on their
a) limbs b) body
c) face d) hair
4. The word ‘fascinated’ in the second paragraph of the text means
a) enchanetd b) encouraged
29
c) silenced e) upset s

English For Today 97
Cc Read the text in B again. Say if the following statements are true or
false? If false, give the correct information.
1 The ancient Egyptian art shows that people at that time interacted
with one another through signs.
2  Inancient times, humans used a few words as the primary means of
interaction.
3 Partha Pratim Majumder is among the first few who performed
mime in Bangladesh.
4 The turning point in Majumder’s life was when he performed at
Bangladesh Shilpakala Academy.
5 Marcel Marceau’s school of mime is in Barcelona.
D Read the text in B again and write answers to the questions.
1 What 1s ‘mime’?
2 What helped Majumder to express himself clearly while performing mime?
3 What did he depict through his performance at the beginning?
4 Why was the French ambassador impressed when he saw Majumder’s
performance?
5 Describe the awards in art and culture that Majumder received.
Why were they given to him?
E Project: Do you know anyone who has skills to perform a special feat?
Write about the person, covering the following points.
e the first time the person came to know about it
e the time when the person began to practise it
e people who supported him/her
e his/her achievements /recognitions
If you do not know anyone, make a search and then write about the
person based on the above guideline.
Format 13, English For Today-9-10

98 English For Today
Lesson 3: Flashback
A Read the text and match column A with column B below.
Partha Pratim Majumder was born in 1954 in Pabna to a family of artistes. He
spent most of his early years in his big ancestral home, situated in a small
locality known as Kalachandpara. At that time Kalachandpara was well known
for its cultural activities. There were festivals and various types of cultural
shows round the year. Majumder's father, a photographer by profession was an
art lover. He taught and inspired his son to appreciate different forms of art.
Majumder went to live with his aunt in Chandernagar, 30 kilometers away from
Kolkata in 1966. It was there that he first came across a mime artiste named
Jogesh Dutta. The way Dutta narrated stories without uttering a single word, left
Majumder spellbound. He took lessons on mime from Dutta in his mime
academy in Kolkata from 1966 to 1972.
ee
1. Majumder was very much impressed | a. loved art.
2. He spent most of his childhood b. him value all forms of arts.
3. His father loved c. inhis own village.
4. The people of his locality d. were culturally active.
5. His father made e. when he saw Dutta’s performance.
B Read the statements below and form appropriate questions for
each statement.
1 The birth place of Partha Pratim Majumder is in Pabna.
2 He was born in 1954.
3 He belonged to a culturally enlightened family.
4 Majumder’s father inspired him to value art.
5 His forefathers’ home was in Kalachandpara.
6 He spent his childhood enjoying different cultural activities.
Cc Listen to the Audio and complete the chart about Partha Pratim co
Majumder. 8

English For Today 99
Lesson 4: The beginning
A Read the text and choose the best answer.
It was late summer, 26 August 1910. A little girl was born to a rich Catholic
merchants’ family of Albanian descent in a small town called Skopje, Macedo-
nia. She was the youngest of the three siblings and was named Agnes Gonxha
Bojaxhiu. Who could imagine at the time that this little girl would one day
become the mother of humanity, loving and serving the poorest of the poor. Yes,
we are talking about none other than Mother Teresa.
At the age of 12, she heard a voice from within that urged her to spread the love
of Christ. She decided that she would be a missionary. At the age of 18 she left
her parental home. She then joined an Irish community of nuns called the Sisters
of Loreto, which had missions in India.
After a few months of training at the Institute of the Blessed Virgin Mary in
Dublin, Mother Teresa came to India. On May 24, 1931, she took her initial
vows as a nun. From 1931 to 1948, Mother Teresa taught geography and
theology at St. Mary's High School in Kolkata (then Calcutta). However, the
widespread poverty in Kolkata had a deep impact on Mother Teresa and in 1948
she received permission from her superiors to leave the convent and devote
herself to caring for the poorest of the poor in the slums of Kolkata.
1 What does ‘mother of humanity’ mean in the text?

a agood mother

b akind mother who has many children

c amother who likes humans

S d amother figure who serves the poor like her own childern
g

100 English For Today
2 Why did Mother Teresa want to be a missionary?
Because she heard
a the voice of her neighbours discussing it.
b a voice in her dream.
c a voice within herself.
d the voice of her parents talking about it.
3 Mother Teresa set out to join the missionary of the Sisters of Loreto in
the year
a 1927. b. 1928.
c 1929. d. 1930.
4 Mother Teresa took her first vows as a nun at the age of
a 18. b. 19.
ec 20. d 21,
B Read the text in A again and answer the questions.
1 Where did Mother Teresa’s ancestors come from?
2 Where was her father’s home?
3 Why did she want to become a missionary?
4 What made her different from other girls at such an early age? What
words and expressions are used in the text to describe this difference?
5 What did Mother Teresa do in the first seventeen years in India?
Cc Look at the picture and talk about her in pairs. .
Take the help of the questions given below. =
1 How old is she? Why do you think so? y -—
2 What is she wearing? .
3 How has she worn it? ‘ "

English For Today 101
Lesson 5: The missionary
A Listen to the Audio and fill in the gaps.
To prepare herself to work with the , Mother Teresa took an
intensive medical with the American Medical Missionary
Sisters in , India. Her first course of action in Kolkata was
to__..._..______ children from the slums and start to teach them. Financial
support and volunteers came to give a hand to Mother
Teresa in her work for ____- In 1950 her group, now called
the Missionaries of Charity, received _______ Status as_ a religious
community. Members took the vows of poverty, chastity
(purity), and , but they added a fourth vow —to give free
to the most poor.
The Missionaries of Charity received publicity, and Mother
Teresa used it to her work. In 1957 they began to work with
lepers (those suffering from leprosy, which is a terrible infectious disease).
Gradually from one school they to nine elementary schools
in Kolkata. They also opened a home for and abandoned
children. Soon they were in more than ___—————_Indian cities. Mother
Teresa also visited other such as Sri Lanka, Australia,
Tanzania, Venezuela and Italy to begin new foundations.
Mother Teresa's group to expand throughout the 1970s. They
opened new in places such as Amman, Jordan, London,
; and New York. By 1979 Mother Teresa's groups
had more than different operations in over twenty-five
countries around the world, with dozens more ventures to follow.
B Read the completed text and say if the following statements are true or
false. If false, give the correct information.
1 Mother Teresa took a thorough medical training from the USA.
2% 2 At first she collected children from the streets and gave them food and
& clothing.

102 English For Today
3 She and her group started to look after and care for the lepers.
4 It took them a long time to go to other cities of India.
5 Mother Teresa went to several countries.
Cc Read the text in A again and complete the chart given below.
D:_Read the text in A again and answer the following questions.
1 What did Mother Teresa initially do before beginning to work
for humanity?
2 How many vows did the Missionaries of Charity take? What were they?
3 What did Mother Teresa and her group do?
Now write the answers in your exercise book.
E Do you know anyone in your locality who helps the needy and does
so to make others happy? Write a short composition about him/her.
Lesson 6: Love for humanity
A Look at the picture and talk about it in pairs.
= 4 <
ot “ae oe Noe! _° %
=< i 4 we bos 4. &

English For Today 103
B Read more about Mother Teresa.
Mother Teresa was moved by the sight of the sick and dying on the streets of
Kolkata. She founded a home for the dying destitute and named it ‘Nirmal
Hriday', meanmg ‘Pure Heart’. She and her fellow nuns brought the dying people
off the streets of Kolkata to this home. They were lovingly looked after and cared
for. Since then many men, women and children have been taken from the streets
and carried to Nirmol Hriday. These unloved and uncared for people get an
opportunity to die in an environment of kindness and love. In their last hours
they get human and divine love, and can feel they are also children of God. The
Missionaries of Charity try to find jobs for those who survive, or send them to
homes where they can live happily for some more years in a caring environment.
Regarding commitment to family, Mother Teresa said, "May be in our own
family, we have somebody, who is feeling lonely, who is feeling sick, who is
feeling worried. Are we there? Are we willing to give until it hurts in order to be
with our families, or do we put our interest first? We must remember that love
begins at home and we must also remember that future of humanity passes
through the family".
Mother Teresa's work has been recognised throughout the world and she
received a number of awards. These include the Pope John XXIII Peace Prize
(1971), the Nehru Prize for Promotion of International Peace & Understanding
(1972), the Balzan Prize (1978), the Nobel Peace Prize (1979) and the Bharat
Ratna (1980).
Mother Teresa died at the age of 87, on 5 September 1997.The world salutes her
for her love and compassion for humanity. She has taught us how to extend our
hand towards those who need our love and support irrespective of creed, caste
and religion. The picture of Mother Teresa, draped in a white and blue-bordered
sari, with a wrinkled face, ever soft eyes and a saintly smile, lives on in our mind.
Cc Now say whether the following statements are true or false. If false,

give the correct information.

1. Mother Teresa was moved to see the diseases that spread in the

streets of Kolkata.
2 She opened a home for the orphans.
oo 3. She and her group brought in the dying people from the streets of
s Kolkata.

104 English For Today
4 ‘Nirmal Hriday’ was founded so that the poor people who are dying can
get love and care before death.
5 Mother Teresa said that humanity passes through charitable organizations.
6 Wehave learnt from Mother Teresa how to come forward to help only
those who belong to a special caste.
D_ Read the text in B again and write the answer to the following
questions in your exercise book.
1 Why do you think Mother Teresa won so many awards?
2 What does ‘Nirmal Hriday’ stand for?
3. Why do you think the home is named ‘Nirmal Hriday’?
4 Why did Mother Teresa want the dying people to feel that they too
deserve care and love?
5 What are the things that we have learnt from Mother Teresa?
Lesson 7: The wizard of Apple
A Look at the picture and ask and answer the questions.
1 What do you see? b 9
2 Are you familiar with this logo? -
3 What does this logo stand for? i
4 Which company uses this logo for its
products?
5 Do you know the logo of any Bangladeshi product? :
6 Do you like it? Why/Why not?
ES
8

English For Today 105
B Read about Steve Jobs.
Steven Paul Jobs (24 February 1955 - 5 October 2011) , most popularly known
as Steve Jobs was the co-founder, chairman and chief executive officer of Apple
Inc. He was the pioneer of the personal computer revolution. He was famous for
his career in the electronic field of computers and consumers. This became
possible through the marketing of Apple computers.
In 1985, Jobs left Apple after losing a power battle with the board of directors.
He then founded NeXT, a computer platform development company
specializing in the higher education and business market. Apple, howover failed
to bring up any new operating system during Job's absence. Jobs returned to
Apple as an adviser, and took control
of the company as an interim CEO. i,
By 1998, Jobs brought Apple back [ie
to profitability from the verge of peo :
bankruptcy. He supervised the \e . aR, e, ae
development of iMac, iTunes, iPod, & » Py
iPhone and iPad. These devices are ee | " -_
so simple and user friendly that even “Os \ =
a child can operate them. > \
He supervised the company's Apple Stores, iTunes Stores and the App Stores
too. The success of these products and services brought about steady financial
returns for several years and pushed Apple to become the world's most valuable
publicly traded company in 2011. This triumph is regarded as the greatest
turnarounds in the business history.
Steve Jobs has been highly acclaimed as a visionary leader. He has changed
people's perspective towards the computer and how they use it, consume
personal media and how they communicate with each other. Hence iBooks,
iPhones, iPods and iPads have become extremely popular. Jobs saw and felt the
need of Wi-Fi (wireless Internet connection) in laptops. It is he who made Wi-Fi
a standard feature of every laptop, and of many other devices worldwide. So
Jobs' dream to be anywhere anytime became a reality.
Jobs also co-founded and served as chief executive of Pixar Animation Studios.
He became a member of the board of directors of The Walt Disney Company in
2006, when Disney acquired Pixar.

Format 14, English For Today-9-10

106 English For Today
C True or false? If false, give the correct information.

1 Jobs spent his entire career working for Apple.

2 He became famous because he knew how to market computers

and keep the buyers happy.

3 He became the chairman of The Walt Disney Company.

4 Jobs left Apple in 2001.

5 Jobs was a visionary.
D Read the text in B again and answer the following qustions.

1 Write about Jobs' successful career.

2 What does ‘power battle' mean?

3 How did Jobs manage to bring Apple back to profitalriity ?

4. Why was he called a visionary?

5 Why did Jobs feel that Wi-Fi connection was needed in laptops?
E Pairwork: Write a dialogue about the contribution of Steve Jobs on

ICT and do a role play.
Lesson 8: Jobs’ childhood
A Read the text and write answers to the questions that follow.
A car mechanic Paul Jobs and his wife Clara Jobs adopted Steve who was
abandoned at birth. Paul and Clara loved Steve very much. They made him feel
that he was 'chosen' and very ‘special’.
One of his colleagues, Del Yocam said about Steve, "I think his desire for
complete control of whatever he makes derives directly from his personality and
from the fact that he was abandoned at birth."
Jobs' mother taught him how to read and write before he went to the elementary
school. So when he went to school, he found out that he knew everything that the
teachers were teaching. He got bored and played pranks to keep himself busy.
This continued for the first few years. It was clear from his behaviour thathe 3%

g

English For Today 107
could not accept other people's authority. He said, "I encountered authority of a
different kind that I have never encountered before, and I did not like it."
A turning point came when he was in grade four. His teacher Imogene Hill
watched him very closely for some time and soon found out how to handle him
and get things done by him. In order to get things done she used to give him
money and food. One day after school, she gave Jobs a workbook with math
problems in it. She said,"I want you to take it home and do this." She showed
Jobs a huge lollipop and said, “When you are done with it, if you get it mostly
right, I will give you this and five dollars. "Within two days, Jobs solved the
math problem and returned the book to his teacher.
This continued for a couple of months and Jobs enjoyed learning so much that he
did not need any return. Also he liked his teacher very much and wanted to
please her. In Ms. Hill's class, Jobs felt he was special. At the end of the fourth
grade, Jobs did very well. It was clear not only to Jobs and his parents but also to
the teachers that he was exceptionally intelligent. The school proposed that Jobs
should skip two classes and go into the seventh grade. This would mean that Jobs
would find the study challenging and he would be motivated to study. His
parents had him skip only one grade.
Source: Steve Jobs by Walter Isaacson
Questions

1 What do the words ‘chosen’ and ‘special’ mean in the text. Explain.

2 Why didn’t Jobs enjoy school?

3 What did he do to keep himself entertained?

4 Why couldn’t Jobs accept other people’s authority at school? Why

hadn’t he come across other people’s authority before?
5 Why did Jobs have the wish to control everything?
6 How did Jobs’ teacher Imogene Hill keep him busy?
S

108 English For Today
B Match the words with their meanings as used in the context.
adopted deserted /left alone
abandoned | encourage
encounter | power
authority | mischiefs
pranks legal y took and raised another’s child
motivate | face
oo
S

English For Today
Unit Eight
World heritage
j
Learning outcomes
After we have studied this unit, we will be able to
e listen for specific information
e read and understand texts through silent reading
e ask and answer questions
e describe a place.
s
§

110 English For Today
Lesson 1: The Shat Gambuj Mosque
A Look at the picture. Work in pairs. Talk about the picture and ask
and answer the following questions.
1 What is this building? == | RS ]
2 Do you have a building like JE les th, er” see &
this in your town/village? ait mss jg — A
3 What do we call it? at i i) 0a ithe Leia
4 Whatis it used for? ———
B Read the text and complete the chart given after it.
‘Heritage’ is what we inherit from the past, live with in the present and then pass
on to our children or future generation. Our unique source of life and inspiration
is our cultural and natural heritage. When we speak of ‘World Heritage’, it
indicates places and sites that we inherited from the past and pass on to the
future generation of the entire world.
The '‘Shat Gambuj Mosque’ in Bagerhat is such a heritage. It became a UNESCO
World Heritage Site in 1985.
Originally, the historic Mosque City was known as ' Khalifatabad". It is situated
at the outskirts of Bagerhat town--- not very far from the dense mangrove forest
of the Sundarbans. Khalifatabad was a Muslim colony. It was founded by the
Turkish general, a saint warrior Ulugh Khan Jahan in the 15" century. The
infrastructure of the city reveals significant technical skills in many mosques as
well as early Islamic monuments. Baked bricks were used for the construction
of the buildings. The planning of the city was dominated by the tradition of
Islamic architecture and the decorations were a combination of Mughal and
Turkish architecture.
Khan Jahan built a network of roads, bridges, public buildings and reservoirs to
make the city habitable. There were about 360 mosques in the city. Among them
the most remarkable is the multi-domed Shat Gombuj Mosque. The mosque is
unique in the sense that it has 60 pillars that support the roof, with 77 low height _
domes. The 4 towers at 4 corners have smaller domes at the top as well. The S$

English For Today 111
vast prayer hall has 11 arched doorways on the east and 7 each on the north and
south for light and ventilation. It has 7 aisles running along the length of the
mosque and 11 deep curves between the slender stone columns. These columns
support the curving arches created by the domes. The thickness of the arches is
6 feet and have slightly narrowing hollow and round wall.
The west wall in the interior has 11 'mihrabs' (niche in mosque pointing towards
Makkah). These mihrabs are decorated with stonework and terracotta. The floor
of the mosque is made of brick.
Besides being used as a prayer hall, Khan Jahan used the mosque as his court
too.Today, it is one of the greatest tourist attractions and one of the best
architectural beauties of Bangladesh.
a
rs
i
2
8

112 English For Today

C Look at the picture of the Star Mosque in Dhaka. Read the information
and write a description of the mosque with the help of the given clues.

Location: Dhaka, Abul Khairat Road

Style: Mughal

Number of domes: 5 i aja

Decoration: different sizes of stars on 4 s ’ ; e =

dome and outside wall oe , Se. Ge 2 tf nA

Bitieciclimse sOaiticte ine meme OA

Materials used for decoration: chinaware Pars rir aS ares

nesting of the mosque: mosaic floor, floral F eS 7 a a4 “i

tiles on the wall = ] yas

Built by: Mirza Ghulam Pir— a respectable

Zamindar of Dhaka

Time: early 18% century

Lesson 2: The Somapura Mahavihara

A Read the text.

Paharpur is an important archaeological site situated in a village named

‘Paharpur' in Naogaon district of northern Bangladesh. Naogaon is mainly plain

land but in the middle of it stood a hill covered with jungle. When the jungle was

cleared and the hill excavated, there emerged a lofty ruin of an ancient temple.

The temple is about 24 meter high from the surrounding level. 'Pahar’ means hill.

Hence the name Paharpur.

The Paharpur site has been excavated and re-excavated a number of times by

archaeologists. Sir Alexander Cunningham, archaeological surveyor of India,

visited the place in 1879. He intended to carry out an extensive excavation but

was prevented by the land owner. Nevertheless, he was satisfied with whatever

excavation he was permitted to carry out. The site was declared to be protected

by the Archaeological Survey of India in 1919 under the Ancient Monuments ~

Preservation Act of 1904. &

English For Today 113
Systematic and regular excavation started jointly by the Archaeological Survey
of India, and Varendra Research Society of Rajshahi and Calcutta University in
1923. They excavated the south-west corner of the monastery. Next, in 1925-26,
historian and archaeologist RD Banerjee excavated the northern part of the cen-
tral mound. From 1926-27 onward, excavation was carried out under the super-
vision of KN Dikshit.
The Department of Archaeology of Bangladesh brought the site under further
excavation after independence. The operations took place in two phases. The
first phase was initiated in 1981-82 and continued till 1984-1985. The second
phase was started in 1988-89 and continued till 1990-91.
Pre-liberation expeditions have revealed the architecture of a vast Buddhist
monastery, the Somapura Mahavihara. It is dominated by the central shrine,
attracting immediate attention by its lofty height and unusual architectural
design.
Somapura Mahavihara was one of the most famous Buddhist institutions for
monks of ancient Bengal and Southern Asia. The excavated complex at
Paharpur has been identified as Somapura Mahavihara built by the second Pala
king Dharmapala (781- 821 AD). Some clay seals from the ruins bear the
inscription Shri-Somapure-Shri-Dharmapaladeva-Mahavihariyarya-bhik-
su-sangghasya.

oa a wa i =
The Pala rulers were devout Buddhists and they founded a number of
monasteries throughout their growing empire. Some of them became great
centres of learning and their reputation quickly spread throughout Asia.
Somapura Mahavihara's close relationship with the ruling dynasty implied that it
shared the political ups and downs of its benefactors.
Format 15, English For Today-9-10

114 English For Today
B Match the words with their meanings.
archaeological rubbles/wreckage
excavate widespread
lofty ancient cultural remains
extensive pious
systematic uncover something with difficulty
debris grand
devout done methodically
Cc Read Text in A again and choose the correct answer.
1 Paharpur is a
atypical Bangladeshi village. b an extraordinary village.
c avery small village. d_ avillage on top of a mountain.
2 After excavation, the archaeologists discovered a huge
a king’s palace. b  emperor’s courtyard.
c Buddhist monastery. d Hindu temple.
3 How many phases of excavation of Paharpur have been mentioned in
the text?
a four b five
Cc Six d_ seven
4 What objects indicate that the site was built by the second Pala king?
a earthen seals b ceramic seals
c stone seals d_ iron seals
5 The word ‘ benefactors’ in the text means
a banks. b famous businessmen.
c people with money. d__ financial supporters.
20
Ss
AQ

English For Today 115
D Read the text again. Work in pairs. Ask and answer the following
questions.
1 Why is the village named Paharpur?
2 Where is it located?
3 What is it famous for?
4 What did Cunningham find when he was digging the Paharpur site?
5 Why was the site officially stated to be preserved?
Now write the answers in your exercise book.
E Do you have any old or ancient relic in your city/town/village? Write
about it with the help of the following questions.
e When was it established?
e Who built it?
e How does it look like?
e How big is it?
e What was it for?
e What is its present condition?
e Why do you like it?
If you don’t have any such relic, surf the Internet for a relic in
Bangladesh that you find interesting and write about it with the help
of the above questions.

Lesson 3: The Statue of Liberty ie a
A Look at the picture and talk about it in 4 "
pairs. fi ‘a
1 Do you know what it is? Yi ;

2 Discuss what stands out in the picture. / i 4"
3 Do you think it is a man or a woman? ty
B Read the questions first. Now listen to the a I
Audio about the Statue of Liberty and answer the oe
s following questions. ea

116 English For Today
1 Where is the Statue of Liberty situated?
2 Which country gave the statue as a gift?
3 The gift was meant for which country?
4 On what occasion was it given?
5 When was the statue given?
6 What does the statue represent?
Cc Listen to the text again and complete the chart.
situated
artist
gift from
reason for the gift
presented on
occasion
the statue symbolizes
framework made of
amount of copper used
weight
year it was declared a UNESCO World
Heritage Site
D Read the text and answer the following questions.
The French sculptor Frederic Auguste Bartholdi was assigned to design and
complete a sculpture Liberty Enlightening the World within 1876, so that it
could be a gift for the Americans on the occasion of the hundredth anniversary
of the American Declaration of Independence. The statue was a joint venture
between the USA and France. The French people would build the statue and
assemble it in the States, and the people of the USA were to build the pedestal
for the statue.
Raising money for the pedestal was completed in August 1885. The construction
of the pedestal was finished in April 1886. In the meantime, France completed
the Statue in July 1884. They sent it to New York on board the French war ship =
‘Isere' in 1885. While transporting the statue, it was split up into 350 pieces and 3
packed in 214 crates.

English For Today 117
It took four months to put the Statue together and place it on the pedestal.
Thousands of people saw the unveiling ceremony of the Statue of Liberty on 28
October 1886. It was a centennial gift ten years late.
The Freedom that the Statue stands for is not stationary. The broken chain
wrapped around her feet, sticking out from the bottom of her robe, symbolizes
her free forward movement, enlightening the world with her torch, free from
oppression and slavery.
The Statue's original torch was the first part constructed in 1876. It was replaced
by a new copper torch covered in 24K gold leaf in 1984. The torch is lighted by
flood light at night. The original torch is currently located in the lobby of the
monument. Access to the torch has been closed since 1916.
From 28 October 2011, on her 125th anniversary, the Statue of Liberty was also
named "Liberty Enlightening the World Wide Web". The credit goes to a series
of new web cams placed around her torch. Several amazing views will be just a
click of a mouse away. On clear days, three cameras provide unobstructed views
of scenes far and near. Two cameras provide an ultra wide-angle interactive view
of the famous golden torch. The remaining camera looks downwards towards the
crown of The Statue of Liberty, her face and the tablet she is holding. So a person
can have access to the web cam's live feed of The Statue of Liberty from
anywhere in the world.
Questions:

1 On what occasion did the French government give the Statue of Liberty

to the USA?

2 When did she reach her destination?

3 How was she transported?

4 How has new technology made it possible for people to see the statue

from anywhere they are?
5 What do you understand by the expression ‘enlightening the world’?
x
&

118 English For Today
Lesson 4: Lake Baikal
A Look at the picture and talk about it.
B Work in pairs and ask and answer i
the following questions. ie: — we
1 What do you think it is? —_—
2 Where is this situated? = == a= ——
3 Are you familiar with something like this?
C_ Read the text to find out if your guess about questions 1 and 2 is right.
Lake Baikal is the deepest and one of the biggest and most ancient lakes of the
world. It is situated almost in the centre of Asia. Lake Baikal is a gigantic bowl
set at 445 meters above sea level. This grand, enormous, unusual and charming
miracle of nature is located in the south of Eastern Siberia, in the Buryat
Autonomous Republic and region of Irkutsk, Russia.
The lake covers 31,500 sq km. It is 636 km long and an average of 48 km wide.
The widest point of the lake is 79.4 km. The water basin occupies 557,000 sq
km. and contains 23,000 cu km (cubic kilometer) of water, which is about one
fifth of the world's reserves of fresh surface water.
The average water level in the lake is never higher than 456m. The average
depth of Lake Baikal is 730 m, and its maximum depth in the middle is 1,620 m.
It would take about one year for all the rivers of the world to fill Baikal's basin,
and would take four hundred years for all the rivers, streams and brooks now
flowing into Siberian lakesea to do the same.
There are hot springs in the surrounding area of Lake Baikal. The quality of the
water of these springs is excellent. The lake acts as a powerful generator and bio
filter producing this water. Baikal is a stormy lake. Autumn is the most stormy
time. The wind blows in various directions.
The weather depends on the wind. If it is blowing from the north, the weather is
bright and sunny. The water of the lake looks green and dark blue. But if the
winds get stronger, Baikal turns black, waves rising high with white crest. The =
beauty of Lake Baikal is exceptional. Ss

English For Today 119
D Match the words with the meanings.
miracle small stream
basin top
brook outstanding
crest an act believed to be caused by God
exceptional | bowl-shaped depression filled with water
E Read the text in C again and complete the chart.
location
setting/placed
length
width
maximum depth/
utmost/highest depth
extended over an
area/occupies an area
amount of water
F Make a list of attractive features of Lake Baikal.
G__ Have you seen a Jake or river that has attracted you very much? If yes,
write what aspects of the lake or river appealed to you. If not, go and
20
s see a lake or a river. Then write about it.

Unit Nine
Unconventional jobs
d Mi,
fF"
Learning outcomes
After we have studied this unit, we will be able to
describe familiar objects
read intensively and extensively
© participate in debate, discussion
® Write about jobs and situations
read for skimming, scanning, and inferring
[ Skimming = to read quickly to get the gist of a text
Scanning = to read quickly to get specific information
Inferring = to read text to be able to make logical conclusions. |
x
R

English For Today 121
Lesson 1: Jobs that people do ee
A Many of us think that we must have a £73 fey ie rs
steady big job to be happy in life. Is that #2 pe ee
always true? Look at the picture and ""! axes
discuss in pairs what you see in it. spe: ie et
oer boia pk ae
B Read the text. It is about a young be £ per al
entrepreneur, Sayeed Kamal. Notice 4m (falgoges ~~ .
what he thinks about job and happiness. &% [ ee
Then answer the questions that follow. a
I know you will wonder if I say the best thing that ever happened to me was
when I left my last job. Yes, really!
I was a desk clerk in an office. But believe me I never liked my job. Nothing can
be more boring than being stuck in an office all day with computers and
telephone.
So after two years or so, I decided to leave my job though I had a good salary.
Now I'm the owner of a nursery. Planting seeds, budding, grafting, taking care
of saplings, cleaning the flower beds and spending time with trees are different
parts of my full time job. I start work very early. In summer I usually leave home
at 5:30 in the morning, but in winter not until about 7. I've a small hut in my
nursery. There cannot be any more pleasure for me than when I see the moon
from there or walk through the trees in the soft moonlit night. The winter is just
over. So I'm cleaning up the winter flower garden. Now I'm busy producing
more timber and medicinal plants which people will buy from July. Every
season is so different and I love them all. When I compare my present days with
the past, I simply can't understand how I could survive in my previous job. I love
nature. I just love working outside in the open air after all those months in a
stuffy office. Gadgets never attract me and perhaps never will.
I'm not married. I do my own work, even cook my own food. I try not to depend
on others for the work which I myself can do. Often my friends are annoyed with
me. They say, I should engage a maid for household chores. They are not happy
to see me in this ‘rustic life’. They are professionals. They earn a lot. Maybe
Format 16, English For Today-9-10

122 English For Today
much more than what I do, but I think I enjoy my work more.

At weekends, I often go to the countryside. Sometimes with my friends,
sometimes alone. I love collecting unknown saplings. I have another hobby. I
love collecting stamps. I have a Russian stamp from the period of Lenin. I don't
watch TV. Almost everyone has a TV set these days. But I don't have any. How
is that?.

The only problem I face is I do not earn enough money in all seasons. The winter
and the monsoon are two busy seasons for me. But it's OK. Maybe I do not earn
enough like many other people around me. But I at least earn enough for my
family, employees, and myself to run a decent life. I must say I'm a very happy
man!

Questions:

1 What is the best thing that ever happened to this man?

2 Why didn't Kamal like his last job?

3 What are the advantages and disadvantages of his present job?

4 When does he earn most money?

5 What attitude of Kamal is reflected in the lines: ‘Maybe I do not earn
enough like many other people around me. But I at least earn enough
for my family, employees, and me to run a decent life’?

Cc Ask and answer questions about Kamal. Use the clues given.
Example:
Jia ed dea eae ede et se seaeaes Married?
Q: Is he married?
A: No, he isn’t. He isn’t married.
1 wee eeeeee happy?
2 When...... leave home in summer?
3 What ........ plant after winter?
4 What ....... do at the weekend?
20
5 What ........ collect? g

English For Today 123
D Look at the following table. The left column shows some positive
aspects of Sayeed Kamal’s character. Add some more to the list. Also
find out some aspects of Sayeed that you think are unacceptable and
write them in the right column.
Good aspects of Sayeed Unacceptable aspects of Sayeed
a. simple a. old fashioned
b. diligent b. loner
c. loves nature c.
d. caring d.
e.
f.
g.
E Write a paragraph on Sayeed Kamal. Take your cues from D.
F ‘I must say I’m a very happy man!’--- Do you agree with Sayeed?
Write why/why not?
20
S

124. English For Today
Lesson 2: Weird jobs around
A Look at the following pictures and discuss with your partner what
you see in them.
p Wanted: Rare, US r' galt directed)
employment But fs at one's ty

F unique 2PPIEAGst be out ot Se 52d

a
B Read the text and answer the following questions,
What type of job do you want to have? Is it a highly paid and high-profile
conventional job most people like? Yes, you can have it. It is matter of your
choice and an important decision that would help you advance in your life. But
have you ever thought of other types of jobs out there— cool, fim, exciting, even
atrange or weird jobs you never knew existed? What are they? Did you ever
wonder who picks up the chewing gum left on a park bench or who assesses
whether a piece of furniture is comfortable enough or who constructs glass eye-
balls or who farms oysters in the middle of the ocean? These are all odd,
unexpected, wild, unconventional, strange or just plain weird jobs and careers.
They are not your traditional career choices, but somebody out there does all
these things, gets paid for it, and enjoys life like anybody else.
There are hundreds of such jobs to take if you want to travel the less taken
ways of life. You have to decide on several questions: =

a

English For Today 125

e What companies will recruit/hire me?

e Dolactually get a paycheck?

e What type of education/diploma will I need?

e Can I make a living doing this?
Your answers to these questions will help draw your career roadmap and help
you decide if you are ready to take the challenge. Decide if you want a change.
A lot of strange jobs also allow you to work part-time or freelance when it fits
your schedule. This way you can get a taste of freedom, a secondary income, and
build experience at the same time.
Do you have interests beyond writing memos and attending boring meetings? If
so, you may wonder how you can find a strange job. Hobbies are a good place to
start. What do you do for fun? Do you stuff animals, act like Charlie Chaplin, or
make model cars? There are people out there working in fields, making money
off their hobbies. Maybe they are testing mountaineering equipment, develop-
ing fragrances, trying new brands of undergarments, or saving sea turtles. And
they are getting paid good wages too.
Questions

1 ‘But have you ever thought of other types of jobs out there----?’? What

does ‘other types of jobs’ mean here?

2 There are four particular strange and weird jobs mentioned in para one of

the text. Which one of them seems to be most weird to you and why?

3 Before going for an unconventional and strange job the author has
suggested several questions to decide on. Rearrange them, beginning from
what you think is the most important to the least. Add some more
questions to the list that might be important to consider.

4 What are some other strange part-time jobs mentioned in the text?

5 What type of job is referred to by the expression ‘writing memos and
attending boring meetings’? Do you think the author's observation on the
particular job is justified? Why/Why not?

x
&

126 English For Today
Cc Look at the following dialogue and act it out in pairs.
x : Have you heard of a job like picking up the chewing gums
lelft on a park bench?
Y : Yes, Ihave. Iknow one person who does that job.
Xx : What do you think of the job?
Y : Sounds rather funny/odd/crazy/ though. But what’s wrong?
You can go for it as long as you enjoy it. And if it pays,
I think it’s fine.
Now make dialogues on the following:
1 Assessing the comfort of a piece of furniture
2 Farming oysters in the middle of the ocean

D Arrange a debate in the class in favour of and against strange jobs.

E Work in pairs. Make a list of adjectives used in the text to describe
strange jobs (at least10). Are you familiar with all of them? If yes,
use them in your own written sentences. Compare with your partner’s.
If no, try to guess their meaning from the context. Then
look up a dictionary to get the meanings. Finally use them in your
own sentences.

F Anumber of strange jobs have been mentioned in the text. Do you
know any one around you who does one of the jobs? If yes, write a
paragraph on him/her.

If no, first select a job. Then try to imagine who around you
could successfully do that particular job. Write why you think so.
sy
Ss

English For Today 127
Lesson 3: Floral career
A Look st the pictures and say what you see in them.
fe Ae
ahi Sn pH Ba ea 7 pape] (Sm aa
- “if a Bee att IR
B Work in pairs, Choose a job from the box below but don’t tell your
partner. Ask and answer the following Yea/No questions to find out
what the job fs,
Architect, taxi driver, dentist, farmer, lawyer, photographer, accountant,
mechanic, soldier, hairdresser, chef, politician, nurse, plumber, florist
Use these questions to help you.
Do you have to...? Did you have to...?
doa cing
weccoumie fatwety
a s
C Read the text and answer the following questions.
Have you ever thought of a very creative career? Have you dreamt of a rosy
environment full of colour and fragrance? How much would you love it if you
se were placed in a store full of flowers the whole day? I'm just going to give you
& some clues about such a job which can also be a business.

128 English For Today
Yes. Daisies, violets, tulips, marigolds, dahlias, lilies, jasmines, roses and all
those things of beauty can also earn you a living if you handle them
professionally. If you start such a profession you will be called a florist. A
florist's career is a good choice as an unconventional job for many around the
world. Wherever you see eye-catching floral displays, you actually see the
professional performance of a floral designer. Using both real and artificial
flowers with other greeneries, florists prepare flower displays for a variety of
events such as weddings, birthdays, anniversaries, Valentine's day, official
receptions and even funerals. Every flower comes with its distinct colour,
design, value and meaning which flower designers have to know well. There are
conventions and meanings associated with flowers. We know that
conventionally roses are meant for romance and marriage anniversaries and
tulips for birthdays.
Although formal education or a diploma is not always essential for florists, they
must have good taste, a good eye for colours, shapes and proportion. They have
to have good sense for selecting flowers, ribbons and other accessories to make
beautiful arrangements. Professional florists are knowledgeable about not only
flowers but also designs and techniques. Most florists learn the trade mainly
through apprenticeship in a flower farming job and also by attending formal
floral schools and courses. However, a true passion for flowers and a bit of
aesthetic sense are all that can make a florist's career successful.
Flower designers earn fairly handsome money. But the bonus is that they work
in a fresh and beautiful environment which their clients also enjoy. They work
with flowers all day long in a pleasant and fragrant atmosphere with vivid
colours around. But there is a disadvantage too, if you are inclined to see so:
florists deal with flowers, but miss their honey!
Questions

1 Howis the career of a florist?

2 What qualities do you need to have for a florist’s job?

3 How do most florists learn the trade?

4 What is the extra advantage of a florist’s job?
D Suppose you have met a florist in a flower shop. Write an imaginary

interview with him/her.
E Write a short paragraph giving reasons why you like or don’t like the 20
job of a florist. ES

English Ror Today
Unit Ten
Dreams
as
“

After we have studied the unit, we will be able to
* icipste in eT ;
® understand and narrate problems
e complete a grid.

Foamet 17, English For Todey-9-141

130 English For Today

Lesson 1: I have a dream

A Read these texts and say what is common among them.

Hi, I’m Moitry Mutsuddi. My Hello! I’m Mofakkhar Hasan. |
father is a freedom fighter and live in a slum with my parents
my mother is a teacher. They both and sisters. | know how cruel
dream for a golden Bangladesh Poverty can be! My heart

woe F bleeds to see the poor,
and inspire me to do something . .

_— , as suffering people in my slum.
significant, something positive Aner 1 Hae ARIGHEd ny.
for the punting; Often | Sinks education, I'll be a_ social
what to do to fulfil their worker and fight against social
expectations in future. Finally injustice and poverty.
I've decided to be a politician ‘Change’ is the word I believe
and work for my motherland. in to make Bangladesh a
How is it? golden Bengal.

I’m Amitabho Kar. When I say My name is Ruth Antara

to my friends that I would like Chowdhury. I believe that a

to be a space traveller, they society cannot be enlightened

laugh. But I really want to be without proper education.
that. If people from other Education lights the candle in

countries can conquer the moon, people’s heart. So I will be a

and roam in the space, why not teacher. Most of the times,

we? To be honest, I visualise people laugh at me and say,
that one day I’m stepping on ‘You are a brilliant student.

Mars from a space shuttle. Why not be a doctor or an

Please wish me the best so that engineer?’ | tell them, ‘I want

my dream comes true. to be a teacher because I’m

brilliant:

B Read the texts again and then work in pairs. Which person do you
think is most like you and why? Write a similar text stating your
own dream.

Cc Read this interview between Swati, a successful student in JSC and a

newspaper reporter, Animesh Roy. The interview is jumbled up. ,
Read the text and then organize the conversation properly. S

English For Today 131
Animesh : So you mean learning from each other?
Swati : There is no magic behind my success. I just worked hard. I followed
our teachers’ advice, ‘The more you read, the more you learn’.
I’m grateful to my teachers and parents for guiding me properly.

Animesh: Well Swati, we are really so proud of you for your brilliant
performance in the JSC exams. Please tell us how you could
achieve this success.

Swati : Obh....and I’m grateful to my school and friends too.

Animesh : That’s great!

Swati: In my school, we had a nice study group. Whenever we had any
problem, we discussed it in our group first. We tried to help each
other. And it always worked. Never forget, two heads are better
than one.

Animesh : I understand why you are grateful to your school but would you

explain how you are grateful to your friends, please?

Swati : Exactly that!

Animesh : By the way, Swati, what are your dreams for the future?

Swati : To keep up the success in next exams and make my dreams come true. I
want to be a scientist. Since my childhood I've known that many
people in Bangladesh are under arsenic threat. They are taking
arsenic directly from their drinking water and indirectly from the
crops and vegetables they eat. It's a kind of slow poisoning. People
are helpless. They are suffering from many kinds of diseases.
Therefore, I have a dream to carry out a research on how to get rid of
this problem, using our own recourses and expertise.

Animesh : Wish you luck.

D Now listen to the Audio and check whether your answer is correct.

E Work in pairs. Make questions for your partner to know about

a his/her dreams and take his/her interview.
S
x)

132 English For Today

Lesson 2: What I dream to be

A Work in groups. Read the following words. How are they related to
dreams?

imagination, emotion, passion, obsessions, strong desire, colour, rosy, future,

mind, brain, plan

B Work in groups, and discuss the following questions:

1 Do you consider dreams important for life? Why/ Why not?

2 What do you dream at this moment as a student?

3 What, according to you is the dream of Bangladesh at present?

4 Give examples of some dreams that are commonly shared by
Bangladesh as a nation.

5 Do you think the world has any common dream? What is that?

Cc Listen to the Audio. Three persons are telling about their dreams.
Take notes in the following grid to show what they plan to do and
what they don’t want to do.

aig Yat
— ef
— fe
_ FL]

D Listen to the texts again and check (.//x) the statements.

1 Masum Billah desires to study agriculture as his teacher suggests
him to do that.

2 If Masum qualifies, he will get admitted to a university inhis x
tural area. ES

English For Today 133

3 Catherine’s mother died in a doctor’s hand.

4 If Catherine’s family had brought a trained nurse, her mother might
have survived.

5 If Najmun Sultana came a few months ago, Nirmal could take
admission to a foreign University.

6 If Nirmal’s dreams come true, his near and dear ones will be more
conscious about their rights.

E Now make sentences from the following substitution table.

If Masum | becomes a nurse he will be a leader in the field

If Catherine| deserves any merit of education.

If Nirmal _ | has opportunities she will serve her community.

If Najmun CeCe cree Sine FREES she could save her mother’s life.

Sultana came to Nirmal’s class a few days ago he will be a farmer’s friend.
they could learn more.

F Work in pairs and make sentences reflecting your own life using if
clauses as in the table above.

G Write a composition about some event in your life that has inspired
you to have adream. Then briefly describe the dream. Make
predictions and possibilities.

Lesson 3: They had dreams 1

A Shanta was chatting with one of her foreign friends Jenny. Read

the dialogue and tell what the subject of their conversation is.

Jenny : Shanta, what’s your dream for the future?

Shanta : Tobe a good human being first and then work for my country-no

matter whether I become a social worker, an artist, or a professional.

Jenny :Wow!I really appreciate your thought! By the way, Shanta, does

anyone inspire you in your dreams?

Shanta : Certainly. I'm always influenced by the great personalities in our coun-

try and abroad. Whenever I read the biography of great people, I try to
29 understand how their dreams could help them to be what they have
& been.

134 English For Today
Jenny : Would you please tell me about some of your favourite dreamers?
Shanta : Sure! Read the following texts to know about some dreamers
in my country. They are my icons as well.
B Read the text.
Pritilata Waddedar was bom in Chittagong on 5 May 1911. She was a
meritorious student at Dr Khastagir Government Girls’ School in Chittagong and
Eden College, Dhaka, She graduated in philosophy with distinction from
Bethune College in Kolkata. In her college days, Pritilata was an activist in the
anti-British movement. All through her life, she dreamt of two things: a society
without gender discrimmation, and her motherland free from British colonial
rule.
So she decided to fight agamst the British rule.
Soon after, Pritilata became the head teacher of
Nandankanon Aparna Charan School in Chittagong.
Gradually she involved herself in Surja Sen's armed
resistance movement. Surja Sen waa a famous
" ¥ activist in Chittagong area at that time. In 1932,
hae Surja Sen planned an attack on the Pahartali Euro-
‘3 / DS) pean Chub, The club was well-known for its notori-
“a IAM xn sign st its cotrunce: Doge and Indiana not
Jt J #8) allowed. Sutja Sen assigned Pritilata to lead a team
SEED of 10-12 men to attack the Club, The raid was
successful but Pritilata, dressed as a man, failed
to get out of the Club. She committed suicide =
by taking potassium cyanide to avoid arrest. |,» Pn
also proved that women too needed to be [dee ~ es
prepared to sacrifice their lives for freedom cart dup a
from the British colonial rule. Her dream final- Se
ly came true. The British rule came to an end in Fauirtannrépea cues
1947 though she couldn't see it during her
lifetime.
=
R

English For Today 135
C_ Read the words in Column A and match them with the meanings in Column B.
graduated a member of a certain social or political group
activist fight
movement took a university degree
gender discrimination _| rule by a powerful country over a weaker county
colonial rule battle
combat inequality between male and female
gradually slowly
resistance give responsibilities
notorious activities
assign dishonourable
D Now answer the questions.
1 Where did Pritilata fight?
2 When did she fight?
3 Why did she fight?
4 What was Pritilata’s profession?
5 What do you learn from Pritilata’s life?
E Now make questions from the substitution table and match the answers.
One is done for you.
When she graduate in? On 5 May 1911.
Where Pritilata born? In Chittagong.
What | was | assigned Pritilata to attack Philosophy.
Why | did | the Club? To fight against the British rule.
What Pritilata die? For its notorious sign—Dogs and
Who the Pahartali European Club | Indians not allowed.
How famous for? Surja Sen.
she born? She committed suicide by taking
S potassium cyanide.

136 English For Today

Lesson 4: They had dreams 2

A Look at the picture. He is a great son of our country. Who is he?
What do you know about him?

B Read the text,

Zahir Raihan was one of the most talented film

makers in Bangladesh. He was born on 19 August

1935 in the village Majupur in Feni district. He was

an active worker of the Language Movement. He was

one of the ten students to go out in a procession on 21

February 1952 despite a ban on such activities imposed

by the authorities. Ag a result, he and many others * Wh oe

were atrested and taken to prison, Raihan was also |(\&seu re

present at the historical meeting of Amtala on 21 Februmry | =

1952. He also took part in the mass movement in

1969, In 1971, he jomed the Liberation War.

All through his life, Zahir Raihan dreamt of a democratic society, a society that

would ensure freedom of speech. He had many dreams about our film industry

too. He made a legendary film Jibon Theke Neya based on the Language

Movement of 1952. It was a protest against the autocratic government then

ruling our country. The family portrayed in that film symbolically represented

East Pakistan. The family was ruled by an autocrat who had to go to prison for

her conspiracy. During the Liberation War in 1971, this film was shown outside

Bangladesh. Celebrated film makers like Satyajit Ray, Mrinal Sen, and Ritwik

Ghatak appreciated the film. Raihan gave all the money the film made to the

Freedom Fighters' trust. Besides, his great documentary on Pakistani atrocities,

Stop Genocide, helped create world sentiment in favour of our liberation war.

On 30 December 1971, someone informed Raihan about an address somewhere

at Mirpur where he might find his brother, the famous writer Shahidullah Kaiser,

who had gone missing from 14 December 1971. Kaiser was captured and killed

by the Pakistani army and the local collaborators during the last days of the war.

Accordingly, Raihan left home to get his brother back but he never returned.

Zahir Raihan’s dream was fulfilled. He could see the emergence of an

independent Bangladesh though he did not get back his brother. And it's a pity =

that this dreamer could not live to see his dream come true. 8

English For Today 137
C Use appropriate information from the text above to complete the grid.
document | on language | since
ary movement
D Read the following sentences and complete them.
1 Zahir Raihan is famous as ................0.cseeeeeee eee
2 Raihan was imprisoned because ............cccscecseeseeeneneusaes
3 He participated in oo... cece cece eeteeeeeeeeeeeees ANG coceceeeeeeee eee
4 Jibon Theke Neya symbolizes............cscecscscecsceeeeeensneneneneae +
5 He donated ....... cece ee ec cere eee eeeeeeeeneneneeeeeeseeenseneneneeee «
6 He worked to organize 5.5.0 0 0 ween DY
his great documentary Stop Genocide.
7 His disappearance is a great............. ee eeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeenee
E Work in pairs. Discuss.
1 Why is Zahir Raihan considered a freedom fighter though he was a film
maker?
2 How does the title of the lesson fit the story of Zahir Raihan?
F Project. Work in groups. Meet a freedom fighter in your locality.
Interview him/her. Then write a paragraph on him/her.
Format 18, English For Today-9-10

English For Today
Unit Eleven
Renewable energy
i ad ai . ee =~"
beret eee Te =a €3 n
4— ef
Learning outcomes
After we have studied this unit, we will be able to
e describe familiar objects
© participate in conversation, discussion
e read intensively and extensively
¢ write formal letters.
3
&

English For Today 139
Lesson 1: Renewable energy sources -1
A __ Look at the pictures. Discuss with your partner what these pictures
show and when and where people use them. Then write the name of
each item under the picture.
© [S]
3 ‘| =,
: Py na
. nae ml
head light, gas light, hurricane lamp, electric bulb, tubs light, stage light, candle
x | light, table lamp, charger light, search light, energy saver bulb, oil lamp
g

140 English For Today
B Read the text and answer the following questions.
Sohan lives in a village in the south-west part of Bangladesh. Last night he could
not sleep. His sister had her SSC exam next morning. She could not read either.
There was load-shedding. The summer night being muggy and hot, life became
hell without electricity. Most of their area remained dark for hours due to power
shortage
In May-June, temperature shoots up to 40 degree Celsius. With almost 90
percent of humidity in the atmosphere, it becomes all wet, damp and sticky.
When you are busy fanning yourself all the time, how can you concentrate on
studies? In the night it is impossible to sit down to study with a candle light or
table lamp or hurricane lamp or a rural kerosene lamp. People simply come out
of houses almost bare-bodied and sit in the open places. Some splash cold water
on their faces. Fans remain unmoving, electric bulbs are off and it is dark
everywhere. It is simply unbearable.
What is the reason of frequent load-shedding? Press reports say there is a
shortage in electricity production. According to the Power development
authorities, the demand for electricity a few years ago was more than 6,000
MW* a day while the supply remained around 4,200 MW. In the rural areas, the
Rural Electrification Board (REB) could supply barely half of the total demand
which was around 2,400 MW per day. In the capital city, the demand stood at
around 1,400 MW while the supply amounted to 650 MW. As a result,
load-shedding is unavoidable for the time being. But situation is improving very
fast.
*MW is Megawatt which is a unit of power used to measure the output of a power station.
Questions

1 What happened to Sohan last night?

2 How was the summer night?

3 How is a summer day?

4 What happens during load-shedding in Sohan’s area?

5 What do people use at night during load-shedding? 0

S
N

English For Today 141
Cc Complete columns B and C in the following table with the
information from the above text in section B. Then calculate the
shortage of electricity supply and write the results in column D.
A B C D
Electrici Demand Suppl Deficit
a
fete
D Complete the dialogue. Base the dialogue on the nationwide demand,
supply and deficit of electricity shown in the table in section C.
X: What’s the nationwide demand of electricity?
Y: It’s .................... Megawatt per day.
X : How much can the Power Authority supply?
Y : They can supply only ......................... Megawatt per day.
X: What’s the deficit/How much is the deficit?
Y: Well, it’s ......................... Megawatt per day.
Now complete the following dialogues using the other information in
the table.
I. X: What’s the rural area’s demand of electricity?
X : How much can the REB ............ccecceeeeeeee?
Yor They oo. cciccececnceeeeeneneneeeeneneeeneenen eases
Yo Well, ....ccccccccccccc ese ceeseseeseeseeeseeneeeneeees
% Il X: What’s the capital city’s 2.00... cece cence ee?
S
N

142 English For Today
Yt TRY epecevereecacaresencmenenenemeumemmmmemememennr re
Y Welly ses oc rereroreesersoraeerereeeeeeeeeee
E_ Do you think load-shedding causes the same kind of problems to people
both in and outside the city? Discuss with your partner and make two
different lists of problems caused by the long-time load-shedding, one in
the city, and the other outside the city.
List of problems caused by load-shedding
F Write a letter to an editor of a national daily about the sufferings
of the people caused by load-shedding in your locality.
Lesson 2: Renewable energy sources -2
A Pairwork. Read the words in the box. Which of the words are related
to energy?

1. fuel 2. desert 3. fossil 4. sun
ot ie ind
ee
st saat sa
Now underline the odd word in each column that doesn't belong to the
group. Then compare with your partner. Check the meanings of the new
words in a dictionary. x

N

English For Today 143
B Read the text and answer the following questions.
In a speech at the 90° Science
Congress, internationally = papper
acknowledged scientist and fm 4
former Indian president Mr APJ SZ g de
Abdul Kalam mentioned a very xy =
future energy crisia. He pointed Ss
out that the era of wood and bio- 4 1
The age of oil and natural gas % pe aie.
would soon be over within the next few decades. Massive burning of world's
coal reserves may lead to a worldwide ecological disaster because coal buming
eaits the higheat amount of carbon in the atmosphere. Ukraine's (former Soviet
Union) Chemobyl disaster in 1986 has exposed that nuclear energy can be
potentially dangerous too. So according to Kalam, the only solution that
mankind can look to is the massive use of solar energy in future because it has
some advantages over other fonms of renewable energies.
Now, why has Kalam put so much importance to the issue of energy? The energy
sources have abways been a major factor of change throughout history. The
world’s petroleum consumption hag increased from 3 billion barrels annually in
1936 to 50 billion barrels annually today. In the next quarter century, the world's
population is expected to be about 8 billion which is 30 percent higher than
today. Developing countries will grow their economies about two times faster
than industrialised countries. Global economic growth is expected to continue at
3 percent per year, Consequently, the global demand for energy will grow at
about 1.7 percent per year on an average. It indicates a 50-percent rise of energy
consumption by 2030. If the world’s daily petroleum consumption is 220 million
barrels now, it will rise to 335 million barrels by that time. The present reserve
of hydro-carbon energy resources is limited and it will not be sufficient to meet
the future energy challenges of the world. And hence, leading industrial
countries have taken initiatives to tap alternative energy sources mainly known
as green or renewable energy sources. The bottom line of Kalam's speech
» indicates the concern of mankind in the 21st century,
[Statistics from: Rex W. Tilerson]

144 English For Today
Questions
1 What is the scientist Kalam concerned about?
2 Why do you think the massive burning of coal may lead to an ecological
disaster?
3 What do you mean by the potential danger of nuclear energy?
4 What according to Mr Kalam is the solution of future energy crisis?
5 Why does Mr Kalam put so much importance on the issue of energy?
6 Why does Mr Kalam put much importance on solar energy?
Cc Make sentences using the substitution table.
Chernoby] disaster the use of renewable energy
h indus taken sources.
The energy industries been the potential danger of nuclear
have ; —
The global petroleum has emphasized ~
consumption increased a major factor for change
exposed throughout history.
Major industrial economies to three billion barrels per year.
initiatives to tap alternative
Scientists energy sources.
D Complete the following passage with words from the box. There are
more words than necessary.
suggested radiates would’ effective conducted either energy
affected crisis tap were
To answer the energy.......... in the world, scientist, professor, and former Indian
president Mr APJ Abdul Kalam has ........... that solar energy can be harnessed
by establishing space stations in outer space in order to.......... solar power round
the clock.
Mr Kalam said that the sun .......... about 10 trillion times the energy which x
humans consume across the world today. &

English For Today 145
If we .......... able to extract even a small portion of this energy from the
sun, it .......... be sufficient to secure the energy demands of our future.
Pointing out that space based solar power plants do not get .......... by
weather, the scientist said that it would thus be far more .......... in
efficiency and power generation than the surface based systems.

Professor Kalam suggested that the energy should be transmitted from space

back to earth .......... through microwave or any other technology like laser.

Careful research of the impact and safety concerns would have to be.......... in

this regard.

E ‘Massive burning of world's coal reserves may lead to a worldwide
ecological disaster ...'-- Do you support this view? Explain why/why
not.

F In Sohan's village, some people headed by Mr Asadul Islam came from
an organisation to hold a meeting at the local Union Parishad (UP)
Office. Their objective was to introduce alternative power supply
systems in rural households. Read the dialogue between the UP
Chairman and Mr Islam.

Chairman : What’s your alternative power supply system?

Mr Islam : Well, it’s solar power and we are going to use solar power units

in rural areas.

Chairman : What is it? Is it something new?

Mr Islam : Not exactly. It’s already familiar in many parts of the world. We’ve
introduced it in our country too. But yes, in this locality it’s
something new.

Chairman : I see. Why do you call it ‘alternative power supply system’?

Mr Islam : Because solar power is a substitute for conventional electricity.
It’s actually a renewable energy source. Our solar units can be
installed on open roof tops or at any open place where sunlight is
available.

Chairman : Sounds good. How much electricity can they give? Can they run
my irrigation pump?

Format 19, English For Today-9-10

146 English For Today

Mr Islam : I’m afraid Mr Chairman, they can’t. Our solar panels are small
and are designed for domestic purposes only. They can produce
enough electricity to run say, two or three tube lights, two fans, a
TV set and the like. But larger units can run...

Chairman : Sorry to interrupt Mr Asad. I’ve to go to the bus stand now to
receive a sick friend. Anyway, several villages in our Union are
still without electricity. I hope people will welcome your ‘alternative
power supply system’.

MrIslam : Thank you, Mr Chairman. Goodbye.

Chairman : Goodbye, Mr Islam. See you again.

G_ True or false? If false, write the correct answer.

1 Alternative power supply system is a completely new system in
our country.

2 Arenewable energy source can be a substitute for conventional
electricity.

3 Solar power units of Mr Islam are for commercial use only.

H_ What questions would you like to ask Mr Islam about solar panel, solar
unit, energy sources, ‘alternative power supply system’, its capacity, its
advantages and disadvantages, etc? Make a list of your probable
questions.

I Role play. Work in pairs. You take the role of the Chairman and

your partner the role of Mr Islam. Rewrite the dialogue and act it out.
20
S

English For Today 147

Lesson 3: Renewable energy sources-3

A Look at the following pictures and discuss with your partner what

you see in them. How are the two pictures related to each other?
a i \ Ja
i idl
i at a ce &
INS » " x
, . = < i.
4 ( } 4
‘i
= —_—

B Read the text and answer the following questions.

Countries of the world rely heavily on petroleum, coal and natural gas for their

energy sources. There are two major types of energy sources: renewable and

non-renewable. Hydro-carbon or fossil fuels are non-renewable sources of

energy. Reliance on them poses real big problems. First, fossil fuels such as oil,

coal, gas etc, are finite energy resources and the world eventually will run out of

them. Secondly, they will become too expensive in the coming decades and too

damaging for the environment. Thirdly, fossil fuels have direct polluting impacts

on earth's environment causing global warming. In contrast, renewable energy

sources such as, wind and solar energy are constantly and naturally replenished

and never run out.

Most renewable energy comes either directly or indirectly from the sun. Sunlight

or solar energy can be used for heating and lighting homes, for generating

electricity and for other commercial and industrial uses.

The sun's heat drives the wind and this wind energy can be captured with wind

turbines to produce electricity. Then the wind and the sun's heat cause water to

evaporate. When the water vapour turns into rain or snow and flows downhill

into rivers or streams, its energy can be captured as hydroelectric energy.

Along with the rain and snow, sunlight causes plants to grow. Plants produce
3 biomass which again can be turned into fuels such as fire wood, alcohol, etc
“ identified as bioenergy.

148 English For Today
Scientists have identified Hydrogen as another form of renewable energy source.
It is the most abundant element in nature. But it does not exist separately as a
gas. It is always combined with other elements, such as with oxygen to make
water. Hydrogen, separated from another element, can be burned as a fuel to
produce electricity.

Our Earth's interior contains molten lava which gives off extreme heat. This heat

inside the Earth produces steam and hot water which can be tapped as

geothermal energy to produce electricity for heating homes, etc.

Ocean energy comes from several sources. Ocean's force of tide and wave can

be used to produce energy. The surface of the ocean gets more heat from the sun

than the ocean depths. This temperature difference can be used as energy source
too. (Source: the Internet)

Questions

1 What do you mean by renewable energy sources?

2 What are the problems with non-renewable energy sources?

3 What are the major differences between renewable and non-renewable
energy sources?

Cc. Which of the renewable energy sources mentioned in the text have you
heard of before? One of those resources is used in the Chittagong Hill
Tracts (CHT) to produce electricity. Can you say what it is? Browse the
net in groups to find out the answers to the following issues and present
them to the class.

1 What is the name of the project?
2 Where in the CHT is the project located?
3 When did it start operation?
4 How much electricity is being produced from here for the national
grid?
5 How many units are working there?
6 What is the positive impact of the project on our national
development? -
Ss
N

English For Today 149

D Read the dialogue between Raju, a student of class ten and his uncle, Mr
Barua who works at Sangu Gas Field and answer the following
questions.

Mr Barua : What are you reading, Raju?

Raju : English, Uncle. A chapter on renewable energy sources.

Mr Barua : Isee. Do you know renewable energy is also called green energy?

Raju : Green energy?... No Uncle, I don’t know. Nothing is there about
green energy in the text either.

Mr Barua : Are you sure? Anyway, renewable energy sources provide us with
energy which doesn’t harm environment during its production or
consumption. Say, solar energy. You see, there’s no burning, no
smoke, no emission of gases. It’s a sort of clean technology and
clean energy source.

Raju : Oh exactly. That’s what our teacher said, I remember.

Mr Barua : On the other hand, burning fossil fuels, say oil or coal, emits
greenhouse gases that harm the environment.

Raju : ©... Isee. Yes, ’ve got the clue, Uncle. Thanks a lot. I now
understand the relation between the two pictures in section A. Green
energy sources make a green globe. Excellent!

Questions

1 Why is renewable energy called green energy?

2 ‘Nothing is there about green energy in the text either’. --- Do you think
this statement of Raju is correct? Explain why yes/no.

3 ‘I now understand the relation between the two pictures in section A’.
What does Raju mean here? What does he really understand? Do you
agree with Raju’s view here? Why?

E Read the dialogue and act it out in pairs.

A : What’s solar energy?
B : It’s one of the renewable energy sources,
A : Why is it called green energy?
B : Well, it’s green energy because it helps us keep the Earth green.
I mean it doesn’t emit any pollutants in the atmosphere when
5 we produce and use it.

150 English For Today
A : I see. Then it must be a clean source of energy.
B : Exactly. And that’s why it’s also called clean energy.
Now complete the following dialogue taking cues from the above model.
A : What’s wind energy?
B 2 It’s one of the 2.0.00... cece eee eee ee eee eeeee
A : Why’s it called 0.0... cece eee eeneeee ee?
B : Well, it’s green energy because ..............cececeeeeeeeeeeee the
Earth green. I mean it doesn’t .............cccecceceeeeeeeeeeeeneese
cneneerecnnanne ce When weproduce
and use it.
A : T see. Then it ............0. cceseeeseeeeeeeeees SOUrCE Of energy.
B : Exactly. And that’s why ......................... clean energy.

F Now write dialogues on hydroelectricity, ocean energy, geothermal

energy, hydrogen energy, using the model in E above.

G___ Both South and North Dhaka City Corporation are installing solar
panels in place of conventional electricity connections to illuminate
roads in many areas. Write a letter to the editor of a daily newspaper
appreciating this initiative and saying why this should be followed by
other city authorities too.

x
8

Unit Twelve
Roots
or, Mae
hat datas
7 fr NxgP3 he Fs neon
Pa win F S45 25
Mm a ee ar "i
Learning ontcomes
After we have studied the unit, we will able to
® participate in conversations and debates
® exchange personal information
® narrate incidents and events in a logical sequence
* present own ideas, give and ask for information
* write letters to newspapers
e lodge complaint
s ® present information in a chart.

152 English For Toxtay
Lesson 1; My roots
A __— Look at the pictures and the caption below. How do you feel looking
at the photo? Why do you think people take such risks to go home
to celebrate Eid?
r a AG
Bn i Ai " aa @
ol V wm if a a wet re
(Grohe Ae PMG
i Ay Hod le As. me , y. an Hibs iy
A \ oe >) ge 4 <e
v/ ate v/ % a aM A fi. me) gcc Maced
; s q ; n j met aire 3 ru : a oie gj” 4
TL TB pik Oe at SD eae
+ Sah My wi - antl pee ie ey rae 4 pede he
EG, SENT Pie ic ead ee
Serefir | STREET Se TT a
B Read the following text.
Eid ia the main religious festival of the Muslims in Bangladesh. Bid means
happiness. Eveyone wants to share this happiness with near and dear ones. So
most of the people, who are living outside their homes for different reasons have
a strong desire to get back home during the Eid vacation. As a result, there is a
toad rush to board buses, trains, or launches for going home. This often causes
transpost accidents that take away many liver, However, these cannot stop
people from going home to meet their family, m-laws, or friends, What makes
people rush for their homes in spite of serious hazards? Thie is nothing but
people’s desire to return to the roota. Do human beings have roots like the trees?
The answer is ‘yes' but unlike the roots of the trees they are invisible, so
they lic in our minds. It’s these roots that make a bond between ua and family &

English For Today 153
members, in-laws, friends, neighbours or even between us and the land where
we were born and grew up. In that sense our families, our land of birth, relatives,
our culture, traditions, or surroundings are our roots. And wherever we stay, we
feel the power of our roots. It's our roots that develop our identity making us
what we are. When we lose that bond, we become rootless. Human beings who
do not have any roots are a non-entity. In other words, they do not have an
identity. They don't know where they are from, and/or where they are heading
to. This often makes them feel empty and lost.
C Read the text in the speech bubbles. Make questions based on the
bubbles and then compare them in pairs.
Eid is the main Eid means
religious festival of happiness.
the Muslims in
Bangladesh.
[> ©
In that sense our families,
our land of birth, relatives, It’s our roots
our culture, traditions, or that develop our
surroundings are our
E identity making us
roots.
what we are.
S- b-
Format 20, English For Today-9-10

154 English For Today
D Fill in the grid with appropriate information from the text above.
The problems of a rootless person
E Work in pairs. Talk about these questions.
1. Do you have any root other than the place where you are living now? If
yes, where is it and who live there? If not, why not?
2. How do you label your roots?
Ihave my roots in
(Ja remote rural village [(_] a village [-_Ja semi-urban area (upazila)
[Ja smalltown [__] a midsize city [_] asuburb [_] acity
3 Do you feel any attraction for your roots? Any pull in your heart?
4 How do you nourish your roots?
5 What, according to you, are the reasons why people become rootless?
F Make a classroom survey and present in a chart the types of roots
your classmates have.
20
S

English For Today 155
Lesson 2: My roots -2
A Read the following remarks and find out who is like you.
I simply just can’t bear the people who don’t have any respect for their roots.
— Haridas Soren
We have a moderately big house in a town but we frequently go to our village
home as well. I always feel so at home when I visit my village and stay with
my near ones.
—Bidisha Yasmin
I live in a small apartment with my mom, dad, and my little sister. Most of my
relatives live in a village. I seldom go over there as I don’t like village life.
— Ifti Mahmud
Some people are so eager to leave their own homes, friends, and everything
behind only to be a part of the city life. They are not for me.
— Antara Gomes
To be frank, I don’t get used to visiting my relatives in the village.
— Jhilik Ahsan
] live in a city but I never forget my parents are from a tiny but beautiful village.
I know I have my roots there and I’m so proud of that.
—Anupom Chakma
I just can’t stand the people who have grown up in the village but forget it once
they are out from there.
— Debashish Biswash
Now make your own statement about your roots.

156 English For Today

B Read the above statements of different people again and make two
lists—one stating what they like and the other stating their dislikes.

Cc Do you agree/disagree with their statements? Write down why.

D Read the following text.

Mainul Islam is a qualified farmer in Naogaon. Mr Islam was very brilliant as a

student. He took his higher education from Bangladesh Agricultural University

in Mymensingh. He then came back home and started advanced farming. He has
two other brothers who are graduates in different disciplines. The specialty of
the Islam family is that they all are living in their village and all are renowned in
their own fields. Mr. Islam’s younger brother, who is a Rajshahi University
graduate, is a science teacher in a local school. His youngest brother is a social
science graduate who likes to start a local NGO to work for this area. When
asked "What makes you decide to stay here in this village?" Mr Islam smiled and
said, "Look, it's true that we could leave this village for city life. I could be
banker or my brothers could be bureaucrats. But it didn't attract us. We are sons
of this soil. Yes, we have education but does education prepare a person only to
be an officer? Don't we have any obligation to the soil that has made us what we
are?" He also added that not every educated individual should be a job seeker.

He added that since his discipline was agriculture, after his education he took the

occupation of a farmer. In response to a question whether they had any

frustration living in a village, he confirmed that they were indeed very pleased
with their life. He said, "I work in my own farm, stay with my family members,
pass time with my old friends, and sleep at my own home. All these count a lot."

Mr Islam is right. Many people go to cities and forget or loosen their roots

knowingly or unknowingly. Mr Islam and his brothers are great—they haven’t

forgotten their roots. They not only stuck to their own roots, they have been
torch bearers for others to be respectful of their roots.

E Work in pairs. If you are given a chance to meet Mr Islam, what
questions would you ask him? Make both wh-questions and yes/no
questions. 80

ES

English For Today is?
F Read the statements in columns A and B. Then match them to
make complete sentences.
1. MrIslam a. if anyone has education she/he
2. The specialty of Islam's brothers is HSE have a Job. .
4, Mellen believes dat b. has multi- faceted opportunities.
, eae wee tee c. graduated from Bangladesh
4. Mr Islam also believes Agricultural University.
5. Staying with the roots d. in the duty toward roots.
e. that city life couldn’t attract them.
G Do you like Mr Islam? Why/ Why not? Write down some reasons in
favour of your opinion and share with your partner.
Lesson 3: The return of the native
A Read the following text.
Michael Madhusudan Dutt, popularly known as Madhusudan, was a celebrated
19" century Bengali poet and dramatist. He was born in Sagordari on the bank
of the Kopotaksho River, a village in Keshabpur Upazila under Jessore district.
From an early age, Dutt aspired to be an Englishman in form and manner.
Though he was born in a sophisticated Hindu family, he converted to
Christianity as a young man, much to the ire of his family, and adopted the
first name Michael. In his childhood, he was
recognised by his teachers as a precious child with a
gift of literary talent. His early exposure to English
education and European literature at home and his
college inspired him to imitate the English in taste,
manners and intellect. \
Since his adolescence he started believing that he was ' :
born on the wrong side of the planet, and that his
society was unable to appreciate his talent. He also
believed that the West would be more receptive to his
% creative genius.
S
a

158 English For Today
Madhusudan was an ardent follower of the famous English poet Lord Byron. So
after adopting Christianity, he went to Europe and started composing poems and
plays in English. They showed his higher level of intellectual ability. However,
he failed to gain the right appreciation. To his utter frustration he found that he
was not esteemed as a native writer of English literature. Out of his frustration,
he composed a sonnet in Bangla "Kopotaksha Nad" which earned him huge
reputation in Bangla. Gradually he could realise that his true identity lay in
Bengal and he was a sojourner in Europe. Afterwards he regretted his fascination
for England and the West. He came back to Bengal and devoted himself to
Bangla literature from this period. He has written the first Bangla epic Meghnad
Badh Kabya.
(Source: Wikipedia)
B Work in pairs and decide how the story of Madhusudan is related
to the unit theme Roots.
Cc Read some more information on Madhusudan. Make questions
for those statements.
ee ee
He introduced amitrakshar chhanda (blank verse) in Bangla literature.
Madhusudan passed most of his European days in Versailles, France.
His days in Europe were full of hardship.
It was unbearable to him as he had to suffer extreme poverty.
Co eeeeecneceeeeececeeeeeeeseeeeeeeceeceeceeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeaeeeeeeeeeenes
It was Iswar Chandra Vidyasagar who helped him to pay off his debts
and return to India.
Madhusudan married twice. While living in Madras, he married Rebecca
Mactavys of English descent. 5

English For Today 159
Later he married Henrietta Sophia White, who was also ethnic English.
His second marriage lasted until the end of his life.
Madhusudan and Sophia had a son Napoleon and daughter Sharmistha.
Madhusudan died in Calcutta General Hospital on 27 June 1873, three
days after the death of Henrietta.
D Write notes about Madhusudan under the following headings. One is
done for you.
—
e celebrated 19"
century Bengali
poet and
dramatist
Lesson 4: In search of identity
A Do you ever read the Problem Page in magazines or newspapers?
What kinds of problems do people often write about?
B Here are two letters from the problem page in the Daily Bangladesh.
Read them and discuss with a partner what you think the content of
20
S the letters is. Use a dictionary to check any new words.

160 English For Today
Avajon’s Problem page | ™
5) }
Yowarevt alone... |. is
Dear Avajon
Often I'm so sorry to see the city’s footpaths occupied by floating people.
They are living in some makeshift shacks. I simply cannot think how father,
mother grandfather, grandmother and kids—all live in such a tiny place. Within
the few square yards in their possession they sleep , socialise , cook and even
beautify themselves. These people are living in such an inhuman condition!
This cannot be the picture of life in a civilized society. Also they are polluting
the area. They are least bothered about their health and hygiene. Out of curiosity,
I talked to some of these people. They have their own homes and identity in
their own village. They are here thinking that life in the city will be better.
What an irony! Can't the society or the state do anything for these people?
However, I must admit that I'm amazed to see how they sometimes tidy up
their places especially in the evening! Home, sweet home after all ! Mithun
Dear Mithun
T understand your concern. Human flow from the rural areas to the urban areas
is a big social problem in many countries like ours. These floating people are
definitely a burden to the cities where they migrate. When the number is huge,
it is difficult for any state to rehabilitate them quickly. See from the other side.
The people you have referred to have lost their roots and they are unable to
assimilate in the new culture. Maybe many of them are attracted by the charm
of the cities, but I'm sure it was a need to many others. People become rootless
sometimes due to climate change, river erosion, social discrepancies, or
poverty. However, you cannot solve this problem overnight. But you can
cartainly take steps to improve their lifestyle. Why don't you form a committee
with other young people in your locality that will teach them basic health and
hygiene? It may better their life as well as help you minimize pollution. Give
it a try.
Yours 20
Avajon S

English For Today 161

Cc Look at the texts. Say who/what they, their, this, that, it refer to
in the following sentences.

a __ They are living in some makeshift shacks.

b Within few square yards in their possession they sleep,
socialise, cook and even beautify themselves.

c This cannot be the picture of life in a civilized society.

d Why don’t you form a committee with other young people in your
locality that will teach them basic health and hygiene?

e Give ita try.

D Work in pairs. First write two problem letters. The problems can be
personal or of your locality as in B. Read your partner’s problem
and give suggestions.

E Work in groups. Take roles as a TV Anchor, Mojnu Mia, Fazlur
Rahman, and Nilima Chowdhury as given in the following text. Put
suitable verb form into each gap of the text related to your role.
Then act out the talk show.

TV Anchor : Viewers, ................... to our program ‘Looking back to roots’.
Today we................... three guests with us-Mr Mojnu Mia, a
slum dweller, Mr Fazlur Rahman, an immigrant to UK, anda
social scientist Nilima Chowdhury. Today we .................5
to see how people ................... When they are detached
from their roots, what might................... some consequences,
and how a social scientist ................... them. Let me
seveeeeeeeeeeeesees tO Mr, Mojnu Mia. Mojnu Mia, where ............
you from and why and how have you................... to this
city?

Format 21, English For Today-9-10

162 English For Today

Mojnu Mia : I’m from Sherpur. You .................. it?s a river erosion-prone
area. The river has washed away most of my agricultural
land. It has................... my home as well. Now you can
Lissseesseeseeeeee that ’m a refugee. I and my family members.
seseeeeseseeeeeees tO this city with our last savings. But I’m
fed up with the life here. I ................... vegetables as
a hawker. I .................-very hard. I Cam’t .cceccceeeee
any time to my wife or kids. I................. ina slum. It’s very
dirty. People are sometimes involved in different sorts of crime.
My kids don’t ................... it. Neither my wife nor me. In the
village, everybody used to ................... us but here no one
knows me. I have nowhere to ..............., MONE tO ............065
beside me. Nobody ...................me.I................... the city
will give me a moderate life. But I’m mistaken.

TV anchor : Right. We are really sorry to ...................about your situation.
Now let us ................... to Mr Fazlur Rahman. Mr. Rahman,
why did you ................... your country and how are you
feeling in the UK?

Fazlur Rahman: Well I was young when I went to UK. My first few years
were terrible. I ................... all kinds of odd jobs.
Gradually I... «experience. Tee
different professional training courses. And over the period
my language ................... Now I’m a citizen there. I
secessseeesessseeee MY OWn detached home, personal car, and
business. When I .................... there I was a poor man but
now I’m a rich man. I .................... a good amount of
income tax but to be honest, when1.................... to my own
country, I wish I should not ................... to UK. It’s my
own country. I .................. my friends and family members S

English For Today 163
here. I miss my culture, tradition, food, and what not? I
sesssseseceseeeees, there for more than 15 years but still there is
a distinction between the native people and expatriates like
me. Perhaps we will never shake off our identity as foreigners.

TV Anchor : Ok, let us ................... the explanation of these problems
from a social scientist, Nilima Chowdhury. Ms Chowdhury,
what are your interpretations of these problems?

Nilima Chowdhury: You see, this problem is often ................... diaspora.
A diaspora is created through migration, or scattering of people
away from an established or ancestral homeland. There might be
different reasons for that. It may be due to government action,
political decisions or for avoiding conflict and war. Diaspora has
some common consequences. Once people are away from their
roots, they have a kind of culture shock. They take time to
vccecucercessesesee., to the new culture. Sometimes they never integrate.
This ............. them a feeling of home sickness. In spite of
their strong fascination for homeland or hometown diaspora
people ....................to0 get back to their roots because of
ecomomic and social realities. As a result, they have a kind of
mental conflict and identity crisis which make their life restless.
Sometimes a lack of social acceptance coupled with economic
hardship, inadequate education, and loose family ties people
veseeseseesee++- IVolved in crimes. You may ask, “Does it...........
that people won’t ...................to other cities /countries?”.
People will, as itis 21%' century when the world is a big global
village. But we .................. to be aware of the problems
created by migration. It’s a reality that people with better ties
with their roots suffer less from this problem. So instead of being
allured by the ‘better life’ we can .................. to be happy

26 with what we have and gradually try to develop our condition
= without forgetting our roots.

Unit Thirteen
Media and modes of e-communication
oc
2% 2GAo
¥ 7
Learning outcomes
After we have studied this unit, we will be able to
surf the Internet
* read and write emails
® narrate incidents in a logical sequence
* understand texts
* read intensively and extensively
® participate in debates.

English For Today 165
Lesson1: Media and modes of e-communication
A Look at the pictures and say what you see in them.
aL —-
LAG t =
3) a
B Work in pairs. Discuss which of the following words you are familiar
with. How are they related to e-communication?
facebook, e-mail, web site, blog, e-commerce, twitter, e-learning, iPod,
tablet pc, information super high way, social network, smart phone
C Read the text and answer the questions that follow.
Let’s imagine a citizen’s
ordinary day at work. The |¥s#00l o
morning probably starts with a | tli "Doni 620022915010
cup of coffee/tea, followed by | | mequiey)
greeting the colleagues. Then |aiiu Ng ‘eee
comes the inevitable, which is | "| ser
logging in the computer. For | sis: | ie ssn senso sravony mane
many of us the third step has | sist iiwastae a
become an automatic behavior |_—— SEE een ante ea
and it dominates the rest of eee Se
our work day, receiving and realy
sending dozens of emails.
An e-mail is an electronic ; ; —
mail. It is a computer-aided ——————
so way of exchanging digital text
>
N

166 English For Today
messages from a sender to one or multiple recipient/s. E-mails operate through
a network of computers linked by the Internet. There are commercial server
agencies such as Yahoo, Gmail, Ymail, Hotmail, etc. that accept the text
message from the sender, forward it and deliver instantly to the digital mailbox
of the recipient. If the recipient is not online, the message is stored and delivered
later when the recipient is online. It works instantly just with the click of your
mouse. It has been a powerful communication tool in modern life.
Questions
1 What is an e-mail?
2 How do e-mails operate?
3 How do the commercial servers serve in the process of an e-mail?
4 ‘It has been a powerful communication tool in modern life.’ Explain the
statement.
5 How do e-mails affect our daily work schedule?
D_ Work in pairs and discuss the steps of your normal days, weekends, etc.
E_ Pairwork. Read the following e-mail exchanged between two friends.
Like an informal letter, an e-mail to a close one is casually written.
Identify the mistakes in the main body of the message, discuss with your
partner, and correct them.
Subject: Details of Dhaka Tour
FROM: Alexa Dowson<alexa.dowson@yahoo.com>
TO: Moutushi Laboni<moutushil997@ymail.com>
Monday, 21 May 2012 6:20 AM
Hi Moutushi!
Thanks for your mail. I'll fly from Ottawa on 7:36 hours local time on 13 July
with Qatar Airlines via London-Doha and land Dhaka on 15 July around 13:41
hours local time. Wish to stay 2 days in the Cox's Bazar and 1 day in Khulna.
Return flight on 21 July at 3:04 hours local time.
Keep fine and in touch. Hope to see you soon!
sy
Alexa 8

English For Today 167

F Pairwork. The e-mail in section E is a reply by Alexa to Moutushi’s
previous e-mail. Imagine what Moutushi might have written to Alexa.
Write that e-mail.

G Read the following text. It gives the information about the origin of
the e-mail. Choose the appropriate forms of the verbs from the box
to complete the sentences. You can use a verb more than once.

send say use remain call expand allow develop spread

Sending text messages electronically could be ................ to date back to the

Morse code telegraph of the mid 1800s and the 1939 New York World’s Fair. In

the fair, IBM ................ a letter of congratulations from San Francisco to

New York on an IBM radio-type, ................. it a high-speed substitute for

mail service in the world of tomorrow. Teleprinters were ................1n

Germany during World War II. The use ................. until the late 1960s

when there was a worldwide Telex network. Additionally, there was the

similar American system ................ TWX which ................ important
until the late 1980s.

With the introduction of MIT’s Compatible Time-Sharing System (CTSS) in

1961, for the first time multiple users were ................ to log into a

central system from remote dial-up terminals. They were also able to store

and share files on the central disk. Informal methods of using this to pass
messages ................ and were ................ to create the first true e-mail
system.

H Read the following grid first. Then listen to the Audio and tick
the right box in the following grid.

Listening text 10
cs Comparison among e-mails, phone conversations and face to face meetings
S
Ss

168 English For Today
se [| ae [ome | om |e
Phone
conversations

ee
I Group work. Arrange a debate in the class on the advantages
and the disadvantages of the e-mail.
Lesson 2: Social network services
A Look at the following logos. Are you familiar with them? Discuss

with your partner what they are and how they are related to the

field of e- communication.

facebook

B Read the text and answer the following questions.
The Internet technology has helped desgin a large number of web sites to
facilitate social relations among people around the world. These are known as
social networking services or social networks or social media. At present, Face-
book is the most popular social media site. Google+, Twitter, LinkedIn, etc. are
other frequently used social services. Social network services are web-based
and hence, provide ways for the users to interact through the Internet. These
services make it possible to connect people sharing interests and activities
across the borders and thus have made the users feel that they really liveina .,
global village. s

English For Today 169
Why are social networks expanding so fast? The answer is simple. Most of the
social services are cost-free. You can make use of them free, paying a very little
to your Internet service provider. Secondly, you can make your personal profile
public before the entire online community. It is like presenting yourself before
the entire world. You can also look into other people's profile if you are
interested. It is simple and easy. Thirdly, social networks allow users to upload
pictures, multimedia contents and modify the profile. Some services like
Facebook allow users to update their profiles. Fourthly, networks allow users to
post blog entries. User profiles have a section dedicated to comments from
friends and other users. Finally, there are privacy protection measures too. A user
himself or herself decides over the number of visitors/viewers, and what
information should be shared with others.

Questions

1 What do you understand by social networks?

2 What are some uses of social networks?

3 ‘These services ...have made the users feel that they really live in a global
village’. Do you agree with this view? Why/ Why not?

4 Make a list of the arguments as to why social networks are expanding so
fast. Why do you think this is happning?

Cc Read the second paragraph of the text in section B again. Notice the
words in italics and write how they work in maintaining logical
sequence in the paragraph.

D Choose the best answers.

1 The technology has helped social networking sites to emerge.
a LinkedIn b Googlet+
c Internet d Twitter
2 Users have to pay for
a social networks. b their online connections.
c multimedia contents. d uploading pictures.
3. User accounts have ----------- protection measures.
a virus b_ identity
c personal secrecy d network
4 User profiles have a section for
a others’ remarks. b__ outsiders’ editing.
c outsiders’ moderation. d__ outsiders’ uploading.
Format 22, English For Today-9-10

170 English For Today
E Fill in the following dialogue box to open a Facebook account.
G re foes cer yy ecm ton a BC) ID sgn Up tor Facets Faces® | a
SO ef amon = Bg) IRIE) sczoronoio = mi rostucr = tate ~ BG voresea n> Lag > rans
fenovo Dt oF ong) a) Gh we
facebook ae es
ry Sign Up for Facebook
ram: Select Sex [=]
slthday: Month:[=] Oey:[=]Year:(=)
F Look at the following table adapted from Wikipedia. It shows some
data on worldwide use of social networks.
° 7
Social Networks Individual users Percentage i a) of Regions covered
populari
MySpace 61,037,000 49, USeennel anata
oS
=~
&

English For Today 171
Now complete the following dialogues about Facebook and MySpace,
and provide your own questions and answers on the rest of the social
networks in the table. Act them out in pairs.

12: social network is the most popular ?
A: Facebook is ‘
Q: individual users use Facebook?
A: About 793 million.
Q: part of the world is Facebook mostly used in?
A: Worldwide. It’s popular worldwide among individual users.
2Q: the least popular ?
A: MySpace is .
Q: individual users use MySpace?
A: .
Q: mostly used?
A: among individual users.
(Continue)
Lesson 3: E-learning
A Look at the following picture. What objects do you see in the picture?
How are they related? Discuss with your partner and say what these
are.
g

172 English For Today
B Work in pairs. Discuss the following questions.

e Have you ever experienced any digital education programmes in

multimedia or CD/DVD?
e Have you ever used any digitized educational resources such as Oxford
Dictionary, Banglapedia or Wikipedia?

e Have you ever heard of any online education course?

e Have you ever seen a classroom teaching programme on TV?
Cc Read the text and answer the following questions.
Can you think of a classroom where there is no blackboard or desks? Do you
believe that you can be a student without a printed book or a writing pad or even
pen/pencil? Are you not thrilled to imagine that you have asked a question and
your tutor is answering it while flying in a Boeing from Dubai to Dhaka? These
are all possible in a ‘virtual campus' in the system of e-learning. No kidding! For
quite a long time, educationists have been utilizing the advantages of computer
technology. The social networking services have a huge potential to help
educationists in this sector. They have access to millions of people worldwide.
Educationists have noticed that a large number of social network users come
from young generation who especially belong to student community. So side by
side with computer assisted teaching-learning software, online education
programmes are evolving fairly rapidly to assist conventional education system.
Is that e-learning?
We may confuse distant education or computer-based learning or computer-
assisted training or even online education programmes with e-learning. But
we should be cautious about the mix-up. What happens in an online education
programme? Maybe you get some materials online from your tutor. Maybe you
submit your assignment through email. Or even you may take your test online.
But there must be some conventional campus, a department/institute from where
your certificate will come. But in e-learning, as said by global e-learning guru Dr
Badrul H Khan*, every step, such as registration, admission, classroom entry
and exit, class work, attendance, discussion with course mates, feedback, exams
and finally certification must take place electronically through computer and
the Internet technology in a virtual campus.

8

English For Today 173
Everything is digitized and conducted by a system called Leaming Management
System (LMS). So online education programmes blend various components of
e-learning.

The revolutionary concept of e-leaming is already in its practice phase in many

parts of the world. Professor Khan has developed a framework and important

literatures on e-learning which have been praised by pundits worldwide
including from Bangladesh. Professor Khan is especially enthusiastic about the
prospect of e-learning in Bangladesh.

How would you feel if Bangladesh contemplates establishing South Asia's first

virtual university? Won't it be a pioneering step for us in the world of e-learning?

Let's keep our fingers crossed.

*Born and graduated in Bangladesh, Dr Badrul H Khan was a Professor at

George Washington University and the University of Texas, USA. He is one of

the celebrated theorists in the field of e-learning.

D Write an e-mail to your teacher expressing your feelings and opinion
regarding the next mode of education— e-learning. Also ask your
teacher to clarify if anything in the text is unclear to you.

E Suppose Dr. Badrul Huda Khan has come to visit your school and
intends to meet students for a presentation on e-learning. Write a text
message to invite your friend to attend the presentation.

F Complete the following sentences with suitable words.

1 Education experts .......................-. utilizing the advantages of
computer technology ............. a long time.

2 Ine-learning, everything from admission to certification must ..............
se seeseseteeeeeeees Clectronically through computer and the Internet technology
in a virtual campus.

3 Insome online courses, you ............. ......s...-.. your test online.

4 Incase of online programmes, there ............useccee ceceetertseen seen ene
some conventional campus from where

x 5 Ine-learning, all activities .........0 ee by a system
& called Learning Management System (LMS).

Unit Fourteen
Pleasure and purpose
( = RY %. cng
fin / > See =|
<2 xf 40
kK , a7 ih A of
Learning outcomes
After we have studied the unit, we will be able to
® recognize and use English sounds, stress, and intonation
® understand and enjoy stories and other texts
* interpret, evaluate, and summarise literary texts.
=o
&

English For Today 175
Lesson 1: Books
A Ask and answer these questions in pairs.
1 Do you read any books other than your school textbooks?
2 Ifyes, what kinds of books do you read? (stories, poems, etc)
3 Now write one or two reasons why you read those books and
share with your partner.
B Read the poem.
Books
What worlds of wonder are our books!
As one opens them and looks,
New ideas and people rise
In our fancies and our eyes.
The room we sit in melts away,
And we find ourselves at play
With some one who, before the end,
May become our chosen friend.
Or we sail along the page z ag
To some other land or age. Ne
Here’s our body in the chair, N =
But our mind is over there. ne *
-
Each book is a magic box, (a B
Which with a touch a child unlocks. ge
In between their outside covers Nea
Books hold all things for their lovers. v4
- Eleanor Farjeon
3
N

176 English For Today
Cc What does the poet say about the good things that reading a book
can do to you?
What other benefits do you think reading books can give you?
Lesson 2: Two Mothers Remembered
A Read the poem and answer the following questions
Two Mothers Remembered
I had two Mothers — two Mothers I claim
Two different people, yet with the same name.
Two separate women, diverse by design, Fags il
But I loved them both because they were mine. ae
The first was the Mother who carried me here, o
Gave birth and nurtured and launched my career. .
She was the one whose features I bear, | : :
Complete with the facial expressions I wear. 4,
She gave me her love, which follows me yet, : ;
Along with the examples in life she set. ae
As I got older, she somehow younger grew, : =|
And we'd laugh as just Mothers and daughters do.
But then came the time that her mind clouded so,
And I sensed that the Mother I knew would soon go.
So quickly she changed and turned into the other,
A stranger who dressed in the clothes of my Mother.
Oh, she looked the same, at least at arm’s length,
But now she was the child and I was her strength.
We’d come full circle, we women three,
co
S

English For Today 177
My mother the first, the second and me.
And if my own children should come to a day,
When a new Mother comes and the old goes away,
I’d ask of them nothing that I didn’t do.
Love both of your Mothers as both have loved you.
Joann Snow Duncanson
Questions
Ask and answer the questions in pairs.
1 How are the two mothers different from each other?
2 How are they the same?
3 What did the first mother do to the speaker?
4 Who was the speaker’s second mother? Describe her briefly.
5 What would be the speaker’s advice to her own children?
6 Who are the three women referred to in the poem? Briefly describe
them.
7 What should children do to their mother and why?
8 Do you like this poem? Why?
Lesson 3: The Sands of Dee
A Listen to the poem. Read it aloud in groups.
The Sands of Dee
i £ —— ai’ ee: — “=z t, ae a eS
Format 23, English For Today-9-10

178 English For Today
“O Mary, go and call the cattle home,
And call the cattle home,
And call the cattle home
Across the sands of Dee!”
The western wind was wild and dank with foam,
And all alone went she.
The western tide crept up along the sand,
And o’er and o’er the sand,
And round and round the sand,
As far as eye could see.
The rolling mist came down and hid the land
And never home came she.
“Oh! Is it weed, or fish, or floating hair,
A tress of golden hair,
A drowned maiden’s hair
Above the nets at sea?
Was never salmon yet that shone so fair
Among the stakes of Dee”
They rowed her in across the rolling foam,
The cruel crawling foam,
The cruel hungry foam,
To her grave beside the sea:
But still the boatman hear her call the cattle home
Across the sands of Dee.
Charles Kingsley
=
g

English For Today 179
B Answer these questions.

1 What was the weather like when Mary went to bring the cattle home?

2 Look at some words, phrases and sentences that have been repeated
several times. Explain why the poet has done that.

3 How has the poet described the sea?

4 Narrate the story of Mary in your own words.

5 Suppose you were walking on the shore with a couple of your
friends while Mary was drowning. Describe what you would have
done.

Lesson 4: Time, You Old Gipsy Man
A Read and answer the following questions.

1 Have you ever seen a gipsy? If yes, where?

2 Do gipsies live in our country?

3 In what ways are they different from the general people?

B Now read the poem and answer the questions that follow.
Time, You Old Gipsy Man
Time, you old gipsy man,
Will you not stay,
Put up your caravan
Just for a day?
All things I'll give you,
Will you be my guest?
Bells for your jennet
Of silver the best,
Goldsmiths shall beat you
~ A great golden ring,
S
x)

180 English For Today
Peacocks shall bow to you,
Little boys sing,
Oh, and sweet girls will
Festoon you with may.
Time, you old gipsy,
Why hasten away?
Last week in Babylon,
Last night in Rome,
Morning, and in the crush
Under Paul’s dome;
Under Paul’s dial
You tighten your rein—
Only a moment
And off once again;
Off to some city
Now blind in the womb,
Off to another
Ere that’s in the tomb.
Time, you old gipsy man,
Will you not stay,
Put up your caravan
Just for a day?
Ralph Hodgson
Questions
1 Why does the poet call time an ‘old gipsy man’?
2 Make a list of things the poet will offer time if it stays just for a day.
3 What else can you offer time if it stays for a day? 8
N

English For Today 181

Lesson 5: Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening

A Ask and answer these questions.

1 Do you enjoy natural beauty like flowers, trees, woods, hills, etc.?
2 Have you ever been to a place where you enjoyed such beauty? If
yes, briefly describe it.

B Read the poem and say how the words in each stanza rhyme. For example,
in stanza 1 know (line 1) though (line 2) and snow (line 4) rhyme with each
other.

Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening
Whose woods these are I think I know.
His house is in the village though; — _
He will not see me stopping here % RS
To watch his woods fill up with snow. | iota x Ye |
My little horse must think it queer A i Some 00.
To stop without a farmhouse near Sn ae AY: in
Between the woods and frozen lake a 7 aegis |: h 1}
The darkest evening of the year. te Se
— = :
He gives his harness bells a shake =
To ask if there is some mistake.
The only other sound’s the sweep
Of easy wind and downy flake.
The woods are lovely, dark and deep.
But I have promises to keep,
And miles to go before I sleep,
And miles to go before I sleep.
Robert Frost
os
&

182 English For Today
Cc Answer the following questions.
1 Where do you think the poet is going? Why is he going there?
2 Why did the poet stop by the woods though it was dark and he
was alone?
3 Guess what promise the poet had to keep before he would sleep.
4 Write an imaginary dialogue between the poet and his horse.
Lesson 6: The Purple Jar-1
A Think about the following situation.
Suppose your mother / father has given you some money to spend on
anything you like in a fair.Going round the fair, you have shortlisted the
following items:
(a) a beautiful decorative wooden horse
(b)  acolourful shirt / kamiz of latest fashion
(c) abox of delicious chocolates for your family
(d) agolden pen---a gift for your best friend
But you have money enough to buy only one thing.
Write a paragraph about what you will buy and why.
B Read the story and answer the following questions.
Rosamond, a little girl about seven years old, was walking with her
mother in the streets of London. As she passed along she looked in at the
windows of several shops, and saw a great variety of things. She wanted
to stop to look at them and buy them all, without knowing their uses or
even without knowing their names.
At first they stopped at a milliner’s shop. The windows of the shop
were decorated with ribbons, lace and festoons of artificial flowers.
“Oh, Mamma, what beautiful roses! Won’t you buy some of them?”
“No, my dear.”
“Why?”
“Because I don’t want them. They are not real flowers.”
They went a little further and came to a jeweller’s shop. In it were a great
many pretty, bright ornaments of little value, set beautifully behind the ,,
glass. S

English For Today 183
“Mama, will you buy some of these?” fe EY
"Which of them, Rosamond?’ Fd Mix. 4
that necklace, those pendants! Any of them will do, a]
they are so pretty?!” “i
“Yea, they are all pretty, but of what use would ~~
they be to me?” .
if you only bonght them first.”
Though a little disheartened, Rosamond kept on looking at the shops and tried to
persuade her mother to buy this or that.
“[have a pair of buckles. I don’t need any now.” So saying her mother walked
on.
Questions
1 Make a list of things Rosamond wanted to buy.
2 How did the milliner’s ahop look like?
3 Whatcan you soe in a jeweller’s shop in a town/city in Bangladesh,
which you know well?
Lesson 7; The Purple Jar-2
A __ Read more of the story.
nothing. However, while they were passing by a chemisi's shop, she saw
some jars-—blue, green, red, yellow snd purple—and she seemed to have
a fascination for a purple jar. Bot her mother anawered aa before, “Of
3 what uze would they be to me, Rosamond?"

184 English For Today

“Oh, Mamma, I would use it for a flower pot.”

“But you have a flower pot and the jar you are dying for buying ‘1s nota
flower pot.”

“Yet, Mamma, I like it so much ...!”

Then suddenly she cried, “Ouch! A stone, mamma, a stone has got in my
shoe. It hurts!”

“Oh! How did it get there?”

“See, there’s a hole in my shoe, Mamma. In fact, my shoes are quite worn
out. Would you be so good as to buy me another pair?”

“But, Rosamond, I haven’t got money enough to buy shoes, jars, jewellary,

buckles and all that you wish to buy.”

Rosamond became sad again. Her mind flashed back to all those beautiful

things she had seen that morning.

“But, Mamma, I like the purple jar very much. And now my foot hurts.
Could you buy me only these two things --- the jar anda pair of shoes,
please?”

“No, Rosamond, you can buy only one thing. However, you may buy the
other thing next month. And you have to decide which one you would
like to buy now.’

“T need the shoes badly,” Rosamond began to argue with herself, but my
heart is in that beautiful jar.”

Then looking at her shoes, she told her mother, “These shoes are not so

bad, except for the hole in one. I think I can make them last till the end

of the month, can’t I? Don’t you think so, Mamma?”

“T want you to think for yourself, dear.”

“Okay, if you please, I would like to have the purple jar.’

“Very well, you will have it.”

°9
S
AQ

English For Today 185
B Tick the best answer.
1 Which is the correct statement?
a Rosamond saw the chemist’s shop from a distance.
b She liked the jars of all the colours equally.
c She had a special liking for a jar of a particular colour.
d Her mother found some use of the purple jar.
2 Rosamond wanted to buy
a__ all the jars. b the purple jar.
ca flower pot. d = auseful pot.
3 The money Rosamond’s mother has can buy only
a one thing. b two things.
c three things. d four things.
4 Why did Rosamond persuade her mother to buy her a pair of shoes?
Because
a her shoes had become old and ugly.
b she had no money to buy the purple jar.
c the shoes in the shop were very beautiful.
d a stone got in her shoe and was hurting her.
5 What made Rosamond finally decide to buy the purple jar?
a the beautiful size of the jar
b her mother’s inability to buy the shoes
c her shoes being not so bad
d the beautiful colour of the jar
Lesson 8: The Purple Jar-3
A Read the last part of the story to see what happened to Rosamond’s
beautiful purple jar.
Rosamond and her mother were going back to the chemist's shop. As they were
walking, Rosamond had to stop once again to take another stone out of the
broken shoe, and she often limped with pain.
Format 24, English For Today-9-10

186 English For Today
When they got back to the shop, Rosamond's mother asked her to carefully
examine the jar before she bought it. But Rosamond was so excited that she
bought it even without looking at what was inside the jar.
Happily she came back home with her mother. Then Rosamond quickly brought
some flowers from the garden and was going to put them into the jar. But as soon
as she took the top off, she saw something dark inside, which gave off an
unpleasant smell.
“What is it, Mamma? I didn’t want this black thing and the terrible smell.”
“Nor did I, my dear.”
“But what shall I do with it?”
“That I can’t tell.”
“Okay, Mamma, I must pour it out and fill the jar with fresh water.”
Then she made the jar empty. But to her great disappointment, she found that it
was no longer a purple jar --- it was a plain white glass jar. With its coloured
water gone, the jar did no longer look beautiful.
Rosamond cried with tears of disappointment in her eyes. She also cried for her
folly. Every day her shoes grew worse and worse, and she could neither run,
dance, jump, nor go shopping with her mother.
Thus Rosamond suffered for a whole month and learned a lesson the hard
way. She hoped that she would be wiser in future.
Adapted from The Purple Jar by Maria Edgeworth
B Answer these questions.

1 Why didn’t Rosamond examine the jar before buying it?

2 What did she take the jar for?

3 How did she come to know that the purple jar was in fact a plain

white glass jar?
4 Describe her sufferings and disappointments for buying the purple
jar. x
g

English For Today 187

Cc Read all the three parts of the story again and answer these questions.

1 How did Rosamond try to persuade her mother to buy all the pretty
things she saw in the shops?

2 How did her mother try to stop Rosamond from buying all the things
she wanted to buy?

3 Write two paragraphs-one about Rosamond and the other about her
mother. Use words and phrases from the box below, which are
appropriate for each character. You can also use your own words
and phrases.

a seven year old girl, use, disappointed, purple, worse, lesson,
sufferings, artificial, ornaments, pretty, liking, worn out, persuade,
beautiful roses, disheartened, enough, badly, examine, unpleasant
smell, stupidity, emotional, practical, decide, limped
Lesson 9: A Pound of Flesh
A Look at the picture and ask and answer the
questions. =
1 What do you see? ok Nis
2 What are the three persons doing? P eR g.
3 What type of clothes are they wearing? ¥ * Ae Was ne
“vg a ij y ye
4 Are you familiar with such clothes? iy i i’ :
5 Who wears such clothes? a ii ' i i "
6 Mention which clothes of our country are close “j,i Maal,
to the ones the men are wearing in the picture? fii eal
B Read the text.
Once upon a time in Venice, Italy, there was a very rich merchant named
Antonio. He had many ships that sailed in the sea. His ships carried different
types of merchandise to other countries. He sold those goods there. He bought
co spices and other valuables from foreign countries and sold them in Venice.
Ss
AQ

188 English For Today

Antonio was a good and kind man. He always helped the poor. The people of

Venice loved him very much for his honesty and kindness.

Antonio had a close friend named Bassanio. He was a handsome young man and

was born in a noble family. Bassanio liked to live a very luxurious life. He loved

grandeur and style. He spent more money than he earned. As a result, he was

very often short of money. In such situations, Bassanio would go to his best

friend Antonio for help. Antonio would help him with cash.

It so happened that Bassanio fell in love with a wealthy lady named Portia. Portia

was known not only for her beauty but also for her wisdom. She was soft

towards Bassanio too. He wanted to visit Portia in a grand manner but he did not

have any money. So he went to Antonio.

Bassanio said, "Dear friend Antonio, I am in great need of some money. I would

like to visit Portia at Belmont, grandly dressed and with many servants. But I

don't have any money right now. Please help me to fulfill my intention."

Antonio said, “ This is not a problem, my friend. How much do you need?”

“Three thousand ducats [Venetian currency] will do.”

“T don’t have that much money with

me now as all my ships have gone out : / y

worty, my friend, I'll arrange three #3 ,

thousand ducats for you.” ¢ i Pee aD a’

So he decided to borrow the sum ow Saal ff |

from a moneylender named Shylock. ff > Mat. GY

Shylock was a very crooked man. 1 ~, i 2)

Antonio and Shylock hated each | } i j r ie

other. Shylock used to lend money (pel | J j ‘he

with high interest. He would even| | WM e

send the debtor to prison if the latter “~~

failed to pay his debt. On the

contrary, Antonio used to lend money to help those who needed it and

would not charge any interest.

Shylock agreed to lend him money but on one condition. Ifhe failed to repay the

money in three month's time, he would pay a penalty. Shylock would cut a

pound of flesh from any part of Antonio's body. FS
™

English For Today 189
Antonio willingly agreed, thinking that his ships would soon return with all the
rich merchandise and he could easily return the money to Shylock by selling
them. Shylock made Antonio sign a bond before giving him the money. Antonio
took the money and gave it to Bassanio.
Cc True or false? If false, give the correct information.
1 Bassanio was a very rich man.
2 Bassanio and Antonio hated each other.
3 Antonio went to Shylock to borrow some money.
4 Shylock happily gave Antonio the money he asked for.
5 Antonio needed the money to bring his merchandise.
D Read the text in B again and answer the following questions.
1 Why was Bassanio short of money all the time?
2 Why did he go to Antonio?
3 Why did Antonio go to Shylock?
4 Why did Shylock get a bond signed by Antonio?
5 What was written in the bond?
Lesson 10: The three caskets
A Look at the picture and discuss it in pairs.
‘Peas 4) -
"e ¥
ay
Nee Fiat
hae et NAY
B Read the text and answer the questions that follow.
Bassanio went to Belmont to visit Portia grandly dressed, with many servants.
Portia's father had died lately. Before his death he had thought of an unusual plan
to find a good husband for his daughter. He wanted a man to marry Portia for
herself and not for her wealth. He had three caskets made, one of gold, one of
= Silver and one of lead, One of the caskets had Portia's portrait in it, The suitor
$ who would first choose the casket with the portrait would marry her.

190 English For Today
The first one to try was the prince of Morocco. He
thought that silver and lead are poor metals. It is the ‘
casket made of precious metal that can hold the 3 .
precious picture. So he chose the gold casket. But all p23
he found was a picture of a skull with a message that [as ~ as oN
said, “All that glitters is not gold.” The prince was i Al | ms ae
very sad and went back home. Then came the prince | i | ih yy aa
of Spain. He looked at the silver casket for a long | oo IN
time. On it was written, “He who chooses me will # /) | \“ia gy
get what he deserves.” The prince had a very high jg , | My
opinion about himself. He thought that he deserved — —=—=aiEam i 1d
the best. He therefore chose the silver casket and ee : —
opened it. Inside the casket he found the picture of a a
blinking fool. He was very disappointed and
offended. He immediately rode away.
Then it was Bassanio's tum. He looked at the caskets for a long time. He thought,
" Appearances are often misleading. Bad men appear good and they hide their
inner ugliness under fine clothes." So he chose the plain looking lead casket. On
opening the casket, he found the portrait of Portia inside.
Bassanio and Portia got married. There was great joy at Belmont and the newly
married couple were spending their time happily.
But soon their happiness turned into sorrow by a piece of news. A messenger
came with a letter from Antonio. The letter said, “Dear friend Bassanio, all my
ships have been lost at sea. I cannot pay the money I owe to Shylock. So I have
to pay the penalty. Dear friend, come and see me if possible. I would like to see
you once before I die." Bassanio quickly left for Venice.
Questions

1 Why did Portia’s father make such a strange plan?

2 Write what you know of the three caskets.

3 How many people attempted to choose the right casket? What

was the result?
4 Who succeeded to marry Portia? Why/How?
5 Why did the joyous mood at Belmont turn sad? ~
Ss
N

English For Today 191
Lesson 11: The trial
A Read the text and answer the questions that follow.
When Bassanio reached Venice, Antonio was already in the court of justice.
They were waiting for the trial to begin. The Duke entered the courtroom, took
his seat and the trial began. The Duke requested Shylock to be merciful and not
to claim his pound of flesh. But Shylock would not listen to him. Bassanio
offered him twice the amount of money that Shylock lent Antonio but Shylock
did not accept it. He said, "I claim my pound of flesh. The law is on my side.
Antonio must pay the penalty written in the bond."
The Duke was extremely sorry that he iy 2 =I
could do nothing to help Antonio. The law pe iy | 5 ee
was on Shylock’s side and the law must be Fe dP ss ty
abided. The Duke feared that although the ee S om 4 |
wisest lawyer in Venice was coming to $. ye A : y 4
speak in defense of Antonio, he would i i
not be able to save the merchant. Soon a iB ») 1a ‘ J
young clerk entered the courtroom with a oa
letter from that lawyer. The lawyer was ill and would not be able to come to the
court.
He requested the Duke to let his young friend, Doctor Balthazar, defend
Antonio. The Duke gave his permission, and Doctor Balthazar entered the
courtroom. He looked very young, and the Duke doubted if the wisdom of the
young lawyer could save Antonio. This young lawyer was no other than Portia
in disguise and the young clerk was her friend, who was also in disguise.
Portia begged Shylock to be merciful and told him how God bestows mercy to
those who are merciful themselves.
" Mercy” Portia said, " brings a blessing to him who shows it and to him who
receives it. All of us pray to God for mercy. But God will only have mercy on us
if we have mercy on others."
Shylock paid no heed to Portia. All he wanted was his pound of flesh.

~ Portia asked, "Can't Antonio pay the debt?"

& Bassanio cried, “ Yes, he can pay it, and even more. ... Even I can pay ten

192 English For Today
times the sum my friend borrowed from Shylock.”
“ Won’t you take the money, Shylock?” Portia asked.

“No, I demand the lawful penalty. Give me my pound of flesh.”
“ Let me see the bond Shylock”, said Portia.
Shylock handed the bond to her. She read it with great attention and then said,
"You are right Shylock. The law is on your side. You can claim the flesh. But I
would request you one more time to accept the sum Bassanio is offering you, and
let me tear up the bond." But Shylock would not give up his claim. Portia then
turned towards Antonio and said, “Get ready Antonio for Shylock to cut his
pound of flesh. The law gives it to him.”
Shylock was filled with joy on hearing what Portia said. He began to praise
Portia in disguise, for her wisdom and righteousness. He cried out, "Oh noble
judge! Oh excellent young man, you are a second Daniel, who has come to this
earth."
Portia urged Shylock to cut the pound of flesh he demanded. Delighted, Shylock
walked towards Antonio with a knife in hand. He told Antonio to uncover his
chest. But as he was about to cut Antonio's flesh, Portia stopped him. She cried
out, “Wait a second, Shylock! Never forget - there is no mention of blood in the
bond. Therefore, you cannot shed a single drop of blood while you cut your
pound of flesh; or else you pay the penalty. And the penalty is, the state will take
your property from you. You lose everything that you have now, Shylock."
Shylock understood it was not possible for him to cut a pound of flesh without
shedding blood. He was defeated by the wise lawyer. He hung his head and
without another word left the courtroom. Thus Antonio's life was saved.
Lessons 9, 10 & 11 are adapted from The Merchant of Venice by
William Shakespeare.
Questions

1 Who was Portia? What do you know about her?

2 What did Portia say regarding mercy?

3 How did Portia save Antonio’s life?

4 Sketch the character of Antonio.

5 How do you evaluate the character of Shylock? S

English For Today 193
Sample Questions
From SSC Examination 2018
English Paper One
Full Marks: 100
Time: 3 hours
(Answer all the questions. Figures in the margin indicate full marks.)
Read the passage. Then answer the questions below.
21 February is a memorable day in our national history. We observe the day
every year as International Mother Language Day. The day is a national
holiday.
On this day, we pay tribute to the martyrs who laid down their lives to establish
Bangla as a state language in undivided Pakistan in 1952. The struggle to
secure the rights of our mother language is known as the Language Movement.
The seeds of the Language Movement were sown on 21 March 1948 when
Mohammad Ali Jinnah, the Governor General of Pakistan, declared in a public
meeting in Dhaka that Urdu would be the only state language of Pakistan.
The declaration raised a storm of protest in the eastern part of the country.
The protest continued non-stop, gathering momentum day by day. It turned
into a movement and reached its climax in 1952. The government outlawed
all sorts of public meetings and rallies to stop it.
The students of Dhaka University defied the law and brought out a peaceful
protest procession on 21 February 1952. When the procession reached
near Dhaka Medical College, the police opened fire on the students, killing
Salam, Rafiq, Barkat, Safiur and Jabbar. As a result, there were mass protests
all over the country and the government had to declare Bangla as a state
language. This kindled the sparks of independence movement of Bangladesh.
1. Choose the correct answer from the following alternatives. 1x7=7
i) 21 February is a memorable day for all the Bangladeshis because on this
day in 1952:

a) Urdu was declared as the only state language of Pakistan.

b) Bangla was declared a state language of Pakistan.

c) some great people laid down their lives to establish Bangla as a state

language.
d) students protested against Mohammad Ali Jinnah’s declaration of
Urdu as the only state language of the country.
Format 25, English For Today-9-10

194 English For Today
ii) The seeds of the Language Movement were sown by:
a) Salam
b) the martyrs
c) Jinnah
d) the students
iii) The phrase “storm of protest” means:
a) mild protest
b) strong protest
c) moderate protest
d) symbolic protest
iv) The gap between the beginning and the climax of Language Movement was
a) 2 years
b) 3 years
c) 4 years
d) 5 years
v) The greatest outcome of the Language Movement is:
a) the status of Bangla as a state language
b) the independence of Bangladesh
c) the International Mother Language Day
d) mass protests all over the country
vi) Salam and Barkat were the citizens of
a) Bangladesh
b) Nepal
c) India
d) Pakistan
vii) The Pakistani government declared Bangla as a state language because
it was
a) compelled to do so
b) requested to do so
c) urged to do so
d) advised to do so
Answers: i) c; ii) c; iii) b; iv) ¢; v)b; vi) d; vii)a S

English For Today 195
2. Answer the following questions. 2x5=10

a) Why is 21 February a national holiday?

b) What was “undivided Pakistan’?

c) Why did Pakistani government outlaw meetings and rallies in 1952?

d) Why did the police kill Salam, Rafiq, Barkat, Safiur and Jabbar?

e) How is Language Movement related to the independence of
Bangladesh?

Suggested Answers:

a) 21 February is a national holiday because on that day in 1952 Rafiq,
Salam, Barkat, Safiur and Jabbar laid down their lives to establish
Bangla as a state language of Pakistan. The day is observed as a national
holiday as a mark of our tribute to the martyrs.

b) “Undivided Pakistan” was the Pakistan before 1971. In 1971 East
Pakistan became independent and emerged as a new country—Bangladesh.

c) Pakistani government outlawed meetings and rallies in 1952 in order to
stifle the people’s voice raised against the declaration of Urdu as the
only state language of Pakistan.

d) The moral strength of the students’ peaceful procession on 21 February
1952 in support of Bangla as a state language frightened the Pakistani
government. Therefore, their police opened fire and killed the
processionists—Salam, Rafiq, Barkat, Safiur, and Jabbar.

e) The success of Language Movement succeeded in kindling the sparks of
independence movement. The independence movement eventually
turned into the liberation war and the Bangalees got a new country-
Bangladesh.

3. Read the following text and fill in each gap with a suitable word based
on the information of the text. 1x5=5
Eveyone wants to share this happiness with near and dear ones. That’s why
people rush for their homes in spite of serious hazards? This is nothing but
people’s desire to return to the roots. Do human beings have roots like the trees?
o The answer is ‘yes' but unlike the roots of the trees they are invisible, they lie in
s our minds. It's these roots that make a bond between us and family members,

196 English For Today
in-laws, friends, neighbours or even between us and the land where we were
born and grew up. In that sense our families, our land of birth, relatives, our
culture, traditions, or surroundings are our roots. And wherever we stay, we feel
the power of our roots. It's our roots that develop our identity making us what we
are. When we lose that bond, we become rootless. Human beings who do not
have any roots are a non-entity. In other words, they do not have an identity.
They don't know where they are from, and/or where they are heading to. This
often makes them feel empty and lost.
By nature, human beings love a) ___ to share their feelings with near and
dear ones. This invisible b) _ for each other lies in our hearts. It always pulls
us toc) _ back to our roots. It develops our identity and d)__us to know who
we are. If we deny our roots, we will deny our existence. So, we can’t bute) ___
our roots.
Suggested Answers:
a. companions/ friends
b. feelings
c. go/come
d. helps/assists
e. nourish/ strengthen
4. Read the passage from the membership of a reading club. Complete the
following table with information from the passage. 1x5=5
Pathok Club Aims at developing reading habit among community people
irrespective of age. It is open 12 hours a day starting from 8:00 am. The
subscription fee varies for the different age groups. If you are between 5
to 17, you will have the junior membership. It requires Tk. 200 for a 3 month and
Tk. 300 for a 6 month memberships. Annual membership, which will allow one
additional facility like free entry to the movie show every week, can be obtained
for Tk. 600. The membership charges for adult age group (18 to 50) are quarterly
Tk. 300 and half yearly TK. 500. Annual membership charge is Tk. 300 more
than the 6 month membership fee and it comes with the facility to access the
movie library. Senior membership is for people above 50 who have to pay Tk.
100 quarterly and Tk. 200 half yearly. Yearly membership for them is Tk 300,
which also allow them free access to the movie library along with home delivery
and pick up facilities. %
S
N

English For Today 197
Membership | Age group (in
type years Quarterly} Half | Annually | Additional
yearly Facilities for
annual
members
200 300 movie show
300 500
Senior (5) .... ee eeeeeeeeee| TK. Tk. Tk. 300 | Free access to
100 200 movie library
and home
service
Answers:
(1) 8:00 pm
(2) Junior
(3) Tk. 800
(4) Access to the movie library
(5) 50 and above
5. Write a summary of the above passage in your own words. 10
Suggested Answer:
To grow reading habit in its community, Pathok Club is offering some lucrative
memberships where the fee is the lowest for elderly people and the highest for
the middle group of 18 to 50. There are three types of membership for each of
the junior, adult and senior member groups which are quarterly, half yearly and
annual with some extra facilities for the annual membership.
x
&

198 English For Today
6. Match the parts of sentences given in column ‘A’ ‘B’ and ‘C’ to write
five complete sentences. 1x5=5
a) Mount —_ Everest i)George Everest who |i) the Himalayas in
which is in surveyed 1841.

ii) Edmund Hillary and | ii) mountains always

b) It was named after | Tenzing Norgay reached |look exciting and

an Englishman the top on May 10 and challenging to them.

c) Climbing mountains | iii) mountaineers are not|iii)is the highest

like Everest daunted because mountain in the world.

d) In spite of all the |iv) is difficult and|iv) have gone into

difficulties and dangers | dangerous because history as the first to

the daring v) the Himalayan conquer the highest

e) After two months of | Mountains to the North of | mountain in the world.

difficult and dangerous | India between Tibet and | y) there is snow all over

climbing Nepal and there might be snow
slides and cracks under
the ice and snow.

Answer:

a) Mount Everest which is in the Himalayan Mountains to the North of India
between Tibet and Nepal is the highest mountain in the world.

b) It was named after an Englishman George Everest who surveyed the
Himalayas in 1841.

c) Climbing mountains like Everest is difficult and dangerous because there is
snow all over and there might be snow slides and cracks under the ice and
snow.

d) In spite of all the difficulties and dangers the daring mountaineers are not
daunted because mountains always look exciting and challenging to them.

e) After two months of difficult and dangerous climbing Edmund Hillary and
Tenzing Norgay reached the top on May 10 and have gone into history
as the first to conquer the highest mountain in the world.

S

English For Today 199
7. Put the following parts of the story in correct order to make the whole
story. Only the corresponding numbers of the sentences need to be
written. 1x8 = 8
a) The fox said, “What a noble advice it is!” Then he carried the turtle to
the river and let it go.
b) The fox began to shout, “You are ok, come now, dear. But the turtle
raised his neck and said, “Here there are more cunning animals than you.”
c) The turtle began to make more distance and by noticing it tears came
to the fox’s eyes.
d) The shouting of the fox got gradually softer.
e) Once a hungry fox captured a turtle to eat and said, “How hard your
body is!”
f) The fox said, “I am here, don’t waste my time. Come quick while you
are soft enough”.
g) The turtle began to dive and make a great distance between them.
h) The cunning turtle said, “Let me go to the river to soften my body”.
Answer:
The parts of stories can appear in the following order: e), h), a), f), g), b), d), c).
8. Answer the following questions to write a paragraph on Global
Warming. 10
a) What is global warming?
b) What are the causes of global warming?
c) What are the effects of global warming?
d) What should we do to stop it?
e) Why do we need a green environment?
Suggested Answer:
Global Warming
Global warming is now a major worldwide concern. It is the gradual warming of
the air surrounding the earth as a result of heat being trapped by environmental
pollution. There are many factors responsible for it. Firstly, the destruction and
burning down of tropical rain forests; secondly, traffic that clogs up city streets;
x thirdly, the rapid growth of industries and the use of CFC; fourthly, the use of
S detergents. As a result, the worldis heating up. However the main culprit

200 English For Today
is the carbon dioxide gas produced by the burning of fossil fuels and forests. All
these are responsible for global warming as well as climatic change. The effects
of global warming are very alarming for our life and existence. Because of
global warming the temperatures may have risen by as much as 4° C. It could
severely reduce mankind's ability to grow food; destroy wildlife and damage
wilderness, raise sea levels and flood coastal areas and farmland. It is a severe
threat to our life and existence. So to save the globe and to live a healthy life we
should come forward to stop environmental pollution and the emission of green
house gases. To ensure a green environment we should plant trees and stop
destruction of forests. A green environment can ensure healthy and danger free
life. We all should work hand in hand to save the globe from the harmful effects
of climate change .

9. Read the beginning of a story below. Add at least ten sentences to complete
the story. 10
It was on the first day of Boishakh. Dulal came out of his house in the morning
with all his family members. Their first destination was the Ramna Park. In the
park, there were people of all ages. Dulal could see a group of foreigners too.
One of them had a camera and he was clicking all the way. All of a sudden, he
came near Dulal...................-+

Suggested answer:

ssesasessterseeestsstereeetsssererseeterseeeeeed in a sweet yet strange voice said, 'Shubho
Nababorsho'.

Dulal felt excited. ‘who taught you to say that’? asked Dulal.

'T have heard people saying it everywhere in the garden’.

The camera-happy man was from Norway. He said, "Look, we are friends now. I
will give you a small book that contains general info about my country. But
please tell me about this day. I have visited many places of the world but I have
never seen such a festive rally of people’.

‘Do you like it’? Dulal asked.

‘It's fantastic and exciting’.

Dulal guided the foreigner to the Institute of Fine Arts. The huge new year
procession was about to start with all kinds of colorful masks. Dulal started
telling the man about the motifs of the masks. All on a sudden, he remembered
that his parents must be frantically looking for him. In a nervous tone Dulal said,
‘Sorry, I have to go'. Without waiting for the foreigner's response, he started ,,
running to Ramna Park to meet his parents. $

English For Today 201
10. The graph below shows the number of computer owners by gender in
a city named ‘X’ from the year 2012 to 2016. Describe the chart in 150
words. You should highlight and summarize the information given in the
chart. 10
Computer ownership by gender in city 'X': 2012-2016

8 25000 20150

< 20000 17020 614

e 15000 49599 A702 a he

2 10000 90

= 5000 e =

Qa

E

fo) 0

5 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

a Years

Z Male m Female
Sample answer:
The graph presents the number of computer users both male and female in the
city 'X' over five years from 2012 to 2016. It shows that the popularity of
computer among users of both the sexes steadily increased over the span of time.
At the beginning of the time period we see a big difference between the number
of male and female computer users of where the male users out number the
female users three to one. There is a gradual growth in the numbers of both types
of users over the years, but the growth is more rapid in the case of female users.
The number of male users has doubled over five years, whereas the number of
female users is four times more at the end than in the beginning year.
The use of computers is gradually becoming more and more popular among both
the sexes, while women are gradually achieving parity with men.

Format 26, English For Today-9-10

202 English For Today
11. Suppose, you are Rayan/Afsana. Yesterday something amazing
happened to you which you can’t but share with your friend,
Abrar/Pranto. Now, write an e-mail to Abrar/ Pranto about the incident.

10
Suggested answer:
To: zahiddrmc@gmail.com
Subject: Sharing patriotism
Dear Pranto,
I know it may not have time to read my mail as you are extremely busy with your
study tour. But I believe the story will move you greatly.
Yesterday morning, I was heading towards my school to take an exam in a
rickshaw. Everything around was so quiet that I felt a little scared. On my way,
I saw some paper flags lying on the roadside. I remembered that yesterday was
16" December. Suddenly, the grey bearded puller stopped the rickshaw, got
down and sprinted down the road. I was so terrified that I couldn't utter a single
word. But I noticed that in a minute he returned with those flags. Composing
myself, I told him that I was quite moved by his action. Taking a deep breath, he
said, "Look, these are the flags for which I fought risking my life. So, I can't
allow anyone to step on them." I realized that this patriotic zeal made the victory
possible in 1971. My eyes became wet with tears. I believe it’s time for all of us
to play our part in realising the dreams of our indomitable freedom fighters for
which they sacrificed their lives and limbs. Hope to hear from you.
With love
Afsana

x
Rg

English For Today 203

12. Farheen is a 15 year old girl. She wants to go to Cox’s Bazar with her

parents after her final exam. Her father tells her to book rooms in Sea

Star Hotel over telephone. Write a short dialogue that Farheen might have

with the hotel receptionist. 10

Suggested answer:

Hotel Receptionist (HR): Good afternoon. This is Hotel Sea Star. How can I

help you?

Farheen : I would like to make a hotel reservation.

HR : What day are you going to arrive here?

Farheen : We will be there on the 25" of December.

HR : How many rooms do you need?

Farheen : We need two rooms.

HR : Would you like to have double rooms?

Farheen : We need only one double room. The other one should
be single.

HR : Sea-side or hill-side?

Farheen : Please make sure that the double room will be a sea-
side room. The other one may be hill-side.

HR : How long will you be staying?

Farheen : We need the rooms for 3 nights.

HR : Would you like any smoking room?

Farheen : No, thank you.

HR : Alright. We have booked the rooms for you. Please be
sure to arrive before 4:00 pm on your check-in date.

Farheen : Thank you.

HR : You're most welcome.

THE END
26
Ss

Academic Year
PRS CICS Uae PATO AIA
— TAA Aerrat OA AAA
A thing of beauty is a joy for ever
tat 6 Pe Feltocra AAT Roca eifosia @ efecatced GAT AMAT CBSA OPDICA
sod WeA-4 (Colt BR, 28 Zt mS) cH BPA
bor a
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh

