\ Classes Nine-Ten
¢ u J FY NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a Textbook for Classes Nine-Ten from the academic session 2017
English Grammar and Composition
Classes Nine-Ten
Writers
Shaheen M. Kabir
Jahurul Islam
M. Shahidullah
Goutam Roy
Mohammad Ali
Editor
Shaheen M. Kabir
NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH

Published by
National Curriculum & Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka
[All rights reserved by the Publisher]
First edition : July,2016
Reprint : ,» 2017
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
For Free Distribution by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Printed by :

Preface
The aim of secondary education is to make the learners fit for entry into higher
education by flourishing their latent talents and prospects with a view to building the
nation with the spirit of the Language Movement and the Liberation War. To make the
learners skilled and competent citizens of the country based on the economic, social,
cultural and environmental settings is also an important issue of secondary education.
The textbooks of secondary level have been written and compiled according to the
revised curriculum 2012 in accordance with the aims and objections of National
Education Policy-2010. Contents and presentations of the textbooks have been selected
according to the moral and humanistic values of Bengali tradition and culture and the
spirit of Liberation War 1971 ensuring equal dignity for all irrespective of caste and
creed of different religions and sex.
The present government is committed to ensure the successful implementation of
Vision 2021-Honorable Prime Minister, Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina expressed her firm determination to make the country free
from illiteracy and instructed the concerned authority to give free textbooks to every
student of the country. National Curriculum and Textbook Board started to distribute
textbooks free of cost since 2010 according to her instruction.
Communicative grammar is a comparatively new trend in English language teaching. I
believe, the new communicative grammar series for grades 6-10 will work for the
intended curriculum and appear as substantial reference books in English language. In
fact, the main difference between a conventional grammar book and communicative
one lies in its approach. While a conventional grammar book appears as a reference
book to explain rules, and show usage; a communicative grammar deals with practice
creating opportunities to use language accurately. Unlike a conventional grammar, a
communicative grammar presents everything in context that not only promotes
accuracy, but also works for language acquisition.
I thank sincerely all for their intellectual labour who were involved in the process of
writing, editing, art and design of the textbook.
Professor Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

CONTENTS
Pat [Unit [Subject ————*Page No.
ou | vertsanaTenses
es | verbs Medals
06 | nds ofverds ST
ce | the Prepostion
0 | Sentences SCG
a
TI aswerkey 00
ser auesson i
fF aetontedgement ia

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
for Classes Nine-Ten as a Textbook from the academic session 2017
English Grammar and Composition
Classes Nine-Ten
Writers
Shaheen M. Kabir
Jahurul Islam
M. Shahidullah
Goutam Roy
Mohammad Ali
Editor
Shaheen M. Kabir
~ NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH |

Published by
National Curriculum & Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka
[All rights reserved by the Publisher]
First edition : July, 2016
Reprint : , 2017
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
For Free Distribution by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Printed by :

Preface
The aim of secondary education is to make the learners fit for entry into higher
education by flourishing their latent talents and prospects with a view to building the
nation with the spirit of the Language Movement and the Liberation War. To make the
learners skilled and competent citizens of the country based on the economic, social,
cultural and environmental settings is also an important issue of secondary education.
The textbooks of secondary level have been written and compiled according to the
revised curriculum 2012 in accordance with the aims and objections of National
Education Policy-2010. Contents and presentations of the textbooks have been selected
according to the moral and humanistic values of Bengali tradition and culture and the
spirit of Liberation War 1971 ensuring equal dignity for all irrespective of caste and
creed of different religions and sex.
The present government is committed to ensure the successful implementation of
Vision 2021.Honorable Prime Minister, Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina expressed her firm determination to make the country free
from illiteracy and instructed the concerned authority to give free textbooks to every
student of the country. National Curriculum and Textbook Board started to distribute
textbooks free of cost since 2010 according to her instruction.
Communicative grammar is a comparatively new trend in English language teaching. I
believe, the new communicative grammar series for grades 6-10 will work for the
intended curriculum and appear as substantial reference books in English language. In
fact, the main difference between a conventional grammar book and communicative
one lies in its approach. While a conventional grammar book appears as a reference
book to explain rules, and show usage; a communicative grammar deals with practice
creating opportunities to use language accurately. Unlike a conventional grammar, a
communicative grammar presents everything in context that not only promotes
accuracy, but also works for language acquisition.
I thank sincerely all for their intellectual labour who were involved in the process of
writing, editing, art and design of the textbook.
Professor Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

CONTENTS
Pat [Unit [Subject Page No. |
ce | aaiectves |
| vertsandenses i
os | Verbs: Modal |S
- 05 | Kindsofverds |
ce |The Prepostion iY
ce [Sentences SSC
as [ eas SiC
TE aswertey | 00 |
some aueston =| a0 ‘|
FF retnowiedgemene | ato _|

Part -1
GRAMMAR
oF | Thenoun arin fours

A_ Read the following passage and notice the underlined words:
Shakespeare was born in 1564 at
Stratford-upon-Avon in England.
He was a poet, playwright and
actor. He is widely regarded as the _— 4
greatest writer in English and the =: ay = © ‘
world’s prominent dramatist. He is val .
enjoys enormous popularity even Ii x| ;
in the modern age for his plays and N t : al
These are all nouns. The noun is a naming word. It may name a person, place
or thing. There is a bewildering variety of things in the world. So there is a
bewildering number of nouns in a language.
Look back at the nouns in the passage above and think what they name.
There are five kinds of nouns in English. They are:

1. Proper nouns

2. Common nouns

3. Collective nouns

4. Material nouns

5. Abstract nouns
Forma-1, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

2 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 1 Notice the underlined words in the following passage and say
what they refer to:
Rajshahi is a divisional city in Bangladesh. It is in the western part of the
country. It stands on the river Padma. My friend Alamgir lives in this city. He is
a professor of History. | often visit him and discuss many things with him. He
speaks good English.
These are all proper nouns. A proper noun is the name of a particular person,
place or thing. For example, “Rajshahi” is the name of a particular city and
“History” is the name of a particular subject. Think of the other proper nouns
in the passage. A proper noun usually begins with a capital letter. A proper
noun is usually singular but some proper nouns are plural in form. For example:
ia in a +
me 1! Abs
i 3 a .
TR =

The Maldives is an island country.

Have you ever been to the Philippines?

The United Nations has a big responsibility.
Note: Although these nouns are plural in form, they take a singular verb with
them.

[ve)
5

English Grammar and Composition 3
Activity 2 Notice the underlined words in the following passage:
Nasima is a beautiful girl. She is a bright student too. She reads in a local
college. She has many friends. She discusses her lessons with them. She
attends classes regularly. Every teacher is fond of her.
These are Common nouns. A common noun refers to every person, place or
thing of the same class or kind. It does not refer to anything in particular. For
example, the noun ‘girl’ may mean any girl in the world. A common noun can
be both singular and plural. For example:
London is a big city.
There are many big cities in the world.
Note: A proper noun can be used as a common noun. Look at the following
examples:
He is called the Shakespeare (= the greatest dramatist) of Bangladesh.
There are two Raghibs in this class.
B__Look at the underlined nouns in the following passage:
Salam comes of a big family. He has three brothers. His elder brother is a
member of Parliament. His younger brother has recently joined the army. His
other brother is a cricketer who plays for the national team. Salam himself is a
Civil Servant who works for the government.
These are collective nouns. A collective noun is the name of a collection or
group of people or things taken together. For example, an army is a group of
soldiers and a team is a group of players. Think of the other nouns in the
passage as a group of persons spoken of as one whole. A collective noun can
take both singular and plural verbs after it. For example:
The government has/have decided on a new pay scale.
The committee was/were in favour of my proposal.
ioe}
Sy
NX

4 English Grammar and Composition

C_ Read the following passage and notice the underlined nouns:

Mrs. Rahman is now visiting a jeweller. She will buy some gold and silver to

make some jewellery. Next, she will also go to a grocer’s. She needs to buy

sugar, tea, milk and oil.

These are material nouns. A material noun names a thing that has weight but

cannot be counted. It is a kind of mass noun which is considered uncountable.

It refers to any material or substance. The substance may be solid, liquid or

gaseous. “Oxygen” is also a material noun.

D Look at the underlined nouns in the following passage:

Mr. Haque was a freedom fighter. He is known for his bravery. He is working for

a private company now. Everybody loves him for his honesty and sincerity. He

is an admirer of freedom and justice.

These are abstract nouns. An abstract noun is the name of a quality, state or

concept. It has no material form, shape or size.

Activity 3 Think of some other abstract nouns and make a sentence with
each of them.

Activity 4 Identify the nouns in the following passage, and say whether
they are Proper, Common, Collective, Material or Abstract
nouns.

Hasan is a rich farmer who lives in a village in the district of Sirajganj. He has a

lot of cultivable land. He grows rice, wheat and other crops. He has a herd of

cattle and other domestic animals. They provide him with milk and meat.

Hasan is a kind man. He has love and sympathy for the poor class of people.

eo
Ss

English Grammar and Composition 5
1/2: Number
A_ Read the following two passages and notice the forms of the underlined
nouns:
_— Come Lab ~ = 4 a= y

(i) Mr. Aslam is a teacher. His wife is a banker. They have only one
child. Theirs is a small family. They live a happy life.

(ii) Mr. and Mrs. Hasan are teachers. They have two children. Both of
them are students. All the four members of this family are fond of
books.

In the first passage each of the underlined nouns denotes only one person or
thing. On the other hand, each underlined noun in the second passage denotes
more than one person or thing.
This is a question of number. A noun that denotes one person or thing is said
to have a singular form. For example, the nouns in the first passage (teacher,
banker, child, family and life) are all singular in form. On the contrary, a noun
that denotes more than one person or thing is said to have a plural form. For
example, all the nouns in the second passage (teachers, children, students,
members and books) are plural in form.
Number is a grammatical distinction which tells whether a noun (also a
© pronoun, verb or determiner) is singular or plural. There are two numbers in
® English — the Singular and the Plural.

6 English Grammar and Composition
B Plurals are usually formed by adding s, es or jes to the singular form. Look
at the following examples.
(i) Singular + s = plural
boy boys
girl girls
dog dogs
page pages
monkey monkeys
Note: Most nouns are made plural by adding an s to the singular form.
(ii) Singular + es = plural
bus buses
kiss kisses
dish dishes
watch watches
box boxes
Note: Plurals are formed by adding es when the singular form ends ins, ss, sh,
ch and x.
(iii) Singular + ies = plural
baby babies
lady ladies
story stories
duty duties
fly flies
Note: Singular nouns ending in a consonant + y form their plurals by dropping
y and adding ies.
Cc Plural forms of nouns can also be made in other ways. Notice the
following examples:
(i) Singular nouns ending in f/fe form their plurals by dropping f/fe and
adding ves:
calf calves x
N

English Grammar and Composition 7
wife wives
knife knives
Now write the plural forms of the following nouns:
thief
leaf
wolf
shelf
life
(ii) Plurals are often formed by making an internal change of vowels:
foot feet
tooth teeth
man men
Now fill in the following blanks with plurals:
goose
mouse
woman
louse
(iii) Look at the plurals of some compound words:
boy-friend boy-friends
take-off take-offs
step-son step-sons
passer-by passers-by
looker-on lookers-on
runner-up runners-up
father-in-law fathers-in-law
man-of-war men-of-war
(iv) Nouns ending in is have es in the plural:
thesis theses
crisis crises
basis bases
diagnosis diagnoses
S synopsis synopses

8 English Grammar and Composition

D Number is applicable not only for nouns but also for pronouns, verbs

and determiners. Read the following passage and notice the underlined

words:

4 ee y <1 ee
—— } é ca 4 yi !

Karim is a student of class nine. He is my friend. We go to school together by

rickshaw. We always share our rickshaw fare. In his free time he loves to play

badminton while | love to watch movies.

In this passage ‘he’ and ‘we’ are pronouns; ‘reads’, ‘is’, ‘go’ and ‘share’ are

verbs, and ‘my’ and ‘our’ are determiners. You can easily guess which of these

words are singular and which are plural. Remember, whether a verb is singular

or plural is determined by its subject. A singular subject takes a singular verb

and a plural subject takes a plural verb.

Activity 1 Now fill in the gaps in the following sentences:

We have a pet in our house. We all very fond of it. My

mother care of it. It to eat fish and milk. It. us

by killing :

Activity 2 Rewrite the following passage changing the singular words into

their plural forms:

As you are my friend, you can borrow this book from me. But you should return

it within a week. You should not tell a lie to me. | hate a liar. | also hate a person

who breaks a promise. co
s
S
N

English Grammar and Composition 9
1/3: Gender
A Gender is a distinction which shows whether a noun or pronoun is male or
female. It is related to the sex of an animal. Read the following passage and
say what gender the underlined words refer to.
All the teachers were invited to the party. Their spouses and children were also
invited. But Mr. Rahman could not attend the party, because his wife was ill. As
his son and daughter were away from home, there was nobody else in the
house to look after her.
B There are four genders in English. They are:
1. Masculine gender
2. Feminine gender
3. Common gender
4. Neuter gender
Activity 1 Now fill in the gaps in the following sentences to understand
what each gender denotes.
The masculine gender denotes a ---- person or animal.
The feminine gender refers to a ------ person or animal.
The common gender refers to both ----- and ------ persons/animals.
The neuter gender denotes a thing which is neither----- nor------.
Activity 2 Here are some nouns. Say what gender they denote.
man woman student camera
uncle aunt doctor flower
brother sister sibling pen
lion lioness professor table
god goddess minister book
policeman policewoman policeperson dress
gander goose bird bed
Forma-2, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

10 English Grammar and Composition
host hostess guest pillow
prince princess principal office

Activity 3 Read the following masculine nouns and match them with their

feminine forms.
a
a
a
a
ee ind
a
a
a
rephew sd esieswome#

Activity 4 Genders also refer to pronouns. Correct the mistakes of

pronouns in the following passage :

My father is a poet. She has written a lot of poems. Her poems are very good to

read. My mother, however, does not read these poems. He is always busy doing

his own work. His indifference to her poetry is painful.

co
S

English Grammar and Composition 11
1/4: Possessives and
Appositives
A Read the following passage and notice the underlined words:
ei KE
se zs os are ek
- pi 1 ay 7 7 a {

"1 t 1] | Ain as
This is Salma’s school. This is a girls’ school. Her elder sister’s husband is the
founder of this school. It is one of the best schools in Rajshahi. Will you go to
the Headmistress’s chamber and talk to her about your daughter’s admission?
These are all possessive forms of nouns. The possessive case is a grammatical
phenomenon which indicates relationship or ownership.
Note: The possessive case is formed in mainly two ways:
(i) When the noun is singular, its possessive form will be noun +’s:
For example:

Della’s hair is very long.
This is Nazma’s bag.
However, in some possessives the letter s is omitted in order to avoid a hissing
sound.
For example:
eg | have done it for conscience’ sake.
& You should sacrifice it for goodness’ sake.

12 English Grammar and Composition
(ii) When the noun is plural and ends in s, the possessive case is formed by
adding only an apostrophe and no s after it.
For example:
She reads in a girls’ school.
Horses’ tails are short.
But other plurals take (apostrophe + s) in their possessive forms:
For example:
These are children’s books.
This is a women’s club.
Activity 1 Correct the following sentences using the possessive forms of
the nouns in bold:
(i) Nazrul father is seriously ill. He is now at death door. His recovery
at this stage completely depends on Fortune favour.
(ii) Mr. Haque is ill. He is on three days casual leave. In case of
emergency, he can apply for one month medical leave.
(iii) | Yesterday | visited Mr. Islam and Mr. Kabir families. But | could
not visit Mr. Rahim and Mrs. Rahim family.
B Here are some more examples of the possessive forms of nouns:
Bangladesh’s foreign policy is admirable.
We must obey Nature’s laws.
He was at his wit’s end.
| ate to my heart’s content.
Everything is at my fingers’ ends.
He has lost a pound’s weight.
Everything depends on heaven’s will.
His house is only at a stone’s throw from mine.
It is not your money’s worth.
It is a day’s journey from here to Dhaka. S

English Grammar and Composition 13
C Nouns in Apposition :
Apposition means “placing near”. It is a grammatical arrangement in which
two words referring to the same person or thing are placed side by side in a
sentence.
Read the following passage and notice the underlined words.
Mr. Rahman, our Headmaster, is a very nice man. My friend, Nazrul and | saw
him yesterday. He discussed many things with both of us. He also talked about
his childhood days. We also met his wife, Mrs Salma Begum. She is our English
teacher. We like both of them.
In the first sentence, Rahman and Headmaster refer to the same person. The
noun “Headmaster” follows the noun “Rahman” simply to mean which
Rahman is referred to. Here the second noun “Headmaster” is said to be in
apposition to the first noun “Rahman”.
Similar is the case with “Nazrul” in the second sentence. It is in apposition to
the first noun “friend”. The second noun in such a situation is also called an
appositive.
Activity 2 Find out the other appositive in the passage:
Activity 3 Read the following passage and identify the appositives in it:
We, the students of class nine, are going to publish a magazine. Kazal, the first
boy of our class, will be the chief editor of the magazine. Mr. Rafiq, our class
teacher, is our chief adviser. We believe that many students will write for the
magazine.

oS

Sy

N

Pronouns Subject and object pronouns;
and possessive adjectives, possessive
. pronouns, reflexive pronouns
Possessives
A Read the following sentences:
- Who is she? (2 p Subject and object
ad pronouns
- | don’t know her. Sorry. Os <4
BH
- | know her. u OR
She lives near my place. ra
+ aM)
- She is Meghna. iL
This is my bag. Where is yours?
- Here is mine. And this is Uttom’s.
pronouns
- But! don’t see our passports.
- This is my passport. Is it your passport? . = gf
- Oh, yes. Thank you. a
Grammar point:
Look at the following grid:
Subject pronoun Object pronoun Possessive Possessive
adjective pronoun
I me my mine
you you your yours co
3S
aq

English Grammar and Composition 15
he/she/it him/her/it his/her/its his/her/its
we us our ours
they them their theirs
1. When we use a pronoun as the subject of a verb in a sentence it is
called a subject pronoun.
Example:
| was travelling to Savar. On the way suddenly the bus stopped and
remained non-moving. | called on the guide of the bus and asked him
the reason. He (= the guide of the bus) told me that the tire of the bus
got punctured.
2. When we use a pronoun as the object of a verb in a sentence, we call
that an object pronoun.
Example:
Rajon is our class captain for this month. | don’t like him (=Rajon) that
Use
We use a possessive adjective to talk about:
Things that we own
What are you carrying?
This is my passport.
Family members and friends
My brother lives in Indonesia. He is a Micro-Biologist there.
Things that are connected to us
At my school, we learn science subjects through learning by doing. It helps us
« alot to understand the theories.
S We use a possessive pronoun to talk about:

16 English Grammar and Composition
Something that belongs to us or is connected with us, without repeating the
noun
Example:

The navy blue T-shirt is mine (=my T-shirt). Don’t take that one please.

We also use a possessive pronoun when we know which thing we are referring
to.

Example:

My laptop is six months old. How old is yours (=your laptop)?

Activity 1

Complete the description of a job by putting in the correct subject or object

pronouns.

| work in a restaurant. Three other people work with here. They

are Jibon, Sathi, and Bokul. all are good friends. Jibon is a good

singer. always sings and works. I’m a fan of singing.

Sathi is a little senior to : is a bit serious in everything.

If make any mistake, scolds but

loves us a lot too. | don’t know passion.

Bokul is of age. Everyone loves Bokul because of

pleasing personality. Bokul’s special quality is is never angry with

anyone. Our manager doesn’t like friendship. She keeps an eye on

always. enjoy anxiety.

Activity 2 Two friends are talking about their exam preparation. Complete
their conversation by putting in the correct possessive adjectives
and possessive pronouns.

Kalyani Hi dear! (1) look tired — you are working very hard. 2%

BS

English Grammar and Composition 17
Gitanjali To be honest, (2) preparation is not very
satisfactory. Mom got seriously ill last month. (3)
illness killed some of the valuable time. How about

(4)

Kalyani Hmmm....not bad though. (5) brother has come
home on vacation. (6) guidance has helped me a
lot.

Gitanjali My situation is also like (7) . My mom and my sister
are helping to pull. As a result of (8) collective
efforts I’m improving. Yet it’s not that easy once you have a gap in
study.

Kalyani That’s true. By the way, this is really a good park. Very neat and
clean!

Gitanjali Oh yes, we take care of this park. We don’t depend on the local
municipality. In fact, it is (9) and so we keep it tidy.

Kalyani Great! You know we have a small organization working on
environment. From (10) organization we went to
other parts of the city. We tried to convince those people that
(11) parks are (12) . Yet the result is
not always impressive.

Gitanjali When all start thinking ‘It is (13) , maybe the
situation will improve.

Activity 3. Mr Tarafder is recalling his lost days. Read the text and decide if
the underlined words are correct or incorrect. Put a tick mark if
they are correct and write the correct words if they are
incorrect. The first one is done for you.

QO My brother and | were born in Kurigram. Ours Our birthday was in October.

Forma-3, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

18 English Grammar and Composition
1 It was many years ago and there was no electricity in our ........... locality.
2. There was no fan at ours ........... home. During the summer we suffered a
lot.
3. When we started going to the secondary school, our........... father bought
two bicycles for us.
4 My........... was black and his ........... was green.
5 Mine............ friend was Hitesh. Theirs ........... house was in a better part of
the town.
6 We went to their ........... house frequently by our........... bicycle.
7 Hitesh had a pet dog. It ........... colour was black and it was very naughty.
8. Whenever we entered theirs ........... house it not only used to bark but also
chased Ours ............
9 Yet | had special fascination for them ........... house. To be honest | liked
Hitesh’s younger sister.
10 Once! sent her a letter in a book and she showed it to Hitesh. The book
was her ........+.
11 Later Hitesh asked we........... not to go to theirs ........... house anymore. We
sues WEre Upset.
Activity 4 Some friends are travelling by bus. Complete their conversation
by putting in the correct possessive adjectives and possessive
pronouns.
Rahim Mahfuj, are you at the right place? This is my seat — B3.
Mahfuj Really! Let me check. Hmmm... No, it’s not. Look at........... ticket.
It’s .......... Can | see ........... ticket? Look, its D3. | mean ...........
seat is D3. 29
=~)
N

English Grammar and Composition 19

Rahim Oops...Oh yes, sorry. You are right. Anyway, where should we put
sseeese Dags — in the bunker or in the box?

Mahfuj ll put ........... under my seat. Since ........... is a heavier one, you
can put it in the box. ... Do you know where Mokhles and Pritish
are sitting?

Rahim They are at the back.

Mahfuj What are ........... seat numbers?

Rahim........... are G1 and G2.

Read the following sentences:

After we had completed our exams, we organized a party ourselves.

The party was really great. | prepared myself for the party.

Sujata and Ranju sang in the party but they didn’t like each other.

These are some examples of reflexive pronouns. Now see how reflexive

pronoun are formed.

Subject pronouns Reflexive pronouns
| myself
you (singular) yourself
he/she/it himself/herself/itself
we ourselves
you (plural) yourselves
they themselves
Use
1. We use reflexive pronouns with certain verbs:
build , cook, do, enjoy, hurt, paint, teach, make, organize
2. We usually use reflexive pronouns in the following patterns
. Subject + verb + reflexive pronoun (The party was really great. |
S prepared myself for the party.)

20 English Grammar and Composition
OR
Subject + verb + object + reflexive pronoun (as in After we had
completed our exams, we organized a party ourselves.)
We use reflexive pronouns immediately after the verb to talk about actions
or experiences that only affect the subject and none else.
Don’t touch the rod. You'll hurt yourself. (It’ll hurt none but you.)
We use reflexive pronouns to mean that the activity has been done by no
other person than the subject.
She made the ice cream herself. (Nobody else made it.)
We use ‘each other’ to mean that the same action has been done by both
the persons.
Joyita and Jalal love each other. (Jayita loves Jalal and Jalal loves Jayita.)
Activity 5
Read the address made by the chief guest at a programme. Complete the text
by adding reflexive pronouns in the gaps. The first one is done for you.
I’m very glad to know that the students of this school have arranged this
science fair themselves. It’s really a classic example of students’ creativity and
hard work. This programme reminds me of my school days. Then many times
we did similar programmes ............0.+.- Lis good to know that Nasreen has
innovated ...........000. NOW to recycle banana skins to meet nutrition
deficiency. I’m further glad to see Jinia’s work. | congratulate the organizers of
the programme as well. You endeavoured to raise fund for the programmes
tisssseeeenseeees ANd | cannot but give a hand to you. This is really a great school
and | must say that this is a great programme to show how students can help
the country and help ......................... for good causes. ©
S
N

English Grammar and Composition 21

Activity 6

Musabbir and Dilruba have just moved into a new house. Dilruba is showing

their new home to their friend, Rafiq. Complete the conversation using

reflexive pronouns and the words in the box.

finalise our plan did it do the carpeting work everything do
things

Dilruba Welcome to our new place.

Rafiq Wow, everything looks so nice. Did you decorate the house
yourself?

Dilruba Yes, we designed . We
didn’t have enough money to pay for a home decorator.

Rafiq Was it really challenging for you?

Dilruba Yes, it was. It took long time to but we
enjoyed.

Rafiq Guess, you didn’t as
well.

Dilruba Oh, no. We engaged two carpenters. But they did a good job,
didn’t they?

Rafiq That showcase looks interesting. Your carpenters are really
geniuses!

Dilruba Oh, that is a job of Musabbir. He . This is his
first innovation of this type.

Rafiq Wow, | can’t believe it. | really appreciate people who

. ’m no good at that.
oS
S

a “— Ps
A Read the letter and follow the words in bold:

ue

ee. ae Sa = A 6 =
Dear John
Writing from my home. I’m In Bangladesh, finally. It’s late December. The
weather is fantasticl It's not at all humid. The temperature is moderate - in
between 26-28 degree. Unlike England there Is no rain, no strong wind here.
Usually we have strong sun but now the sunlight
ls very soothing. In fact, our winter begins from November and continues till
February. January is the coldest month in Bangladesh. The mest interesting
feature of winter Bangladesh is — the country is full of Interesting vegetables
and deliclous pitha, a kind of handmade cakes. Many foreigners Iike
Bangladeshi winter as it is milder than the winter in many parts of the world
such as England, Canada, or Russla.
You know, my father produces winter vegetables every year. I'm very fond of
bottle gourds. This time the gourds are bigger and nicer than the previous
years. Hope they will taste more interesting too. Well, | got to go now. Write to
me soon.
Love.

=

Rima s

English Grammar and Composition 23
What are the words in bold doing?
All these words in bold are adjectives.
Some of them come before a noun and modify it, e.g. give extra information about it.
Some of the words are completing the sentences.
Thus adjectives work either as noun modifiers or as complements (that
completes) of a sentence.
Adjectives have three forms:
Positive use of adjectives without comparing
e.g. The temperature is moderate.
Comparative __ use of adjectives to compare two things or persons
e.g. This time the gourds are bigger and nicer than the
previous years.
Superlative use of adjectives to show the best or worst (comparison
between many)
e.g. January is the coldest month in Bangladesh.
Grammar Rules
We form comparative and superlative adjectives in this way:
short adjectives with one syllable
1. for comparative: By adding —er.
mild milder
for superlative : By adding -est
mild milder mildest
short adjectives ending with one vowel and one consonant
2. for comparative: by doubling the consonant and adding —er
x big bigger
8

24 English Grammar and Composition
or superlative: by doubling the consonant and adding —est
big bigger biggest
short adjectives ending with -e
3. for comparative: By adding —r for comparative
nice nicer
for superlative: By adding —st for superlative
nice nicer nicest
Long adjectives with two or more syllables
4. for comparative: by adding more with the adjectives
interesting more interesting
for superlative: by adding most with the adjectives
interesting more interesting most interesting
adjectives ending with -y
5. for comparative: by changing y to —ier
dirty dirtier
for superlative: by changing y to —iest
dirty dirtier dirtiest
6. There are some adjectives that do not follow any rule. We call them
irregular adjectives. We need to remember their other forms. Such as
good better best
bad worse worst
far farther farthest S

English Grammar and Composition 25
Use
We use comparative adjectives
e totell about the differences between two or more things
e to give facts and opinions
Activity 1 Read the following dialogue and indicate which of the above
rules the adjective is following in each sentence. The first one is done for you.
: How was the food?
: That was the costliest food | had ever had. Rule 5
:But believe me, the food was really delicious.
: How was the service?
: It was also very good. The service was quicker than the one we had last week.
Perhaps this is why the price of the foods is much higher than the neighbouring
restaurants. Rule .......
: Once | went to that restaurant. | liked the restaurant but the curry
was thicker than what | like. Rule ..........
: Really! | think it was lighter than that in your uncle’s restaurant.
Rule ..........

: Anyway, and how about the ice cream? Rule ..........
: Nicer than what we are eating now. Rule ..........
: But don’t you think the glasses are bigger here? Rule ..........
: [don’t know. In fact to me the most important thing is the taste not

the quantity. Rule ..........
Forma-4, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

26 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 2 Trina is talking about his possessions. Fill in the blank spaces in
the following sentences with comparative forms of adjectives in the
brackets.

a. My laptop is quite slow and | want a ................... (smart) one.

b. My father bought this camera many years ago. This is an auto camera. |
would like to buy a digital one but that is 0... seeseeceseseeeetseeeeneeees
(expensive).

c. My bike is quite old. | want a ...............0000 (NEW) ONe.

d. My harmonium is okay but | want a ..........:csssseeeeeees (ZOO) ONE.

e. My friends like my T-shirt. But next time when | go to Dhaka, |’Il buy a
senses (NICE) ONE.

f. | won’t ride my bike to go to your place because the road to your house
is getting bad to ............:00+(Dad).

g. Our school has a students’ association. They are doing well. Yet | want a
setsssessseeeeeee (POWErfuUl) ASSOCIATION FOF ..........:+000+00+8+2+++2+(B00d) benefit.

Activity 3 Runi and Bony would like to go to the cinema. They are
discussing which movie they should watch. Read the
conversation and fill in the blank spaces using comparative
adjectives. Use than where necessary.

Runi: Let’s go to watch One Day at Bhola. | think that will be

(exciting) The Forbidden Planet.

Bony: Well it depends. One Day at Bhola is a romantic movie. The Forbiden

Planet is a science fiction. Last year it was (hit) film in the box

office.

Runi: That’s true. The Forbidden Planet has (action) whereas

One Day at Bhola has (romance). And you know | like

romance and fun.

Bony: If you like fun, you can also see The Evening. Reviews say that it is

(funny) One Day at Bhola. S
N

English Grammar and Composition 27
Runi: (Good) is The Thrifty Man. | saw it and to be honest |
couldn’t resist my laughter for a single moment.

Activity 4 Read the following sentences. Megha is giving information
about his classmate Urmila. In the left hand column she is giving
clues about what she wants to say. Write comparative
sentences using them + an object pronoun or a possessive
pronoun. The first one is done for you.

1 I’m not very tall. She is. She is taller than me.
2 She’s good at English. I’m not. She is :
3 She has a big family. | don’t. She has .

4 Her house is beautiful. My house isn’t. Her house is :

5 She wears very colourful dresses. | Her clothes are .
don’t.

6 Her parents are young. My brothers Her brothers are :
aren't.

7 She lives near the school. | don’t. She lives ‘

Activity 5

Complete the following text about a comparison between the rural life and

urban life. Use comparative forms of adjectives in brackets.

Many people say that those who live in the rural areas are

sieteseeseeaeeececeess (FOrtUNAte). They Rave... cccccecccssseseseeseeeee

(pollution) and wwe = (fresh) air. Their life is

satesesaseassssssseeceeess (relaxed) than that of the city people. Villages are

ASO aisecssseeseseseeeee. (green) than cities. Often cities are

sseesiseessssesssasessseseesseseesseeeeees (Cirty) than villages. But there are supporters of city

life. They believe that city dwellers have ...........ccssssseseeeeeeeeeee (€MEnities)
ioe}
S than the rural people. It’s true that city dwellers have

28 English Grammar and Composition
seetteteestseetetsttetetetsesetseeeeese (freedom) and social life but they have
sittaninsiinnncennees (facilities) to enjoy. The houses and malls are
(ntiiiiieanisnsseeses (pretty) in the cities. Besides cities have
sietesstetsssstssststsastssssssatssecerseese, (ZOO0) hospitals, schools, and restaurants. In fact, it
depends on your choice — which one is .........ceeseeeeeeeeeeeee (iIportant) to
you.
Activity 6
Bishu is talking to his friend Steve and comparing himself. Complete the
rewritten comparisons using as ... as. The first one is done for you.

1. Your pencil is new. My pencil isn’t.

My pencil isn’t as new as yours.

2. Your school bag is expensive. My school bag isn’t.

3. You work hard. | work hard too.

4. You are very smart. I’m not.

5. You are very intelligent. I’m not.

6. You are very brave. I’m brave too.

7. You can cook well. | can’t.

8. My bike is very good. Your bike isn’t.

9. You get many e-mails. | do not.

10. You are friendly. I’m friendly too.

eo
Ss

English Grammar and Composition 29
Activity 7 Take one phrase from each of the two columns to complete the

following sentences. You can use each phrase only once.
as keen on going outside makes us a bit wiser
it’s hotter in April better
more and more crowded cities in the world
more fun than trains
less expensive every year
one of the most famous her sister
tall as his friends
The I’ve ever had
was the best one than going to Kuakata
our experience than in February

a. Shapla isn’t as

b. Going to Cox’s Bazar on holidays is

c. Travelling by bus is

d. Hot tea? Good. The hotter

e. In Bangladesh

f. Last year’s Pohela Boishakh celebration

g. Bangladesh is

h. Dipak isn’t a

i. The village side resorts are getting

oj. Every year
5

30 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 8 Read the advertisements. Answer the questions using the
superlative forms of adjectives.
A B Cc
2 bedroom, 2 baths, one Sub-let for 1 cosy bedroom. 3 bedroom flat at Uttara.
large sitting room flat at 500 square feet. bath and New building. 1750 sft.
Dhanmondi. 1200 square kitchen need small Very modern. 15 mins walk
feet. Fairly modern. 10 mins renovation work .old from the nearest bus stop.
walking distance from building with trees and Family only. Sunny and
Dhanmondi 27. Spacious garden at down town. airy. 20,000/month.
rooms with balcony. Sunny. Owner lives apart. Bachelor
Modern fittings. only. Girls preferred.
30,000/month 15,000/month.
Which flat is the...?
a. (small) Flat B is the smallest.
b. (sunny)
c. (large) a
d. (near) the city centre
e. (modern)
f. (noisy)
g. (expensive)
Activity9 Now write sentences using the opposite of the superlative
adjectives you have written in activity 8.
Flat C is the largest.
sovseennsonenuaseecenusseeansasonenaasseesusonsniunseennuasanensassteansassnenusaneesssaneenunanennnsseennaaaennnny
Ss
N

English Grammar and Composition 31
Activity 10
Complete the questions using the superlative forms of adjectives in the
bracket and ask them to one of your classmates.
a. What is best (good) place you have ever visited so far?
b. Tell me about YOUP ......... ee seseeeeteseeeneeeeee (favourite) movie.
c. What is Your ..........csesesseseseeeeeeeee (exciting) experience in school?
d. WhO IS ......ccseeseeseeeseseeseeeeeeeeees (FUNNY) Student in your class?
@.  Whai tt is uu... csseeeeeeeeeseeees (HOrible) experience in your life?
f. What subject did you do ...............sseseseeeeee (Dad) in the last exam?
g. Who among your friends is the ..........ssscccseeeseeeeeeeees (COld) with you?
h. Who according to you is the ..........:cssesesseeeeeeee (APpy) student in this
class?
i. Why do you consider your SChOOI .........scsseeesseeeeeseeeeeeee (ZOOM) in this
town?
Activity 11 Catherin Masuda is talking about her job. Complete what she
says, using the words in brackets in the correct comparative or superlative
forms and patterns.
This year my brother has changed his job. He says his new job is better than
(good) the previous one. He is now working in the (big) and
(successful) school in this area. His students are very happy
with him. My brother is a maths teacher. Students say that he is
the. CCsC(frienlly) and cooperative teacher in the school. As a
result, their performance is (bright) in maths nowadays. My
brother is also very happy as he getting (high) salary.
[ey
Ss

32 English Grammar and Composition

To be honest, my brother is my icon. He always does the

(good) for his students. He is the (high) professional person

| have ever seen. I’m (fortunate) than many of my friends

to have such a brother. | must say - I’m happy to see my

(happy) brother.

Activity 12 Say or write five sentences comparing two members in your
family. Use comparative adjective + than to tell or write about
them.

Activity 13 Say or write down another five sentences comparing you with
someone else using as...as.

Activity 14 Say or write five sentences about places or something else using

the superlatives.
5,
=

Verbs and 4/1: Present Tense

Tenses
You have already learned about verbs and tenses in your earlier classes. This
unit focuses on some of the verb forms, especially tenses and modals that
often cause confusion and difficulties for our students learning English.

| j 7 2 ?

The simple present
A_ Read the following text and then underline all the verbs in the simple
present tense.
Mr. Selim Ahmed and his wife Laila Banu live in a small independent house in
the suburb of Khulna town. They are in their mid-forties. Mr. Ahmed is a writer.
Unlike his neighbours and friends, Mr. Ahmed mostly stays and works at home.
That is not to say that he works less and enjoys more free time than anybody
else. He tries to follow a strict schedule and usually works for ten to twelve
hours a day. Every day with the break of the dawn he sits down at his desk and
starts writing on his computer. In the afternoons, he often helps his wife in her
garden. Sometimes he goes for long walks in the countryside. But he always
comes back before dusk.
Forma-5, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

34 English Grammar and Composition
Grammar point
Form: The simple present is formed by a main verb without an auxiliary:
| teach English at a college. She works in a bank.
Making a question in the simple present:
When we make a question in the simple present with the verb be, we put the
subject after the verb: He is a writer. ls he a writer?
With other verbs, we add the auxiliary_do/does before the subject and the
main verb (in the infinitive): He teaches English. Does he teach English?
They live in Khuina. Do they live in Khulna?
If we are using an auxiliary or modal (is, will, have, can, etc.) in a question, we
put the subject after the auxiliary or modal:
He is reading. Is he reading?
He can swim well. Can he swim well?
Making a negative: To make the negative of be, we can add not or n’t to the
mainverb: |ama teacher. | am not a teacher.
He is an artist. He is not/isn’t an artist.
They are friends. They are not/aren’t friends.
To make negatives of other verbs, we use do not/does not plus infinitive:
| play football. ! do not play football.
He works in a bank. He does not work in a bank.
sO
S

English Grammar and Composition 35
Use
We use simple present for:
-facts and descriptions:
Milk is white. 1am a teacher. She likes romantic movies.
-situations we see as long- term or permanent:
Tanim lives in Dhaka. He_works in a business firm.
-habits and repeated actions:
She takes the bus to work. She usually visits her parents on Fridays.
-schedules and time-tables:
The train leaves at 7 a.m. tomorrow. The exams start next week.
-statements about the future after ‘when’ and ‘if’:
When/If | see her tomorrow, I'll tell her everything.
Note: When we use the simple present to talk about something which happens
frequently or regularly, we often use a frequency adverb such as often, always,
usually, once a week, etc. , e.g.
He_always reads the newspaper in the morning.
She often cooks meals for her room-mate.
Activity 1 Read the text in Presentation (A) again and find sentences with
verbs in simple present that talk about:
facts and description
situations not expected to change
repeated or frequent events
<
&

36 English Grammar and Composition

Activity 2 Write questions for the following answers.

Mr. Ahmed is a writer.

He usually gets up early in the morning.

No, he mostly works at home.

Mrs. Ahmed grows vegetables in her garden.

They are in their mid-forties.

Activity 3 The words in the following sentences are jumbled up. Arrange

the words in proper order to make meaningful sentences.

often to library the he goes

romantic she novels reads usually

football once a week play we

Activity 4 In the left- hand column below, there are eight sentences in the

simple present. In the right-hand column, there are eight contexts. In the

blanks, write the letter of the statement that goes with each sentence.

__ 1. He goes jogging in the morning every day. a. present situation

___ 2. Oil floats on water. b. habits

__ 3. The train to Sylhet leaves at 11 a.m. c. routine actions co
S
XQ

English Grammar and Composition 37
__ 4. She collects coins. d. general truths
__5.... and ... yes Mushfequr makes a boundary! e. statements about the
future after when/if
__ 6. They work in a garments factory. f. schedule/timetables
__ 7. 1Vll explain it to her when she comes back. g. newspaper headlines
on recent events
__ 8. The President meets the EU delegates. h. commentaries on
sports or current events.
4/2: The Present
Continuous
A Read the text below and underline the verbs in present continuous.
This afternoon, Mr. and Mrs. Ahmed
are working in the garden. The #2)
weather is lovely. Mrs. Ahmed is © ty SS
sitting on a tree stump while Mr. ér\ | \
Ahmed is cleaning the weeds from ERX Z j | \
the tomato beds nearby. Mrs. bi =D fy i |
Ahmed looks happy. Mr. Ahmed is ad %, i rs L K_\ Z
spending a lot of time with her > %% Gases al) FT, ~
helping in the garden these days. <#& / TROP YS A Fry WJ
| Met Coe eed
They are talking about their PT Rat Die LS
daughters Maya and Sneha who are —
coming home for a week’s vacation from Dhaka tomorrow. The train arrives at
8 in the morning. Mrs. Ahmed is telling her husband not to tell the girls
anything about her garden. She wonders how surprised and happy they will be
S when they see her gorgeous tomatoes and the lettuce!

38 English Grammar and Composition
Grammar Point
Form The present continuous is formed by the auxiliary verb be (am, is,
or are) plus the -ing form of the main verb:
Itis raining. Rina and Karim are listening to music.
Making questions and negatives in the present simple:
To make a question, we usually put the auxiliary verb be before
the subject: He is studying. Is he studying?
The boys are swimming. Are the boys swimming?
Note: But if what, who, how many, etc. is the subject, then we put the subject
before the auxiliary:
Who is coming for dinner tonight? What is bothering you?
To make a negative in the present continuous, we can add not or n’t to the be
verb:
1am not/I’m not doing anything. We/you/they are not/aren’t working.
=
S
N

English Grammar and Composition 39

Use

We use the present continuous to talk about

- things which are happening now:

I’m having lunch right now. Laila is talking on the phone.
- things which are happening during this period of time, but not

necessarily at the moment:

She is working very hard these days. She is attending a training

programme.

- repeated events:

My two sons are always fighting. She is always losing things.

- things that people plan to do in the future:

Rina is going to the museum tomorrow.
We are leaving for London next week.

Activity 1 Read the passage in Presentation-A again and discuss in pairs in
what sense each of the verbs in the present continuous has
been used.

ino}
Ss
XQ

40 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 2 Fill in the blanks in the following sentences with the appropriate
form (simple present or the present continuous) of the verbs in
the brackets:
a. | usually (enjoy) Chinese food, but | (not/enjoy)
this meal.
b. Can you drive?
No, but | (learn) now. A friend (teach) me.
c. On weekends Karim usually (take) his children to the
amusement park, but today he (take) them to the zoo.
d. Why that man (stand) in the middle of the road?
He (try) to get across. He (wait) for a gap in the
traffic.
Why he (not use) the subway?
Lots of people (not bother) to use the subway. They
prefer to risk their lives crossing here.
e. You (go) out tonight?
No, | (stay) home. A friend (come) to watch TV.
=
BS

English Grammar and Composition 41
4/3: Verbs not used
in the continuous

A Read the following conversation. Notice the verbs in bold. These are all

in the simple present form, although they tell us about something that is

happening now.
' -
DD, ms
A oe © a r- os

: Do you smell anything? I’m sure something is burning.

: 1 can hear people screaming! | can hear cracking sounds too!

: Look! Do you see smoke coming out of that building?

: Oh no! | think that building is on fire! Why doesn’t anyone call the Fire

Brigade?
: | think someone has. | can hear the bells!
Forma-6, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

42 English Grammar and Composition
Grammar point
We use verbs which describe an action or situation in the present continuous
to talk about something happening now:
lam listening to music. | Amir is playing in the garden. Mom is cooking
dinner.
Verbs not used in the continuous:
We don’t use the present continuous with verbs which we use to describe
people or things:
Amina is at school. (NOT Amina is being at school.)
| like this painting. (NOT I’m liking this painting.)
But I don’t understand it. (NOT But! am not understanding it.)
Do you love him? (NOT Are you loving him?)
Verbs which are not usually used in the continuous form fall under the
categories of sense verbs, state verbs, emotion verbs, possession verbs and
other.
B Look at the chart below showing different categories of verbs that do
not usually take the continuous form.
emotion ossession
sense verbs | state of mind R other
verbs verbs
a iC CC
et [ese [pm en
co
S

English Grammar and Composition 43
a
a
Note that ‘can’ is often used with sense words such as hear, see, feel, smell and
taste.
C Exceptions
However, some of the above verbs can be used in the continuous form. For
example, be, have, think and appear. We can use the continuous form of these
verbs only when they mean action.
be —_ Karim is an intelligent boy. (state: description)
But | don’t understand why he’s being so irrational about this whole
issue. (acting or behaving in a certain way)
have They have a beautiful house. (state: possession)
She is having breakfast. (action: eating)
think / think Naila is hard-working. (opinion: state of mind)
! am thinking about what to do next. (action: planning)
appear He appears to be quite disturbed. (state: description)
She is appearing at the theatre this evening. (action: taking part)
look and feel: can be used in either the simple or the continuous to talk about
something happening now:
| feel tired/I am feeling tired.
She looks gorgeous/She is looking gorgeous.
ioe}
=

44 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 1 Read the passage and choose the right form of verb.
It is/being guava season. Mariam plucks/is plucking guavas in her orchard. The
guavas are looking/look fresh and juicy. They are smelling/smell sweet and
delicious. Mariam is being/is very happy. She goes/is going to make jelly with
it. But she is needing/ needs to buy sugar and some other things. She is
hating/hates going to the market. She is thinking/thinks who to send to the
market. Suddenly she is remembering/remembers that her sister-in-law
loves/is loving to go shopping. Maybe she will ask her to buy the things.
Activity 2 Read the following text and fill in the blanks with the right form
(simple present or present continuous) of verbs in the brackets.
Jack (love) Nina. But Nina says that she (like) Jack, but (not
love) him. However, Jack (not believe) her. He (think) Nina
(lie). She only (want) to test him. He (not understand)
how can Nina not love him when he (love) her so much.
2
8

English Grammar and Composition 45
4/4: The Present
Perfect Simple
A Read the mini-dialogues below. Notice the verbs in bold. They are all in
the present perfect simple.
a : [have made a terrible mistake!
: That’s not surprising. You are always making mistakes.
What have you done?
’ve forgotten to pay my exam fees. Yesterday was the last date.
b : Have you ever seen a peacock?
: Yes, | have. In fact I’ve seen quite a few of them.
: Oh really! Where did you see them?
: [saw them in Rajasthan while | was in India last year.
c : Have you ever been to Nepal?
: No, | haven’t. Have you?
: Yes, | have. | went there with my parents a few years back.
Grammar point
Form
We make the present perfect simple by using have/has with the past
participle of the main verb:
Sagar has posted the letter.
We have bought some chocolate.
He has had a bad day today.
S To make a question, we use the auxiliary verb have/has, then the_subject,

46 English Grammar and Composition
followed by the past participle of the main verb:
Has she taken her medicine?
Have you talked to Shyamal ?
We make the negative by adding not/n’t after the auxiliary have/has:
I’ve bought the book, but haven’t read it yet.
He hasn’t watched TV today.
Use
We use the present perfect to talk about
- our experience, or an event which happened at some time in our lives:
ve been to New York.
Have you ever played tennis?
- Something that happened very recently:
Have you heard the news? Kiran has got a first class!
The plane has just landed.
- Recent events or actions, the results of which are still relevant:
She isn’t here. She has already left.
Reza has bought a flat in Uttara. (He owns it now)
Note that has/have gone and has/have been have different meanings:
She has gone home. (= She is at home now.)
I’ve been to Nepal. (= I’ve visited Nepal. | am not there now.)
S

English Grammar and Composition 47
Activity 1 Read the following dialogues and put the right form (simple
present or present _ perfect) of verbs (in the brackets) in the blanks.
a :Look!|___— (buy) the latest novel of Selina Hossain for you,
Ihope you___ (not have) a copy already.
:No, |haven’t. Thanksalot. = you___—_—(read) it?
b :_you___ (hear) about Jonathan?

:No,|__ (not see) him recently. What (happen)?

:He__ (get) a job in Australia.

:__sehisfamily_s (know)?___—sihe ___ (told) his wife?

c : Darling, |___—_— (get) something important to tell you.

:_you______ (hear) anything from Australia?

:Yes,they__—_—s (offer) me the job.

:What___syou___ (want) to do? What about your job
here?

:I1__s (decide) to go.!___——_—s (send) my resignation letter this
morning, and___ (put up) an ad in today’s newspaper to sell
the car too.

S

48 English Grammar and Composition
4/5: The Present
Perfect Continuous
A Read the following conversations. Can you Identify the verbs In the
present perfect continuous?
EF) : Hello, Shahan! What have
you been doing? You look so ~
tired and irritated. F ‘ We
: Oh | have been trying to fix \ Ee \
my cycle for the last three [551 ig
hours. < / Ae
: Have you fixed it? > —
as
: No, | couldn’t. All my efforts a
have been useless.
b : Sorry, I’m late. Have you been waiting for long?
: That’s ok. I’ve been watching the news while | waited.
c : Hello, Shila. This Is Mark here. Is Nina there?
We’ve been waiting for her at the library since 3 o’clock.
: Sorry, Mark. Nina Is not here. She has just left.
: Do you know where she has gone? | don’t really
understand ... she has been acting strangely these days.
Grammar point
Form The present perfect continuous is formed by
has/have + been + verb-Ing:
| have been typing for three hours.
He has been practising for the match every day. 8

English Grammar and Composition 49
They have been waiting for her since 3 o’clock.
We usually use the contracted form (I’ve, he’s), especially when
we speak.
For questions and negatives we use the following forms
respectively:
Has Tito been studying all morning? Have you been watching
Tv?
You haven’t been listening. The buses haven’t been
running on _ time today.
Use
We use the present perfect continuous to talk about a situation or an activity
which started in the past and is on-going or not completed. We often use a time
phrase to say how long by using for or since:
Tina has been cooking since morning.
Shamim has been talking to his lawyer for over an hour.
- We also use the present perfect continuous for an activity that began in
the past and has very recently finished:
I’ve been cleaning the kitchen. (I’m still sweating, and | still have the
gloves on.)
The two boys have been fighting again. (The room is a terrible mess.)
- Wealso use it for repeated events up to now:
ve been playing the guitar since | was seven.
Dr. Sayeed has been treating my father for years.
Forma-7, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

50 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 1 Read the descriptions and write a sentence for each one about
what has happened or have been happening.

a Selim is sitting at his study table. He is writing an essay on The
Pleasure of Reading. He started writing two hours ago. Selim

two hours.

b It is 10 in the morning. Laila is in the garden digging the soil and

preparing the beds to plant her winter vegetables. She started
working at 8 a.m. Laila 8 a.m.

Cc Rana is a swimming instructor. He is in the pool now training a ten
year old boy. He still has twenty minutes before he finishes
training the boy. He trains him for thirty minutes. Rana

the boy :

d Andrew and his wife Sara came to Bangladesh ten years ago. They
still live in Dhaka.They in Dhaka ten years.

Activity 2 Read the following conversation and fill in the blanks with the
right form (present perfect/ present perfect continuous) of
verbs in brackets.

: Hello, Jack! you (have) a good nap?

: No, | haven’t.

: Why? What (happen)?

: For one thing, Nina (play) the radio too loud.

: Oh dear! You should have told her to turn down the volume.

: Then the children next door (make) a terrible noise
since after lunch. They (scream, shout and fight) for the
last one and a half hours.

: Come on, dear, relax. I’m going to make you a cup of tea.

co
Sy
N

English Grammar and Composition 51
: How can | relax? | (get) a terrible headache.
: A cup of tea will make you feel better. And | think the children
finally (stop) shouting and screaming too.
Activity 3 Discuss in groups and try to explain the difference in meaning of
the following sentence pairs.
Who has been stealing my marbles? Who has stolen my marbles?
It’s has been raining for an hour. Look! It’s been raining.
The manager has spoken to Kalam. The manager has_ been
speaking to Kalam for an hour.
4/6: The Simple
Past
A Read the following text. Underline the verbs in it and notice the time
they refer to.
Phil Johnson’s father owned a laundry, so he gave his son a job hoping the boy
would work into the business. But Phil hated the laundry, so he dawdled, loafed
and did what he had to do only. Some days he was absent. His father was so
hurt to think he had a shiftless, ambitionless son that he was actually ashamed
before his employees.
One day Phil Johnson told his father he wanted to be a mechanic — work in a
machine shop. The old man was shocked. But Phil had his way. He did much
harder work than he had to do in the laundry. He worked longer hours, and he
whistled at his job! He took up engineering, learned about engines — and when
Philip Johnson died, in 1944, he was president of the Boeing Aircraft Company.
ioe}
=

52 English Grammar and Composition
Grammar point
Form
The simple past is the past tense form that uses the main verb without an
auxiliary. For most verbs in English, the simple past tense is formed with the
ending —ed to the infinitive of the verb:
look - looked talk — talked
But some verbs are different and they don’t end with —ed in their past form.
These are called irregular verbs:
go-went make-—made take — took
The verb be has a different past simple form:
be - was/were
To make a question with be in the past simple, we usually put the verb before
the subject: i
Was he a clerk in the bank?
Were Taniya and Reza class mates?
Where were you yesterday?
To make questions with other verbs in the simple past, we usually use did +
subject + infinitive:
Did you buy that book?
When did he visit England?
Why did he go there?
To make a negative, we add not/n’t to was/were and did:
1 No, he wasn’t a clerk in the bank. ; ;
eo

English Grammar and Composition 53
They weren’t class mates.
He did not visit England.
We didn’t see you in the theatre last evening.
Why didn’t you come?

Use

We use the past simple to talk about an action or happening at a definite time

in the past:

! mailed the letter yesterday.
| met her two years ago.

We often use the simple past with expressions such as yesterday, last week, in

1952, when | was in school, three days ago, etc.

Activity 1 Underline the irregular verbs in the Presentation above (A), and
then write down the present form of the verbs.

Activity 2 Use the right form of verbs given below to complete the
following passage from the life story of Helen Keller. One is
done for you:

Ca aC

When she was one and a half years old, Helen became ill. This sickness left her

blind and deaf. Since she could hear no sounds, she did not learn to talk.

Helen in a dark and silent world for more than five years. In this world

without sound, she only what she could touch and smell and taste.

oS
S

54 English Grammar and Composition
She hunger and cold, but she to herself, “I am hungry.” She
could not say, “Iam cold”.
Helen had not discovered the secret of language. She could not communicate
with other human beings. But because she was human, she to
communicate. Helen finally the secret of language. Years later, she
a book about her life.
When Helen was seven years old, Anne Sullivan, a teacher to live in
her house. Miss Sullivan a way to lead Helen out of her sightless,
soundless world. This woman Helen to discover the secret of language.
Activity 3. Write questions for the following answers:
| studied law.
| graduated in 2010.
At the university of New Castle.
Well, | met Paul at the university. We were both in the same class. No, he
didn’t finish his studies.
x
S
N

English Grammar and Composition 55
4/7: Present Perfect
Versus Past Simple
A Read the following dialogues and notice the verb forms in bold.
a. : Have you been to Sri Lanka?
: Yes, | have.
: When did you go?
: | went there last year, during the summer vacation.
b. : Have you read Zia Hasan’s new novel?
: No, | haven’t. Have you?
: Oh, yes. It’s great!
: When did you read it?
: Last week. | borrowed it from Riaz.
c : Have you talked to Nina recently?
: Yes, | have. She called me yesterday. In fact, we talked for a
long time.
Use
We use the present perfect to talk about our experiences, about something we
have
done in our life up to now, often used with ever or never. Note that the focus is
on
what, not when.
When we ask when or the focus is on a specific time which is past, we use the
past tense of the verb.
S

56 English Grammar and Composition

Activity1 In each palr of sentences below, one sentence uses the simple
past tense and one sentence uses the present perfect. Work In
groups and try to explain the diffarenca in meaning betwean
the two sentences In each pair.

We have known about the problem forages. He knew about the problem for

ages.

We have been waiting for you since 3 o'clock. | waited for you from 3 o'clock.

Have you seen the movie? Did you see the movie?

Have you ever been to Cax’s Bazar? Did you go to Cox's Bazar?

4/8: The past
Continuous
A Read the passage carefully and notice that there ara verbs in both the
simple past and the past continuous forms.

It was 4 In the aftemoon. Hamid was ;

studying at the Ilbrary when hls cell ow eh

phone rang. It was his younger sister, oF po bas

Runa. She said that she was standing oo aa |

in front of the shopping mall 2 { J ial

opposite Hamlid’s office and asked é r| 4| =. aS

him to meet her there as soon as fl ; | wa

possible. Hamid hurried out of the a id I ti

library. As he went across the street, on)

he noticed that Runa was not alone. == “= on

She was holding a three to four year 1 cco

old girl by hand. The child was crying WwW i\ \

and Runa was trying frantically to .

pacify her. He Just couldn’t Imagine what was going on. Some passers-by were

looking at them suspiciously. When he reached her, she started to explain, but

before she could finish — the child suddenly left her hand, and was running

towards a woman who was coming out of the mall crying and calling a girl's

name hysterically. 8

English Grammar and Composition 57
Grammar point
Form
We make the past continuous by using the past of the auxiliary verb be (was,
were) and the —ing form of the main verb:
She was talking. They were arguing.
We make questions by putting the auxiliary verb (was, were) before the
subject:
Was she crying? Why were they arguing?
And we make negatives, by adding not/n’t to was/were:
She wasn’t shopping. They weren’t working.
Use
We use the past continuous to talk about things which were in progress at, or
during, a particular time in the past:
At 4 o’clock | was studying at the library.
At that time yesterday, my friends were playing football in school.
Activity 1 Write down the questions for the following answers.
| was waiting for the bus at about 4.30 today.
Yes, while | was waiting, | was talking on the phone.
| was talking with a friend.
Before that? | don’t remember what | was doing before that.
Forma-8, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

58 English Grammar and Composition
Yes, | was studying at the library. Why are you asking me these questions?
Of course I’m sure. | was not having tea with Salma after lunch at the canteen.
Well, | last saw her yesterday when she was coming out of her class.
Activity 2 Read the following passage. Some of the verb forms and/or the
spellings are not correct. Identify them and write the correct forms.
Yesterday was my birthday. | thought that no one will remember it. But when |
waked up in the morning, | found a brand new copy of Jule Vernes’ Journey to
the Centre of the Earth on the table next to my bed. It has a note stuck on it ‘For
my dearest son, with love. Abbu.’ | springed out of the bed with excitement. As
| was get dressed, | heared mother calling everyone for breakfast. | got dressed
quickly and went to the dining room. My mother comes towards me and says,
“Happy Birthday, darling. Here! | buyed this alarm clock for you....’. But before
she could finish what she is saying, my little sister cryed out, “Bhaiya, now you
won't have any excuse for being late at the breakfast table.”
co
Sy
N

English Grammar and Composition 59
4/9: Used to and
the Past Tense
A Read the following passage and notice the verbs in bold.
~ wit ag bi Loy Pa Ore ee
TIN AS COE)”
| met Hasan yesterday almost after ten years. He was my closest friend in
school. He was the only child of his parents. His father used to worry a lot
about who his friends were or where he was going. But our two families were
on friendly terms and Hasan and | used to spend a lot of time together. We
were very happy to see each other after such a long time and started talking
about all the things we used to do as children: how we used to go cycling in the
countryside after school, or go swimming in the pond by the Town Hall on
weekends. But of course Ali bhai would always be there with us on those
occasions. Ali bhai used to work in Hasan’s father’s garments factory.
Grammar point
Form
Used to + infinitive to talk about past habits and long-term situations that do
not exist now:
In winter, we used to sit around a wood stove in the veranda and listen to
se | grandma’s stories. (We don’t do it anymore.)
iJ
Nn

60 English Grammar and Composition
Use
We use used to in the same way as the past simple, but only to talk about —
what we did often or regularly:
Ten years ago | used to work ona type writer. (Il use a computer now.)
There used to be a park in this place. But it’s not there now.
Activity 1
Make sentences with the following prompts using ‘used to’.
Before Now
play cricket and tennis tennis only
read books a lot no time/ only newspaper
scared of ghost stories write horror stories
go to movies watch TV at home
(Example: Karim used to go to movies regularly, but now he watches TV at
home.)
Activity 2 Write down about three to five things you used to do as a child
that you don’t do now.
You may follow the model of the example given above.
S

English Grammar and Composition 61
Activity 3
Read the following text:
Notice that the underlined verbs are all in the past tense. Some of these can be
changed to ‘used to + base form of verb’. Change them and write the ‘used to’
form in the gaps. For the verbs you cannot change, write down no change. Two
are done for you.
The school |_went (1) to when | was (2) at the primary level had a tin-roofed
building. It had (3) a big playground in front. During the tiffin break, we_played
(4) ‘kabadi’, We made (5) so much noise that the headmaster would often
come out of his office and warn us. Most of the time, we wouldn’t hear the bell
go and got (6)_ scolded by our teacher. During the rainy season, we enjoyed (7)
playing football the most. We often got (8) drenched in the rain.
Last year when | went (9) to visit my school after many years, | found (10) that
instead of the tin-roofed building there stood a multi-storied building. But | was
(11) happy to see that the old playground was (12) still where it_was (13). The
school authority didn’t construct any new building there. Maybe they still
cared for their students as they did (14) before.

1. 8.

2. 9. no change

3. 10.

4, 11,

5. used to make 12.

6. 13.

7. 14.

oS
S

62 English Grammar and Composition

4/10: The Past Perfect and The Past
Perfect Continuous

A Read the following text.

Habib made the following entries in his diary last Monday. Read them.

11am Nargis left Dhaka for Sylhet by car.

11.15 | reached her house fifteen minutes late.

1.30 | called her on cell phone. She was near Ashuganj.

6.00 She reached Sylhet and called me.

7.30 | spoke to her again. She was cooking dinner.

Now see how Habib reported the whole thing to Salma a few days later.

When | reached Nargis’ house at 11.15, she had already /eft home for Sylhet.

She had waited for me till 11.00 and then left with her father in their family

car. When | talked to her at 1.30 pm, she hadn’t yet reached Ashuganj, but was

close to it. At 6.00 she called to say that she had just reached Sylhet.

When | called her again at 7.30, she had already unpacked and was cooking

dinner. | told her how miserable | was feeling because | hadn’t said ‘good bye’

to her before she left. She laughed softly and said she understood.

B Following is a typical evening at work for Dr. Akram, a general

physician. Read the sentences carefully:

Like any other day, yesterday also Dr. Akram saw patients from 5 p.m. to 10.30

p.m. As usual, he started with the emergency cases first. From 5 p.m. to 6.30

p.m. he saw four patients. That is, by 6.30 he had seen four patients. From

6.30 to 9 p.m. he saw eight patients. From 9 p.m. to 10.30 p.m.hesawanother ,,

six patients. That means by 10.30 the doctor had seen eighteen patients. S

English Grammar and Composition 63
He had been seeing patients since 5 o’clock. In other words, by the time it was
10.30, Dr. Akram had been seeing patients for five and a half hours.

How many patients had Dr. Akram seen by 9 p.m.? He had seen twelve

patients.

Use
We use the past perfect to describe an action completed before a certain
moment in the past:

When | reached her house at 11.15, she had already left for Sylhet. She
had left at 11.00.

If two actions happened in the past, the past perfect is often used to show
which action happened earlier than the other:

When | called her at 7.30, she had already unpacked.

We use the past perfect continuous for an action that began before a certain
point in the past and continued up to that time:

It was 9 p.m. Dr. Akram was seeing a patient. He had started seeing
patients at 5 p.m. He had been seeing patients for four hours. He had
been seeing patients since 5.00.

Activity 1 Read the following paragraph and fill in the blanks with the
appropriate form (simple past or past perfect) of verbs in the
brackets:

Dr. Akram asked Fahim when the rash (start). Fahim said that he

(notice) it a week ago. He also said that he (go) to another
doctor before, but since the rashes got worse, he had come to Dr. Akram. Dr.

ino}
S Akram (want) to see what medicines the other doctor (prescribe).

64 English Grammar and Composition

Fahim (look) for the prescription in his bag, but it was not there. He

(realize) that he (forget) to bring it. The doctor told Fahim to lie

down on the couch, and after he (examine) him thoroughly, he
(give) him some new tests to do.

Activity 2 Now read the text below and fill in the blanks with the
appropriate form (simple past, past perfect, or past perfect
continuous) of the verbs given in the brackets:

When we reached the stadium, it was already 4 p.m. We found that a large

crowd (wait) there for the match to start. People (get) into the

stadium since 12 noon as everybody wanted a good place to sit.

While waiting, the crowd (shout) to each other from their seats. A noisy

atmosphere (prevail) then, but as soon as the game started, a sudden

hush (fall) all over the stadium. People who (shout) all this time
(become) quiet. However when the first goal was scored, all the noise
that (prevail) earlier came back more powerfully than ever.

It was memorable experience for my friend and |. The team that we

(support) all along (win) the match.

5,
=

English Grammar and Composition 65
4/11: Expressing
future time
As some modern English grammar books Roe Fs :
have pointed out, it is important to be S
aware that, strictly speaking, English Gin ~~ Ds
does not have a future tense. Rather (e “r ¥ ws
a) ne Wa
the language has a number of verb A -« i)
forms that can be used to express Hf _* , HS
future time, predictions, intentions, ed Me
promises, etc. fi | be AY  ]
A Will and shall
Read the following conversations and notice the use of will, shall and won’t
to refer to the future time:
a. : How old are you, sir?
: ’Il be 56 on the second of next month. Ill retire next year.
: Well, what will you do after retirement? Have you thought of
something?
: No, not really. Maybe | will travel for a while. I’ve always
wanted to do that.
b. : Oh dear! I’ve forgotten to bring my medicine.
: Don’t worry. I’Il go and buy it for you. There’s a pharmacy
down the street.
Forma-9, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

66 English Grammar and Composition
Cc. : Happy Birthday, Rehana. Here’s a small gift for you. | hope you
will like it.
: Oh, thanks a lot. I’m sure | will. Well, everyone is here, except
Shihab.
: | don’t think Shihab will come. He doesn’t usually go to any
party.
d. : Hi Mahin. Could you come and help me with my homework
this afternoon?
: I’m sorry, dear. I’ve a class at 5.00. | won’t have time today.
e. : Have you paid the bill, Jim? Shall we go?
: Yes, | have. But where shall we go from here?
: Let’s go to Nina’s place.
: That will be great! 1’ll call her right now and see if she is home.
Grammar point
Form We can use will (or ‘Il) +base form of verb to talk about
the future. Traditionally this is known as the simple
future. We usually use the contracted form in
conversation:
Il finish the work tomorrow. I’m too tired to do it now.
We use will not (won’t) in the negative:
The school won’t admit any new student to
class-9 from next year.
We usually use shall in questions that are suggestions or offers:
Shall we go? Shail | get you something to drink?
25
3
Q

English Grammar and Composition 67
Use We can use will for a future fact:
ll be 56 next month. lll retire next year.
We use will for offering to do something:
Don’t worry. I’ll buy the medicine for you.
Don’t get up. I'll answer the phone.
We sometimes use will to express hopes or opinions:
! hope you'll like it. I don’t think he will come.
We use will for promises:
Don’t worry. I’il keep your papers in a safe place.
! won’t tell anybody about this.
Activity 1 Complete the following sentences using will or won’t.
a :l____ explain the project to you in class tomorrow.
: we bring our books?
b_ : I’m going to New Zeeland for studying.
: Congratulations! I’m sure you meet many people and
make many friends there. You also learn a lot about a
new culture.| only hope you____ forget your old friends.
c : Please don’t tell anybody that I’ve told you about the letter.
:1____. Does Karim know about the letter?
d_ :Do you know when the show start and how long it will
continue?
:Ithinkit_ se start at 7.00 and continue for more
than two hours.
e : Oops! These bags are too heavy.
S :__I carry one?

68 English Grammar and Composition
B Be + going to
Read the conversations below and notice how we can use be going to + base
form of verb to talk about the future:
a : Hi Raihan! What are you going to do next weekend?
: We’re going to visit the Lalbagh Fort. What about you?
: | don’t have any particular plans.
: Why don’t you come with us?
: Oh, thanks Raihan. I'll do that.
b : Why are you taking the umbrella?
: It’s going to rain any time. Look! There are dark clouds in the
sky.
c : Why aren’t you leaving now? You’|I be late for the prize giving
ceremony.
: No, | won’t. I’m going to take a taxi.
Grammar point
Form
be going to + infinitive. We often use the contracted form, ‘m/ ‘s/ ’re going
to, after the subject in a positive sentence, and ‘m/ ‘s/ ‘re not going to or
isn’t/ aren’t going to in a negative sentence:
I'm going to revise the essay later.
She’s going to take driving lessons from tomorrow.
They are going to submit the report soon.
We aren’t going to buy anything in the market. &
She’s not going to wait for the bus. s

English Grammar and Composition 69
Use
We use going to to express a future intention, plan or decision that we
thought about before the moment of speaking:
I’m going to take a taxi.
We are going to visit the Lalbagh Fort.
We use going to for things that we believe or predict about the future, often
because the present situation or past event gives us reason for our
prediction:
That building is going to collapse any time’.
It’s going to rain.
Activity 1 Put will or ‘m/ ‘re/ ‘s going to in the blanks to complete the
sentences.

a : Have you seen Titanic?

: Not yet. But I’ve already bought two tickets. Raihan and
I watch it tonight.
: I’m sure you love it.

b : Why are you working so hard these days?

: Because | buy a computer and | need some
extra money.

c Shaila is 18 years old. She’s studying fine arts. She is
taking a special course in oil painting. She often visits art
galleries and exhibitions in town. She a painter.

=
R

70 English Grammar and Composition
d : Do you know it’s Amal’s birthday today? We
give him a surprise party this evening. Come and join us.
: Oh, I’d love to. I’d like to buy something for him. What
__you______sgive him?
: I’ve bought some books.
i buy some music CDs then.
Activity 2
At the beginning of every year Mary makes some resolutions about things she
is going to do during the year. This year also Mary writes down her New Year’s
resolutions in her diary. Complete the sentences with ‘m going to plus an
appropriate verb form the list of verbs below.
learn play spend study practise
a I’m ___ study for my SSC exam seriously.
b I’m to use the computer.
Cc I'm more time with my grandparents.
d I’m speaking English regularly.
Activity 3
Think of some resolutions that you’d like to make at the beginning of the next
year. Write them down using ‘going to’.
is}
ES

English Grammar and Composition 71
Activity 4
Read the following sets of dialogues. Discuss with a partner and say what is
the difference in meaning between I’m going to post it and Ill post it.
a : What about this parcel?
: I’m going to post it.
b : What about this parcel?
: I'll post it.
C Read the texts below. Underline the verb forms that you think refer to
the future time.
a.
Our fantastic Winter Sale starts on December 28".
Our sale doors open at 10 a.m.
We are reducing All our prices by 20% or More.
We are offering some really fantastic savings:
50% off some women’s shoes
80% off some men’s shoes!
But be quick — our sale ends on January 7".
(Real English Grammar, Hester Lott)
b : What are you doing this evening?
: We’re having some guests for dinner tonight.
: When is your final exam?
% : It’s in November. Let me see- I’ve the timetable right here.
ES

72 English Grammar and Composition
Well, it starts with English on the 10° and finishes with History
on 18".
: What are you going to do after that?
: My cousins are coming from abroad. Maybe we'll go to Cox’s
Bazar.
Use
We use the present simple to talk about schedules and timetables:
The train to Chittagong leaves at 10. 30 p.m.
The ceremony starts at 6.00. Guests take their seats by 5.30.
The TV serial about crimes and investigation ends next week
We use the present continuous to talk about fixed, planned or organized
actions in future:
We’re having some guests for dinner tonight.
My cousins are coming to Bangladesh on holidays in December.
I’m catching the 7.30 flight to Jessore tomorrow.
Activity 1
Put in the right form of verb (simple present or present continuous) in the
blanks.
a : My brotherisapainter. He Ss (be) in Japan now.
: What (do) there?
: He (have) a solo exhibition in Tokyo.
: How long will he stay there?
: Well, the exhibition (end) tomorrow, andhe_ 2
(come) back next week. &

English Grammar and Composition 73

b : Hello, Hasan. You (go) to Selim’s house tonight?

: I’m afraid, not. I’ve a lot of work to do. | (present) a
paper at
tomorrow’s seminar, and | haven’t finished writing it yet.

Cc : Ms. Selina, the English teacher, is telling the class about the
arrangements for next day’s trip to Mainamati, Comilla:

So students, we (meet) at the school playground at 7 a.m.
We (leave) for the station at 7.30 sharp. Don’t be late, or
we’ll leave without you. The train (leave) from platform
no.3 at 9.00.

And the return schedule is like this: we (meet) at the circuit
house at 4.30. and (start) for Dhaka at 5 o’clock. This time
we (not take) the train. We’ve arranged a microbus to bring
us back to Dhaka.

d : Allin my family have taken up sports. My sister Tina (learn)
to swim. She (has) a very good trainer. | (take) karate
lessons. My brother Nathan (be) a jogger. My dad
(play) tennis and my mother (go) to the gym regularly.

Forma-10, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

Verbs: Modals | 5/1: Primary auxiliaries
and modal auxiliaries

In the last unit we discussed verbs and tenses. In this unit we will focus on
modals.
A Read the passage below and the conversation that follows:
Rehana took a secretarial course a few months ago. She can write short-hand
and can type too. But she cannot use a word processor. She realizes that to get
a good secretarial job, she must learn to use a computer. She also has to
improve her English which is not very good. This morning she goes to an
English Language Centre that a friend has recommended. At the administrative
office there she has the following conversation with a member of the official
staff:

Admin staff : Good morning! Can | help you?

Rehana : Morning. Could you please tell me when the next
English course __ starts?

Admin staff: Well, we have different courses like General
Communicative English, Business English, and English for
nurses and so on. Which one would you like to do?

Rehana : The Business English course. Could you tell me when the
next course starts and what the fee is?

Admin staff: Sure. It’s a three-month course and the fee is Taka 5000.
Would you like to take a brochure — you can find details
about all the courses that we offer. You might like to have
a look at them.

Rehana : Thanks a lot.

Notice the words in bold. They are called modal verbs or modal ©

auxiliaries. S

English Grammar and Composition 75
Grammar point
There are two kinds of auxiliary verbs in English:
Primary auxiliaries: am/is/ are/was/were, have/has/had, do/does/did
Modal auxiliaries: can/could, may/might, will/would, shall/should,
must/ought to/need
Modal auxiliaries are different from Primary auxiliaries in the following ways:
Past tense forms: The primary auxiliaries have past tense forms. The modal
auxiliaries do not. For example, must or may do not have a past form. (may
and might can refer to the same time: present or future)
Third person forms: The primary auxiliaries have third person forms (he/she+
is/has/does). Modal auxiliaries do not change. They have no -s form.
Infinitives: The primary auxiliaries are related to an infinitive: to be, to
have, or to do. There is no infinitive form for the modal auxiliaries. (We do
not say to can, or to might.)
Note: Need fits into both categories.
It can be used as a full verb: need, needs, needed, e.g.
We need sugar. He needs rest. They needed some money.
It can also be used as a modal auxiliary verb:
We needn’t take a taxi. We needn’t go to the doctor.
Use
We use modals to express a variety of moods or attitudes towards actions or
events in the past, present or future. Modals can be used to express
possibility, certainty, ability to do something, requests, permission,
obligation, necessity, prohibition, advice, etc.

e| Look at the following sentences:

=

S

N

76 English Grammar and Composition
Can | borrow your English dictionary for two days?
Sorry, l’m using it now, but | can give it to you tomorrow.
Would Ben lend me his dictionary? What do you think?
You could ask him. He might.
Activity 1 Discuss in pairs what functions do can, could, would or might in
the above conversation perform, and what time do they refer
to - past, present or future?
5/2: Can & Could
A Read the following texts. .
y
Sy) 9
_ a e A 4
a | can sing and | can dance. id
But | can’t fly like a bird or swim like a fish.
; : rs m= : n
>
nN

English Grammar and Composition 77

b : Excuse me, can you tell me the time please?

: Sure, it’s half past five.

: Thanks.

Cc The teacher said to her class, “ Students, you must
remember two things. First, you can bring a calculator,
but you cannot bring any mobile phone into the
classroom, and second, you cannot chew gums in my
class.”

d : Hi, Babul. Are you taking part in the next marathon

race?

: I’m afraid not. | could walk for miles without getting tired
before. But now | can’t. | had a knee surgery two years
ago.

e : Can you tell Mr. Rashid that the guests are here?

: Sure. Anything else?

: Thanks, Shahana. And could you please send in some
snacks and tea for the guests?

f : Can | borrow your pen for a while?

: Yes, but please don’t forget to return it.

: Of course not.

g : Could | use your laptop? | need to check my e-mail.

: Go ahead. You could take it to your room, if you want.

: Thanks a lot.

h : I’m getting bored, can’t go anywhere. When is the rain

going to stop?

: Well, you could make use of the time you’re stuck at
home. You could read books, or do some writing, or do

2 crossword puzzles to improve your English.
S
N

78 English Grammar and Composition

Grammar point

Can and could are modal verbs, and are used like auxiliaries before the main

verb.

We make the negative by adding not/n’t to can/could. Note how we write

cannot. There is no break between can and not:
| cannot fly like a bird.

To make questions we say can /could + name/pronoun + main verb:
Can/could you pass me the salt, please? Can you use a
computer?

Use

Can/could for ability, and cannot for inability/prohibition:

We use can to express ability: / can sing and | can dance.

In the sentence But / cannot fly like a bird, cannot expresses lack of ability.

The past tense of can as ability is could: Two years ago | could walk for miles,

but now | cannot.

We use cannot/can’t to express prohibition: You cannot bring mobile phones

into the classroom, and you cannot chew gums in my class.

For permission and requests:

We use can/could to give or ask for permission. Can is less formal than could.

Can | borrow your pen? Oh, sure!
Could | use your laptop, please? You could take it to your room, if you like.
ES
x

English Grammar and Composition 79
We use can/could to ask someone to do something: Can you please tell Mr.
Rashid to come? _ Could you please send some snacks and tea?
For possibility:
We use could to express possibility: You could read books, or do
some writing, or do crossword puzzles.
Activity 1 Read the following conversations. Fill in the blanks with can,
could, or cannot/can’t:
a Doctor : Look at this chart, Padma. you see the
letters and the pictures?
Padma : Yes, | see some pictures and some of the
letters.
Doctor : you name the things you see?
Padma : Well, | can see a bird, a flower, a house and the
letters B, M,Q. .... No, it’s O.
Doctor : That’s good. Now come here. you take off
your glasses, please?
b : you hear me at the back?
: No, we . We don’t think the microphone is
working. you please speak a little louder?
29
Ss
[x1

80 English Grammar and Composition
c : Dad, | go to the New Year eve’s concert?
: You , but you stay out after 11 p.m.
d ‘ you please make less noise? I’m trying to write a
report, and | concentrate if you sing so loudly.
: ’'m sorry, but | help it. | need to practice for the
college function tonight.
i you please go to another room then?
e : Hey friends, where shall we go on holiday this winter?
: We go to Dinajpur to see the Kantajee’s Temple.
: Oh, it will be too cold there in January. | stand
cold.
: Well, if you like mountains, we go to the
Neelgiri mountains in Bandarban.
: Or we go to the Sundarbans. We see
both the jungle and the ocean!
f you play tennis?
: Yes, | . But | play it until | joined the
community club and took lessons in tennis last year.
: you please teach me?
: Sure. We start tomorrow, if you are ready.
ove)
~~
ES

English Grammar and Composition 81
5/3: May and
Might
A Read the following texts.
a : What are you doing this evening?

: We may go to the museum. You can come along with us.

: Oh, I’d love to. Can | ask Shamim if he’d like to join us?

: Sure. He may be in his office now. Why don’t you call him?

b : Lhaven’t seen Rumana for ages.

: You might see her tomorrow evening. | think she’s in town now
and if she knows about the alumni get-together, she might
come there.

Cc : May | try on these shoes?

: Of course, ma’am. But these might be too small for you. These

are size 4. You might need a size 5.

: Let me just try these once... oops! Maybe you’re right. Can you
please show me a size 5?

d : Thank you, sir, for coming to this talk show this evening. May |
ask you a last question?

: Yes, you may, if it’s not too personal.

e : Excuse me. May we see the document?

: No, you can’t. It’s confidential.

Forma-11, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

82 English Grammar and Composition
Grammar point
Form
May and might are modal verbs and are used, like auxiliary verbs, to express
different meanings of the main verb.
In a positive sentence, we use may/might + verb
For negatives, we use may not/might not + verb
Note: May/ might are not usually used in a question form to mean
possibility.
We can use may in a question to express asking for or giving
permission. For example,
May I sit here? Yes, youmay. May! see that book? No, you may not.
However, this sounds very formal in everyday situations now, and
can/could are used more frequently.
We use may/might to refer to the present or future time:
It may rain this evening.
The shoes might be too small for you.
He may be in his office now.
Use We use may or might to say that something is possible but not certain,
now or in future:
He may not be in office now.
You may see him in office tomorrow.
He might offer you the job. ~
ES

English Grammar and Composition 83
Note: May implies stronger possibility than might, i.e. might, like may,
expresses possibility, but in a lesser degree. For example, if we say, ‘We might
go to the museum today’, there is less chance of going there than when we
say, ‘We may go to the museum today’.
Another function of may is to express permission:
May | use your telephone? May | ask you a question?
Those who have finished writing may leave the exam hall.
Activity 1 Write may/might + an appropriate verb in the following gaps.
a __: Are you going out? I think you should take an umbrella.
: Why? It’s not raining, is it?
: No, but there are dark clouds in the sky, and it
anytime.
b_ : Shall we invite Kanak to go to the movie with us?
: Well, | haven’t seen her go to a movie often. But you never can
tell. She to see The Titanic.
c : We missed Asad in last year’s get-together. Hope he’d come to
the party tonight.
: Well, as far as | know, he doesn’t like parties. He not
to the party tonight also.
Activity 2 Write six things that you may or might do during the next
holidays.
ioe}
=

84 English Grammar and Composition
5/4:  Will/Won’t
and Would

We have already discussed the use of Will and Shall to express future facts or

events. These are modal auxiliaries, and go before the main verb, and do not

change.

A_ Read the following passage and notice the use of will, won’t and would
as modal auxiliaries:

a. My family and | will go to attend my cousin’s wedding tomorrow at
Munshiganj. Father has already made all the arrangements. We will first
take a bus to the Sadarghat, and then we will go by a steamer to
Munshiganj. We will stay there overnight and will come back the next
evening. I’m a little sad that | won’t go to school tomorrow and the day
after, but | don’t want to miss all the fun at the wedding either.

b. : Hello, Rupam!

: Hi, Shahed! How are you?
: I’m good. Listen, we’re going on a river cruise tomorrow morning.
Would you like to join us?
: Oh, I’d love to. What time would you leave?
: We will all meet at the school ground at 7.00.
: Okay I'll be there by 7.00. Would you please give me a wake - up call
at 6.15?
: | will. See you tomorrow then.
eo
Ss

English Grammar and Composition 85
rammar point
Will and won’t are used to predict a future event which is seen as certain:
My family and | will go to attend my cousin’s wedding tomorrow.
We will meet at the school ground at 7.00.
Note that in conversations we usually use won’t in place of will not.
Also we don’t generally use will not in negative questions. Instead, we say,
‘Won’t you come to see me off at the airport?’
We use would for invitations, requests, and for polite conversations:
Would you like to join us for the river cruise? _I’d love to.
What would you like to have, tea or coffee?
We usually use the contracted form of would (‘d) after words ending in a vowel
sound:
'd/ we’d/ he’d/she’d, etc.
But we don’t say, ‘lt’d’ (x), instead, we’d say ‘It would’.
Activity 1 Fill in the blanks with will or won’t or would.
a Jamal has less than 75% attendance in class. He be
allowed to sit for the exam. What he do now? | think he
keep it a secret from his parents, and even tell his
sister whom he tells almost everything.
ns}
=~
g

86 English Grammar and Composition
b Mahim has been late to office everyday for the last three days. If
he continues like this he lose his job.
c : Hello, Meera. This is Akash here.
: Hello, Akash bhai.
: Is Sarwar there?
: He’s in the shower. you like to leave a message?
: Yes. you please tell him that we’re waiting for him at the
library?
d : Ah.. .I’m exhausted! you please give me a glass of water?
: Sure. you like to have something to eat?
: No, thanks, not now. ____ you mind opening that window,
please?
: Not at all.
: Thanks, dear.
e : [hope the function starts on time. It’s already ten minutes to
seven now.
: Don’t worry. The chief guest be here any moment. He’s
very particular about time.
oe}
S
N

English Grammar and Composition 87
5/5: Must, Must not/
Musn’t, Need
A Read the following texts:
a : He ate a dozen eggs at a time! He must be crazy!
: You must be joking! | don’t believe you.

b My mark-sheet shows that I’ve failed in English! There must be
some mistake. English has always been my strong subject. It
simply can’t be!

c The teacher says to her students, “You must submit your essays
tomorrow. | won’t accept any after that. And you must not copy
from any book or from anyone else’s writing.

d Hello, everybody! Here’s an announcement for tomorrow’s
workshop. All the delegates must finish registration by 9 o’clock.
The delegates must wear their badges while attending the
sessions. The volunteers mustn’t leave the venue before the
workshop is over at 6 p.m. The Information desk will remain
open from 8 a.m. to 7 p.m. for all kinds of assistance to the
participants, delegates and the guests.

e When you go for an interview you need to make a good
impression as soon as you enter the room. You need to give the
impression of being polite and at the same time of being
confident and pleasant. Here are just a few things you should
remember:

You mustn’t move about in your chair, you must sit still and
20 relax;
s

88 English Grammar and Composition
You needn’t wear new or fashionable clothes, but you must
wear clean and neat clothes;
You need to speak loudly and clearly, but mustn’t interrupt
when they are speaking.
Use
We can use must and can’t to assert something that we infer or conclude to be
the most logical possibility of a situation or an event. For example,
He must be crazy to eat a dozen eggs at a time.
Or, as the examinee is confident that he just cannot fail in English since it is
his strong subject, he uses ‘can’t’ to express the most logical possibility of
the situation:
It simply can’t be.
There must be some mistake in the mark-sheet.
We use must to express obligation and mustn’t to express prohibition or
something that is not allowed
You must submit your essays tomorrow. (obligation
Delegates must finish registration... (obligation)
You must not copy from any book or anyone else’s writing. (prohibition)
Volunteers mustn’t leave before ...... (prohibition)
You must wear clean and neat clothes... (obligation)
You mustn’t move about in your chair.... (not allowed)
You mustn’t interrupt when they are speaking.... (not allowed)
We use need to talk about something that is necessary:
a
3
N

English Grammar and Composition 89
When you go for an interview, you need to make a good impression.

(necessary)
You need to speak loudly and clearly. (necessary)
We use need not or needn’t (without ‘to’) to talk about something that is
not necessary:

You needn’t wear new or fashionable clothes.

You needn’t smile all the time, but you need to look relaxed and

confident.

Activity 1 _ Fill in the blanks in the following sentences with must,
mustn’t, can’t or need/needn’t:

a Sagar wants to go to the computer fair with his friends and tells
his father so. His father says, “Well, you can go, but you be
home by 9 o'clock.”

b All you read about in newspapers now-a-days is crime, violence
and death. Things continue like this. The government

do something to improve the law and order situation.

c The bank manager tells Manzoor, who wants to open an
account, that he sign his name at the bottom of the form.
The manager then gives Manzoor a new cheque book and says
that he lose it.

d Rita wants to go and live in Japan one day. But then she
learn to speak Japanese.

e One of the rules of hotels anywhere is that the guests
sign the register immediately on arrival.

Forma-12, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

90 English Grammar and Composition
f : | think your friend Habib has come. He’s talking to Grandpa in
the balcony.
tit be Habib. | just talked to him on the phone. He’s in
Chittagong now.
g The doctor tells the patient that his heart condition is bad, and
he smoke at all.
h When you go for an interview, you (necessary) listen to
the questions very carefully, but you (not necessary) tell
them your life story.
i You (not necessary) write a very long essay, but you
(necessary) type it, and submit it by
tomorrow.
co
S

English Grammar and Composition 91
5/6: Should &
Ought to
A Read the following texts and notice the meanings the use of
should/ought to gives to the main verbs.
(a Int)
ft : )
Le XY |
1 iin \ { } |
<%
/
f | \ 5
| | { i ANF
v di |
a : You don’t look good these days. Are you okay?
: [don’t know. I’ve had this cough for quite some time, and
| don’t have much appetite either.
: You should/ought to go to a doctor.
b : Atiya doesn’t like living in Boston. She hates the freezing
winter season there.
: Well, she should then move to some warmer place during that
time, like Texas or L.A.
%
S

92 English Grammar and Composition
c : Hey, Kamal, could you suggest a good book to read during the
holidays?
: | just finished reading The Life of Tagore. | liked it very much.
You should/ought to read it.
: Can | borrow it from you?
: Of course, but you should give it back to me after the vacation.
: | will. Thanks a lot, my friend.
d : Friends, I’m hungry and I’m tired. We’ve been walking around
for hours.
: Right. We should find a place to eat now.
e : Have you noticed that Mr. Lee has put on a lot of weight
recently? He ought to do some exercise regularly.
: Yes, but shouldn’t he consult a doctor before that?
f : Do you know when Tom is arriving?
: Well, he shouldn’t be late. The train has left on time, so he
should be here at 4.00 as scheduled.
Grammar point
Should and ought to are modal verbs and go before the main verb. We can use
them for the present:
eo
Ss

English Grammar and Composition 93
We should find a place to eat now.
Or for the future:
He should/ought to go to a doctor.
We make the negative by adding not /n’t :
If you want to lose weight, you shouldn’t eat so much chocolate.
And you ought not to eat junk or oily food.
We don’t usually use ought to in questions. We make questions with
should + subject + verb
e.g. Has Zaman sent the reports? | need them today.
! don’t think he has. Should | send him a mail or should | call
him?
Or, Shouldn’t he consult a doctor before that?
Use
We often use should or ought to when we are giving advice:
You’ve had that cough for quite some time. You should/ought to see a
doctor.
We use should or ought to for expressing an opinion:
It’s a good book. You should/ought to read it. (| think)
We often use should to talk about things we expect to happen in the future:
Tom shouldn’t be late.The train has left the station on time. He should be here
at 4.00 as scheduled.
ns}
Ss

94 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 1 Complete the conversations using should/shouldn’t or ought to.
Jonathan : Hi, Akash. I’m calling to tell you that I’ll be coming to
Bangladesh in late January for two weeks. What clothes
| bring with me? | bring an overcoat?
Akash : Well, you bring some warm clothes, but | don’t
think you need to bring any overcoat or heavy woolen
clothes. A light jacket or sweater do. Compared
to New York, it’s usually not too cold in Dhaka. Rather
you bring enough cotton clothes, it can be quite
warm and humid in February here.
Jonathan : Great! And could you please make a list of all the
interesting places | see and things | do while
in your country?
Akash : Sure, | will.
Jonathan : One more thing . What do you think, | rent a car
while I’m in Dhaka?
Akash : | think that’s a good idea. But you worry, I'll take
care of that.
Jonathan : Thanks a lot, Akash. See you soon.
Akash : Ya, looking forward to seeing you. Bye.
oe}
S
N

English Grammar and Composition 95
Activity2 Shamim and Rekha howe bought a new TY. They're trying to
Install ®t In thelr itving room. Look at the pictures and completa the blanks
with should/shouldn’t:
Wes do anything without reading
2 the Instructions. Let’s see the Instruction
+h manual first, It tell us everything.
j
al |
Okay, I've put In the plugs on the back. Can you tum 35
on the switch, Rekha? Mmnwnm.. the screen il
come on now. tt Ke?
The screen be moving like that. And the pictures
__ be clearer, too.
|
Pm sure the screen look like that. fy é
__ we start from the beginning again? aes; 8 /f J
a (il ( *
nan
1) \ <== | think we experiment with it any
ap further, We ___scall the agency to send
Z i sameone to help.
2 hn

96 English Grammar and Composition
5/7: Review Modals

A Each of the modal auxiliaries has a number of meanings, and can
therefore, be used to express different functions. Look at the list of modals
below and write down an example for each function.

Can

ability :

permission :

request :

prohibition (not allowed to) :

request :

possibility :

past ability :

Must/mustn’t

obligation :

deduction (logical conclusion) :

prohibition ;

May

possibility/probability :

possibility/probability :

(present) :

(future) :

permission (formal, very polite) :

Might

Possibility :

suggestion: (eg What can | do to improve my English?

You might listen to BBC)

Should

advice :

opinion i

possibility :

Needn’t

absence of obligation (not necessary) —: S

Kinds of Verbs 6/1: Verb: linking,
transitive, intransitive
A. Read the following passage and look at the underlined verbs .
Mr. Kamal is a big scholar. He is our English teacher. He has written many
books. All his books are very good. He has a lot of money. He comes to school
in his own car. He himself drives the car. He drives very carefully.
Look at the words/phrases after these verbs. In the first two sentences ‘is’ is
followed by a noun phrase and the noun phrase refers to the subject of the
sentence. So, ‘is’ here is a linking verb. A linking verb is followed by a noun or
adjective which refers to the subject. There is another linking verb in the
passage. Find it out. Some verbs are followed by a noun which is different from
the subject. For example, “has written”. It is a transitive verb.
A transitive verb is followed by an object (a noun that answers who/what). In
the passage, two verbs are followed by an adverbial. They are intransitive
verbs. Intransitive verbs do not have any object i.e. intransitive verbs do not
answer who/what. Try yourself and find out these verbs.
B__ Identify the transitive, intransitive and linking verbs in the following
passage.
Nasima is a student. She is a student of class VII. She attends classes
regularly. Today she has worn a new dress. She looks very smart in this
dress. The teacher praised her in the class.
C_ Look at some more linking verbs in the following sentences:
(i) She got nervous in the class.
(ii) The man has gone mad.
(iii) The food tastes delicious.
Forma-13, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

98 English Grammar and Composition
D__ See the use of some more transitive verbs in the following sentences:

(i) Who has broken the cup?

(ii) He reads a lot of story books.

(iii) | shall take a cup of tea now.

Now use the following verbs as transitive in your own sentences :

kill, prey, sell, draw, learn
E __ Here are some more example of intransitive verbs.

(i) The baby is sleeping.

(ii) Boys are playing in the field.

(iii) He was killed in an accident.

Note: An intransitive verb may be followed by nothing or it may be

followed by any number of adverbials.
Activity 1 Now use the following verbs as intransitive in your own
sentences :

walk work die laugh open

Remember, the same verb may be used as linking, transitive or intransitive.
It depends on how you use it.
For example:

He ran home. (intransitive)

The river runs dry in summer. (linking)

I ran a race. (transitive)
Can you think of any other verb like this? Use it in 3 different ways.

5

English Grammar and Composition 99
6/2: The Infinitive

We have already discussed tenses and modals in the earlier units. Besides

there are other types of verbs that can sometimes cause problems for learners

of English. These are: verbs followed by the infinitive, verbs+ -ing form and,

verbs that can be followed by either an infinitive or by —ing.

The to infinitive

A Read the following texts and notice the underlined verbs in them.

a Karim wanted to tell Bahar the truth. But at the same time he
didn’t want to upset him. He arranged to meet Raju in the
afternoon and decided to ask for his advice.

b If you want to buy fresh vegetables, remember to go to the
farmer’s market early in the morning.

c We were going to spend the weekend in a resort in Bhawal,
Gazipur. On the way, we stopped to buy petrol and then we
stopped again to buy some oranges and apples. Still we
expected to reach the resort in time.

d Shihab loves to ride his bike for going long distances. But he
often forgets to wear his helmet .This morning when he was
taking his bike out, his mother came out and said to him, “Good
to see that you remembered to wear your helmet, dear. Be
careful on the road and remember not to drive too fast.

Grammar point
We use the pattern verb + to infinitive with various common verbs such as,
want, hope, intend, expect, plan, try, manage, arrange, fail, wish, etc.

<

S

NX

100 English Grammar and Composition
e.g. | hope to see you in office tomorrow.

Why? Do you want to discuss anything in particular?

Yes. We're trying to set up a new office in town.

We intend to make it bigger than the present one.

We’ve managed to buy a good plot and expect to finish the legal

formalities soon. We've already arranged to appoint an

internationally reputed architect.

| wish to make it look unique. I’ve failed to make some of my

dreams come true, but this time | plan not to fail.

We also use the to infinitive after some verbs connected with thinking, such as
decide, forget, remember, etc.

e.g. I’ve decided to do some part-time job during the summer
holidays. And although | remembered to discuss it with
my best friend in school, | forgot to tell my parents about
it.

We use the to infinitive after some verbs connected with saying that we will or
will not do something, such as agree, refuse, offer, promise, etc.

e.g. Rahela had agreed to sell her computer at half price to
me, but refused to do so at the last moment. | offered to
give a slightly higher price, and she accepted that. |
promised not to make any more deals with her.

The negative form is not + to infinitive:
e.g. Remember not to drive too fast.
I’ve decided not to accept the offer.
eo
=)

English Grammar and Composition 101
The infinitive without to
B Read the following sentences and notice the use of the infinitive with to
and without to.
My friend and | went to watch an English film on DVD at the British
Council Library yesterday. It was a very funny film and it made us laugh.
We tried hard not to laugh out loud and disturb other people but just
couldn’t stop. It was a story about a family where the parents let the
children do anything they wanted. We were laughing so much that
ultimately the assistant librarian came and made us leave. We’l!
remember the incident for a long time to come.
Grammar point
We use the infinitive without to after modal verbs (will, can, could, may,
might, must, should, etc.)
e.g. Wecouldn’tstop. We'll remember the incident.
We use the infinitive without to after make and let:
make/let + object + infinitive without to
Activity 1 Put the verbs in brackets into the correct form (the infinitive
with/without to).
a : Did you remember (post) the letter?
: Oh no, | didn’t. You forgot (remind) me. |’Il (do)
it now.
b : Don’t forget (take) the old prescriptions with you?
: Why should | (take) them?
iS : Because the doctor might (want) (see) them.
N

102 English Grammar and Composition
c :lcan (tell) you more stories about Nasiruddin Hojja and
you would just (laugh and laugh).
> Lwant (hear) a sad story now, one that will
(make) me cry.
Activity 2 Fill in the blanks with the right infinitive form of verbs given
below the passage.
a Lucy lives in Manila. She is planning to Dhaka to work
with an NGO. She intends here for one year. She wishes
Bangla after she comes to Bangladesh. A Bangladeshi
friend in Manila has given Lucy a pictorial album of Bangladesh
which she loves to her colleagues in office. She tells
them that she hopes as many places in Bangladesh as
she can. The beautiful pictures of the people and the landscape
of the country have made her in love with Bangladesh.
show come visit stay fall learn
ES
ES

English Grammar and Composition 103
6/3: -ing form of
verb: Gerund
A Read the story below.
It was a nice day. Anna and her mother wanted to go out and enjoy the lovely
weather. Anna wanted to go hiking in the woods or, she said, they could go
swimming or fishing in the lake. But finally they went sailing. They were in the
middle of the lake when the wind started to blow. The boat rocked from side
to side because of the high waves. Anna was happy and started singing in a
loud and clear voice. But Anna’s mother didn’t want to get wet and turned the
boat around.
When they reached the shore, Anna immediately jumped out of the boat and
started running around on the beach. She suddenly stopped walking because
she felt something under her feet. She picked up her foot since she wanted to
see what was there. She was surprised to find a beautiful shell. She took the
shell, rubbed off the sand around it and, it started to shimmer in the bright
sunlight.
Grammar point
Look at the words in bold in the story above. Notice that when we want to use
two verbs together, we use either to + infinitive or the —ing form of the main
verb in the sentence.
Some verbs can be followed by either form, but some can only be used with
the —ing form.
Verbs that can be followed only by v+ing form are:
finish I’ve finished writing the letter. Do you want to read it?

29

Ss

[x1

104 English Grammar and Composition
deny The boy denied stealing the rare coins.
risk You shouldn’t risk going there at night.
delay They delayed going to the station and missed the train.
avoid | always avoid eating rich and oily food.
enjoy | enjoy writing stories for children.
suggest Babul suggested going to a Chinese restaurant after the
meeting.
miss | really miss talking and laughing with my sister. She
recently migrated to Australia.
Verbs, like start, like or love can be used with the -ing form as well as with the
to + infinitive without any change in meaning. For example,
| love to read poetry. | love reading poetry.
| like dancing. | like to dance.
He’s started going tothe gym. _He’s started to go to the gym.
Note: It is important to understand that although some verbs can be
used with both the —ing form and the to + infinitive, the choice may lead to a
change of meaning of the sentence, for example:
a Do you remember leaving a message for her?
(You already left a message for her.)
Remember to leave a message for her.
(Now or in the future)
b Farooq forgot paying the electricity bill.
(He forgot that he paid the bill.)
Farooq forgot to pay the bill.
a
(He didn’t pay the bill.) S

English Grammar and Composition 105
Cc Masum stopped buying fruits from the market.
(He used to buy fruits from there before but doesn’t buy them
from there anymore.)
Masum stopped to buy fruits from the market.
(He wanted to buy fruits from the market and so he stopped.)
Activity 1
Write an appropriate form (infinitive or —ing form) of the verbs in brackets.
a If you want to be fit, what do you have to start ?
(do)
b If you want to be fit, what do you have to stop ?
(do)
Cc What do you remember (do) as a child?
Activity 2
(Now write the answers for the above questions using the same form.)
e.g. I’ve to start
Activity 3
Fill in the blanks with the right form of infinitive or —ing form of the verbs in
the brackets.
a : Come, let’s do something.
:lwant____ (watch) TV.
: No, let’s go out instead of Ss (watch) TV.
:Ilove ss (dance). Let’s gos (dance).
Forma-14, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

106 English Grammar and Composition
: Hey, I’ve a good idea. Why don’t we all go
(swim)?
b : Have you ever forgotten (do) something?
: Like what?
: Do you always remember (send) birthday
greetings to your friends?
: Of course | do.
: Did you remember (send) one to a friend last
week?
: Oh my God! I’m so sorry! A belated Happy Birthday to
you, Sujan!
Activity 4
Correct the mistakes in the use of verbs in the following conversations.
a : ’m not used to cook meals every day.
: Why don’t you start to do so from today?
: Well, | don’t really want doing that. I’d rather go out to
eating at a restaurant.
: In that case, | suggest to hire a cook.
b : Let’s go watching The Titanic today.
: I’ve already seen it. | really enjoyed to watch it.
: Oh, | was looking forward to watch it with you.
co
Sy
N

English Grammar and Composition 107
: Lwouldn’t mind to watch it again with you. It’s a very
good movie.
: Or if you want watching something on the DVD, we can
do that.
Activity 5
Do the sentences in each of the following pairs mean the same? If not, how
are the meanings different? Discuss with a partner and explain.
a | stopped eating burgers.
| stopped to eat burgers.
b We love playing football.
We love to play football.
c Do you like travelling?
Would you like to travel?
d We regret to inform you that your application has been refused.
We regret informing you that your application has been refused.
6/4: -ing form of
verb: Participle
A Read the following conversations and notice the positions of -ing
verbs.
1. Sagor : Do you like cricket, my friend?
Lovelu: Oh sure! I’m such a big fan of cricket.
~ Sagor : Who is your favourite batsman?
= Lovelu: Sachin Tendulkar. What a fighting batsman he was!

108 English Grammar and Composition
2. Mitul : Hi, ever complaining girl! What’s up today?

Kanta : No kidding please. I’m not in a good mood now.

Mitul : Okay but why?

Kanta : | was on my way to school. When | was near the post office, a
procession passed me. Suddenly some people splashed some
colour on me. They were rejoicing world cup cricket. Their
team won. | got drenched. The same thing happened with
some school going boys and girls. | know ours is a cricket
playing country and any victory is special. But you cannot
splash colours to school goers or office goers, can you?

Grammar Focus

As indicated above, a participle can be made by adding ing to a verb. However,
it becomes a participle only when adding ing to the verb makes it function as
an adjective.

Fighting batsman complaining girl

school going boys and girls a cricket playing country

What type of batsman? fighting batsman fighting works as an
adjective
What type of girl? a complaining girl complaining works as an
adjective
What type of boys and girl? school going boys and girls school going
works as an adjective
What type of country? a cricket playing country cricket playing
eo
works as an adjective S

English Grammar and Composition 109

Activity 1 Read the following text and fill in the gaps using participle. Pick
the suitable words from the box below. The first one is done for
you.

Uncle Tom had a printing press. It was the first press in the city. He was very

proud of his machines. When he died, his son, Rod, became the owner of the

(a) business. Initially he was doing fine. After few months his

university (b) brother came home. He was a kind of

(c) bird and didn’t have any interest in business. Yet one day he

came to the press and told Rod to replace the old machines with digital ones.

He also expressed his desire to be his (d) partner. Tom agreed.

Later he took him to London to show modern (e) machines with

digital technology. But Rod had limited ideas about them. So he took time to

think. His (f) brother was not happy to see the big brother’s

(g) mind.

rome [oe [mr [sine Yee Toe [ao

Activity 2 Read the following text and fill in the gaps using participles.

It was midnight when | entered the (a) town. A (b)

dog was following me and | found some flying bats over my head. | was scared

as the whole situation reminded me of Drakula. | waved at a (c)

car but it didn’t care at all. After some time | found a (d) man ata

certain distance. | started (e) at him to have direction for my

destination. The more | was walking to him, farther was the distance. Even

after a twenty minute’s walk, | could not minimize the ever (f)

distance. | tried to shout but no sound came out. Suddenly the man turned at

me and started to laugh. | could see his (g) eyes when he became

close to me. | was struggling to control my trembling legs.

S

110 English Grammar and Composition
Grammar point
Gerund vs Participle
Gerund
People remain confused between gerund and participle because of their
similarities. Both are formed when ing is added to a verb. There is another
similarity, and that is the fact that both gerund and participle indicate some
action or state of being. However, there are differences between them that
will be highlighted in this article.
Participle
As indicated above, a participle can be made by adding ing to a verb. However,
it becomes a participle only when adding ing to the verb makes it function as
an adjective.
What is the difference between Gerund and Participle?

e A gerund is a verbal noun (verb made noun by adding ing) that is derived

from a verb but functions as a noun.

* A participle is a verbal that functions as an adjective.

© Both are made by adding ing to verbs.

e Verb and noun combined is a gerund whereas verb and adjective

combined is a participle.
oe}
ES

07 The Adverb 7/1: Adverbs and their
Functions )
A Read the following conversation and notice the underlined words:
Alim : Where are you now?
Hasan : I’m going home after finishing my exam.
Alim : How did you do in the exam?
Hasan : I’ve done very well.
Alim : Can you see me tomorrow?
Hasan : Why?
Alim : I’ve an urgent talk with you. I’m eagerly waiting for you.
Hasan : Okay, I’ll certainly see you.
Do these words tell you anything about the time, place and manner of an
action? Yes, they do and so they are adverbs. An adverb is a part of speech
which usually modifies the meaning of a verb. It generally says where, when
and how an action takes place.
B The main function of an adverb is to modify a verb. But it has some
other subsidiary functions too. Look at the following examples:
This mango is very sweet.
You have done quite well.
Nearly everybody was late.
The grapes were well within my reach.
| can’t go there just because I’m ill.
Fortunately, he survived the accident.
Notice the items after the adverbs in these sentences. You can then see that
adverbs may modify an adjective (sweet), another adverb (well), a pronoun
x (everybody), a preposition (within), a conjunction (because) and a sentence
& (he survived the accident). These are the different functions of an adverb.

112 English Grammar and Composition
c Read the following sentences. Identify the adverbs in them and say
which words they modify.
He is going abroad soon.
| have done very badly in the exam.
They live upstairs.
The girl is fairly tall.
She seldom visits me here.
He was almost dead then.
They rarely talk with each other.
Unfortunately, he failed the test.
He lost almost everything.
He came here simply because he wanted to meet me.
It is absolutely beyond my capacity to help you.
7/2: Kinds of
Adverbs
A Read the following passage and notice the adverbs:
Salam is trying hard to go abroad for higher studies. He saw me today to
discuss the matter with me. He often seeks my advice.
There are four adverbs in this passage and they are of four different kinds.
e The adverb ‘hard’ answers the question “how?”. It is called an adverb of
manner.
e “Abroad” answers the question “where?”. It is called an adverb of
place.
e “Today” answers the question “when?”. It is called an adverb of time. iS
N

English Grammar and Composition 113
e “Often” expresses the frequency of an action. It is called an adverb of
frequency.
e These are the four main types of adverbs.
Now, identify the four kinds of adverbs in the following passage.
Khan is a busy man. He seldom calls me. But yesterday he requested me to go
downtown with him. | could not say no to him. He invited me very cordially.
B There are also some other kinds of adverbs. Read the following
sentences and notice the adverbs in them.
(i) The boy is very smart.
He is too weak to walk.
The girl is fairly tall.
He looked at me quite indifferently.
His statement was absolutely true.
These are called adverbs of degree. They intensify the meaning of an adjective
or adverb. In current English, they are called Intensifiers.
Think of two/three other adverbs of degree and make sentences with them.
(ii) Where are you going?
When do you sleep at night?
How did you do the work?
Why are you laughing?
These are called interrogative adverbs. These adverbs are used for asking
questions about the place, time, manner and cause of an action.
Notice where they are used.
(iii) You will surely/certainly pass the exam.
| did not go there.
‘Do you like cricket?’ ‘Yes, | do.’
‘Will you come here?’ ‘No, | won't.
Forma-15, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

114 English Grammar and Composition
There are adverbs of affirmation and negation in these sentences.
Cc Adverbs may take different positions in a sentence. Look at the

following examples:

The boy is reading loudly.

They were boating downstream.

lam very busy now.
The adverbs of manner, place and time are usually used after the verbs they
modify. Use some other such adverbs in this position.
But an adverb of frequency is usually used between the subject and the verb.
For example:

He always speaks the truth.

It hardly rains here.

They rarely eat together.

He usually comes here in the afternoon.
Adverbs of degree are used before an adjective or adverb. For example:

He is totally mad.

It is raining very hard.
Interrogative adverbs are always used at the beginning of a sentence. For
example:

Where was he born?

Why are you so callous?
Adverbs actually do not have any fixed position in a sentence. They can change
their position to serve different functions.

co
S

English Grammar and Composition 115
7/3: Adverbials
A Read the following questions and think of their answers:
When will you see me?
Where are you going now?
How is it raining?
How frequently does he visit you?
Why are you waiting here?
Each of the first four questions can be answered by using a single word. For
example, you can say:
| shall see you tomorrow.
| am going downstairs.
It is raining hard/heavily.
He scarcely visits me.
These single words are adverbs. You have seen their use in the preceding
lessons. But you can answer any of the above questions by using a group of
words. For example, you can say:
| shall see you in the afternoon.
| am going to school.
It is raining very hard.
He visits me thrice a week.
| am waiting here to receive my friend.
These are all adverbial phrases. An adverbial phrase is a group of words that
modifies a verb in the sentence.
Identify the adverbial phrases in the following conversation:
Mukta: When are you going to Dhaka?
Mukul: I’m going there next week.
Mukta: Why are you going?
% Mukul: I’m going there to attend a seminar.
&

116 English Grammar and Composition
Mukta: How are you going?
Mukul: I’m going by bus.

B Adverbs and Adverbial phrases have a common name. This name is
Adverbial. That means, an adverbial is a single word or a group of words
which modifies a verb. Look at the underlined words/phrases in the
following sentences:

(i) Rashid saw me yesterday.

| asked him to come in the morning.

It was raining then.

| shall go to Dhaka next week.
These words/phrases are called adverbials of time.
(ii) Can you come here?

| went there to invite my friend.

He was born in a big city.

| am living in an apartment.
These words/phrases are called adverbials of place.
(iii) | He speaks loudly.

She was brutally killed.

The problem was solved in an amicable way.

He was wounded very seriously.

These words/phrases are called adverbials of manner.
(iv) It often rains here.
He never tells a lie.
She phones me four times a day.
| go to Dhaka almost every week.
These words/phrases are called adverbials of frequency.
S

English Grammar and Composition 117
(v) | went home to take rest.
He is going abroad for higher studies.
She studies hard to pass the exam.
They jumped into the pond to save the child.
These phrases are called adverbials of purpose.
(vi) | An adverbial may also be a dependent clause in a complex
sentence. For example:
| shall go home after he comes.
The girl had been married off before she was 18.
You can sit wherever you like.
It is raining like the sky is falling.
The flight was delayed because the weather was foggy.
Note: Anything—be it a word, phrase or clause—that modifies a verb is an
adverbial. All adverbs are adverbials but all adverbials are not adverbs.
C Read the following passage and identify the different kinds of
adverbials in it:
One day | was sitting alone upon a bench at a park near my house. Suddenly, a
young girl arrived there. She was beautifully dressed. She sat beside me and
began to talk with me very cordially. We talked for about half an hour and then
we began to walk together. Within a short time we became good friends.
When we parted, we promised never to forget each other. We now phone
each other every day. We visit each other almost regularly.
cD
Ss

The 8/1: Simple preposition
Preposition
A Read the following passage and notice the underlined words:
Being a student of class nine, | am now reading in a high school. | admitted
myself into this school after completing my primary education from a village
school. | was not given any choice. It was my parents who decided on this
school. However, | love my school very much. | have made friends with many
students of my class.
These words are called prepositions. A preposition is a word or group of words
which usually comes before a noun (or anything equivalent to a noun) and
shows its relationship with another word in the sentence. The prepositions in
the above passage are all single words. A single-word preposition is called a
simple preposition.
B Look at the following simple prepositions and see how some of them
are used in sentences:
about below from since
above beneath in than
across beside inside through
after besides near till
against between of to
along beyond off toward/towards
among by on under
around despite into up
is}
S
N

English Grammar and Composition 119
as down outside upon
at during over with
before except past within
behind for round without

Choose any ten prepositions (not the ones you saw in the passage above) from

the list and make sentences with them.

Complete the following sentences with prepositions:
a. | know nothing the matter.
b. | shall see you this class.
C. They fought each other
d. He called me 9 o'clock
e We started Dhaka sunrise.
f. She sat me the bus.
g. They have a good relationship them.
h. Such a thing was my imagination.
i. Everybody was present there Karim.
j. Natore is not very far here.
k. They were sitting the room.
I. We were waiting the room.
m. The plane was flying just the buildings.
n. It is a quarter five.
0. There was a cat the table.
p. We cannot live water.

Cc Remember that a preposition is usually followed by a noun or
pronoun or anything else equivalent to a noun. For example:
With whom did you go there?
In which box did you keep the money?

« But in conversational English we say:
3S

120 English Grammar and Composition
Who did you go there with?
Which box did you keep the money in?
In these sentences the prepositions have been shifted from their initial
position to the end of the sentence.
Activity 1 Complete the following sentences with prepositions:
1. Where are you ?
2. What are they talking ?
3. Who are you writing this letter ?
4. Which country is London the capital ?
5. Who is this seat ?
D A preposition may be preceded by a noun, adjective or verb. Notice
the following examples:
| have no sympathy for her. (noun)
The cat is fond of milk. (adjective)
He succeeded in solving his problem. (verb)
A preposition can express the idea of place, time, means or any other
relationship. Even a single preposition can express different relationships.
Notice the following examples:
Above
The stars are above the world,
He is above me in office.
Today’s temperature is above 42° Celsius
His honesty is above suspicion.
After
: ’ He came here after breakfast. : :
_ They always run after money. ; / 5

English Grammar and Composition 121
The school is named after its founder’s name.
May comes after April.
Before
He saw me before lunch.
They stood before the headmaster.
April comes before May.
The drama was staged before a large audience.
For
Here is a gift for you.
We started for Dhaka.
It has been raining for two hours.
| bought this bag for two hundred taka.
He works for a bank.
From
Where do you come from?
The train started from Rajshahi at 7 o’clock.
Natore is 30 miles from Rajshahi.
He is suffering from fever.
Soap is made from coconut oil.
With
He went there with his father.
| like bread with butter.
She cut the mango with a knife.
She quarreled with her mother.
He was trembling with fear.
You can try and use some other simple prepositions to express more than one
relationship.
Forma-16, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

122 English Grammar and Composition
8/2: Complex
Prepositions
A Read the following passage and notice the underlined words:
| went to Dhaka last week with a view to attending a seminar. Actually our
chairman was supposed to go there. But he could not go because of his illness.
So | had to make a speech there on behalf of the chairman. | said everything in
accordance with his suggestion. It was my first speech in front of a large
audience.
These are complex prepositions. Like a simple preposition, a complex
preposition also comes before a noun and shows its relationship with another
word in the sentence. It is called complex because it consists of more than one
word. It can also be called a phrasal preposition.
B Here is a list of some other complex/phrasal prepositions:
according to in the event of
along with in view of
by means of with reference to
by virtue of in addition to
in the light of in lieu of
owing to instead of
for the sake of in course of
in favour of together with
in spite of with an eye to
in search of with respect to
Activity 1: Complete each of the following sentences with a complex
preposition from the above list:
1. He could not go there his illness. x
N

English Grammar and Composition 123
2. The crow flew here and there water.
3. her illness, she came to class yesterday.
4. Please cast your vote our candidate.
5. learned this money my normal salary.
Try and make sentences with 5 other prepositions from the list.
8/3: Appropriate
Prepositions
A Read the following sentences and mark the underlined nouns and
prepositions after them:
| have no affection for him.
He has no ambition for fame.
Show allegiance to your master.
Pay attention to my speech.
He made a comment on my lecture.
Make a comparison between the two girls.
They have no compassion for the poor.
| have no connection with that man.
He has no desire for fame.
There is no exception to this rule
You should have sufficient exposure to English.
He expressed his gratitude to his boss.
| had an interview with the reporter.
Industry is the key to success.
3 He has a reputation for eloquence.

124 English Grammar and Composition
The nouns in the sentences take only those prepositions which are used after
them. No other preposition will be appropriate after them.
B Notice the prepositions after the verbs in the following sentences:
You must abide by the decision of the committee.
You should abstain from smoking.
He adhered to his promise.
| apologize to you for my mistake.
He has applied to the authority for a promotion.
You can argue for/against this plan.
She availed herself of the opportunity.
| borrowed these books from the library.
He was charged with murder.
Activity 1 Fill in the blanks with appropriate prepositions:
a. | will cling my original decision.
b. He commented the speech.
c. | communicated him on that matter.
d. You must compete your opponent.
e. He complied my request.
f. Icondole you on your father’s death.
g. This research will highly contribute the field of
knowledge.
h. He dabbles politics.
i. I differ you on this point.
j. He hankers pelf and property.
k. Don’t interfere me in my affairs. ~
Note: These are the appropriate prepositions after the verbs they follow. S

English Grammar and Composition 125
C Notice the prepositions after the adjectives in the following
sentences:
The man was accustomed to smoking.
Are you accurate in your calculations?
He is very affectionate to his children.
| was angry with him at his behaviour.
You should be ashamed of your conduct.
She was deprived of her father’s property.
Smoking is detrimental to health.
This essay is very much different from/to/than that one.
Activity 2 Use appropriate prepositions in the following sentences.
a. He is disqualified the post.
b. She is not eligible this post.
c. Heis his family.
d. | am not interested politics.
e. He is jealous my power and position.
f. The boy is negligent his studies.
g. Are you obedient your parents?
h. The teacher is very popular his students.
i. He is proficient English.
j. lam sorry my delay.
k. Are you satisfied your job?
|. This food is sufficient ten people.
Activity 3 Read the following passage and identify the prepositions in it.
His working hours varied a good deal. Usually he started at six in the morning.
He usually travelled by boat. As his work was tiring, he liked to relax in the
evening. Sometimes he went out with his friends to a cafe for a cup of tea of
coffee. Quite often he went to the theatre. He enjoyed watching plays about
a romantic love. On weekends he sometimes read books till late at night.
S Notice what kind of words the prepositions precede and follow.

” ™ =
A clause is a group of words that contains a subject and a predicate.
There are two kinds of clauses: independent and subordinate clauses. A
clause may be either a sentence (an independent clause) or a sentence-like
construction within another sentence (a dependent or subordinate clause).
A The Independent Clause

An independent clause expresses a complete thought and can stand

by itself as a sentence. If you recognize a sentence, you should be able

to recognize independent clauses.
Look at the following examples: Sai, oe

=

Many people are afraid of tornadoes.

A tornado can be terrifying.

A tornado is a violently revolving storm.

In the centre of the tornado is an area of calm air.

The centre of the tornado is known as the “eye”.

This eye is formed by the air spiraling around it.

This eye is simply a hollow space.
All the above sentences are independent clauses. A sentence may have more -
than one independent clause. s

English Grammar and Composition 127
For example,
A tornado is a violently revolving storm and it can be terrifying.
The centre of the tornado is known as the “eye”, but it is simply a
hollow space.
Activity 1 Write down ten independent clauses about yourself.
B The Subordinate Clause
A subordinate clause is a group of words that has a subject and a
predicate but cannot stand by itself as complete sentence because it
does not express a complete thought. While an independent clause
can stand alone as a complete thought, a subordinate clause cannot
stand alone. Subordinate clauses are sometimes called dependent
clauses.
Look at the following examples. Each sentence has two parts, and in
each part there is a subject and a predicate. However, the second part
in the first sentence and the first part in the second sentence cannot
stand alone, and therefore, they are subordinate clauses.
The crowds cheered to greet Mashrafi when he entered the stadium.
As he walked across the field, he waved back to the audience.
Study the following sentences, which contain subordinate clauses.
Notice that the subordinate clauses are introduced by words like
since, when, if, as, who, which and that.
Luna, who was the Roman goddess of the moon, gave us the
word lunatic
Since at one time the moon was believed to cause madness,
people avoided moonlight.
Anyone that slept with the moon shining in his/her face might
% become mad.
S
N

128 English Grammar and Composition
Even today many people feel uncomfortable if the moon shines
in on them while they are sleeping.

{The examples above have been taken from Warriner’s English Grammar and

Composition, 1973)

A sentence may have more than one subordinate clause. For example,

see the last sentence above.

B1__ Kinds of subordinate clauses:

A subordinate clause may function as an adjective, an adverb, ora

noun.

i) Clauses used as adjectives: A subordinate clause functions as an
adjective if it modifies a noun ora pronoun. Such clauses are
sometimes called adjective clauses.

Look at the following sentences. The subjects of the subordinate

clauses are underlined, and the predicates are shown in bold type.

The movie that_you recommended to me was good.
( Which movie? The one that you recommended to me.}
A doctor who takes care of children is a pediatrician.
(Which kind of doctor? A doctor who takes care of children.)

In the above sentences, the subordinate clauses, that you

recommended to me, and who takes care of children, are adjective

clauses.

Most adjective clauses begin with a relative pronoun:
that which who whom whose

a}
Sy
XQ

English Grammar and Composition 129
You may also introduce adjective clauses with relative adverbs:
after before since where why
for example: It was a place where crowds gathered in the evenings.
(Subordinate clause)
ii) Adverb Clauses: A subordinate clause functions as an adverb if it
modifies a verb, an adjective, or an adverb. Such clauses are sometimes
called adverb clauses.
Here are some examples of adverb clauses:
Before you buy a television, you should compare prices.
(modifies verb)
Aleya was proud that the theatre group chose her.
(modifies adjective)
Like adverbs, adverb clauses tell how, when, where, and to what extent.
They may also explain why.
Look at the following sentences:
How The building swayed as though it would collapse.
When Before the storm started, Nayan took shelter in a building.
Where We can have lunch wherever you want.
To What Extent Maya studied the poem until she had memorized it.
Why Shahed came early so that he would get a good seat.
Forma-17, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

130 English Grammar and Composition
iii) Noun Clauses: Some subordinate clauses function as nouns in
sentences.

Such clauses are called noun clauses. A noun clause may

function as a subject, a predicate nominative, a direct object, an

indirect object, an object of a preposition, or an appositive.

Examples:

Subject That he is generous is evident.

Predicate Nominative That is what we decided.

Direct Object | don’t know where Seema is.

Indirect Object Give whoever is coming a message.

Object of a Preposition | was criticized for what | did.

Appositive The subject of my speech, that taxes
should be lowered, was well
received.

You may introduce a noun clause with either an interrogative
pronoun (such as, who, whom,
whose, which, whatever, whoever,
whomever, etc.) or, a subordinating
conjunction (such as, how, that,
when, where, whether, why, etc.)

Activity 2
Identify the subordinate clauses in the following sentences.
| couldn’t remember when you were going to present your paper on
“Education and Development”.
After you finish this work, let’s discuss the plans for your next project. —
S
N

English Grammar and Composition 131
If you agree, we can work as a team.
While | talked, | noticed that she was not actually listening to me.
Activity 3
Add an independent clause to (either at the beginning or after) each of the
following subordinate clauses, and write the whole sentence on your paper.
i) when | woke up this morning
ii) if it rains tomorrow
iii) but | have to finish my homework
iv) although we met before
v) which you promised to do
9/2: Meaning and
Types
A Read the following examples.
1, Bill Gates is the founder of Micro-soft.
2. He is the pioneer of modern Information Technology.
3. He is doing a lot of works for the service of humanity.
Now read these examples:
4. wonder is the of modern science mobile phone.
5. contact with people can others mobile phone within a second
through.
6. reduced it has labour our time and.
Thinking questions
° Do the first three examples express meaning?
S ° What about the next three examples?

132 English Grammar and Composition

e Do they express meaning? If not, rearrange the words in each

example to make it meaningful.

A sentence is a group of words at least with a subject and a verb expressing
a complete sense.
Activity 1 Work with a partner. Identify which ones are sentences and
which are not.
(a) Farida, a primary school teacher works in the district of Lalmonirhat. (b) As
a social worker she started. (c) Under her closed monitoring she has managed.
(d) She has managed to stop many early marriages of girls’ students. (e) Many
girls have realised the need for education and they are attending schools. (f)
Like Farida many other women are coming forward to. (g) Local authority is
also very helpful and providing support to Farida’s effort. (h) She has been able
to draw the attention of many parents. (i) Her afford has also drawn the
attention. (j) Different medias and international organizations are highlighting
about Farida’s. (k) Currently she has been selected for international award.
Types of Sentences: according to meaning
B Now read and study the following sentences.

1. Cricket has got much popularity in our country.

2. Still many people are not interested to watch this game.

3. Do you like to watch this game?

4. Let’s watch a cricket match this evening.

5. Talk to your mother for permission to go to the stadium.

6. Call Asif to accompany us.

7. Oh, What an interesting idea it is!

8. How enjoyable and thrilling the match will be!

9. May our cricket team win the ‘World Cup’!

8

English Grammar and Composition 133
What do the sentences 1 & 2 express and what is the difference between
them?
The 1* one is an affirmative sentence and the 2™ one is a negative sentence.
They express statement. So a sentence which expresses/makes a statement
or assertion is called an Assertive sentence.
Now notice the 3rd sentence and try to fill in the following gap with the right
word. The 3% sentence expresses and it is an Interrogative
sentence. So a sentence which expresses/asks a is an
Interrogative sentence.
Now notice the sentences 4, 5 and 6. The sentences express proposal, advice
and direction/instruction respectively, and these are Imperative sentences. So
a sentence which expresses is called an Imperative sentence.
Notice sentences no. 7 and no. 8. They express and they are
exclamatory sentences. So a sentence which expresses is an
Exclamatory sentence.
Now notice sentence no. 9. The sentence no. 9 expresses --------- and it is an
Optative sentence. So a sentence which expresses------------ is an Optative
sentence.
Activity 2 Identify the different kinds of sentences from the given text.
Work in groups.

Patriotism is a noble virtue. It is an inherent human quality. 2. Have you heard
the name of Birsreshtha Mostofa Kamal? 3. Read his biography. 4. See how
brave he was! 5. He laid down his life for the sake of his country. 6. Do you
know his birthplace? 7. Every year on 16" December the nation pays special
homage to the heroes like him. 8. Different organizations organize different
programmes highlighting the day. 9. May the Almighty bless our national
heroes! 10. Have you ever participated in any programme on this day?

re}

S

N

134 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 3 Match the items in column A with those in column B to make
sentences.
Column A Column B

1. News paper plays a_ have the habit of reading
newspaper every day.

2. It publishes b_ enrich his general
knowledge and makes him
aware of current issues.

3. Astudent must c important news and views
of home and abroad.

4. Mere bookish knowledge is d_ false and partial reports in
the newspaper.

5. Anews paper helps him e not sufficient in the
competitive world.

6. Aman who does not read f he/she cannot take part in
the talks and discussion.

7. Being ignorant of the g_ is like a frog in the narrow
well.

current affairs

8. Newspaper highlights h_ the good reports and avoid
the bad ones.

9. Sometimes there are i news of various interests
and views of important
personalities.

10. We should accept j. avital role in modern
civilization.

=
BS

English Grammar and Composition 135
9/3 Sentences:
Structures and Types

In the previous lesson you have learned that sentences may be classified

according to their purpose or meaning: assertive (positive/negative),

interrogative, imperative and exclamatory. Another way to classify sentences

is according to their construction, the kind and number of their clauses.

A The Simple Sentence

A simple sentence has one independent clause and no subordinate

clauses.

Look at the examples of simple sentences below. Notice that a simple
sentence may have a compound subject (sentence 2) or a compound
predicate (sentence 3) or both (sentence 4). A compound subject consists of
two or more connected subjects that have the same verb. A compound
predicate consists of two or more connected verbs that have the same subject.

1 Bangladesh has some beautiful tourist spots.

2 The tea gardens in Sylhet and the forests of the Sundarbans are
favourite tourist attractions. (The two parts of the compound
subject have the same verb, are.)

3 We planned to go to Syhet but then went to the Sundarbans
instead.

4 Paban and Sara brought some bananas and fed the monkeys.

=
8

136 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 1
Identify the compound subjects or the compound predicates in the following
simple sentences.

i) The manager and his secretary went out to lunch.

ii) The manager finished his ice-cream and ordered for a coffee.

iii) Hasan, Karim and Shahana will go on the field trip with us.

iv) Jogging, swimming, and cycling are good exercises.

v) Jogging strengthens the heart and lungs but is hard on the knees

and ankles.

Activity 2
Make sentences by adding compound subjects to these predicates.

i) are competing in the race.

ii) make good pets.

iii) went to Bhutan on holidays last week.

iv) On Shihab’s study table were piled.

v) amused the audience at the circus

thoroughly.

Activity 3
Make sentences by adding compound predicates to the following subjects.

i) At the Trade Fair we :

ii) The doctor :

iii) The singer ‘

iv) Last week some of my friends :

v) Jack and Jill .

5

English Grammar and Composition 137
B The Compound Sentence
A compound sentence has two or more independent clauses but no
subordinate clauses.
The independent clauses are usually joined by some connecting or
linking words such as, and, but, or, nor, for, yet, however, therefore, etc.
We can also join the independent clauses by using a semicolon.
Following are some examples of compound sentences:
| like jogging, but | like swimming better.
Razzak graduated last year, and now he works in a private bank.
| wanted to go to the concert, but | didn’t get the ticket.
The giraffe has a long neck and long legs, but it is a very graceful
animal.
Fruits and vegetables should be a part of everyone’s diet, for
they supply necessary vitamins.
It was a good day for outing; | went cycling in the countryside.
Cc The Complex Sentence
A complex sentence consists of one independent clause and one or
more subordinate clauses.
We had lunch at the student cafeteria when we visited the
college.
He gave her a pair of bangles which belonged to his mother.
While we walked along the beach, it started raining.
Forma-18, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

138 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 1 Read the following sentences and identify them as simple,
compound or complex sentences. Explain how you made the
classification:
The blue Toyota car in the parking lot is mine.
Although I'll miss driving the car, I'll sell it if | can get a good price.
The blue Toyota car in the parking lot is mine; however, | might
sell it.
Activity 2
Identify the principal clauses and sub-ordinate clauses from the text below
and locate the connectors. The first one is done for you.
a. Illiteracy is a curse which is the root cause of ignorance.
Main clause Sub-ordinate clause
b. If a man is illiterate, he gets little opportunity to contribute to
the society.
c. Abdul was an illiterate man, but he was very eager to learn about
things.
d. One of his friends asked him why he was not attending a night
school.
e. Then he got himself admitted into a night school and started
studying there.
f. Although it was difficult for him, he continued going to school.
g. He was poor but he was ambitious.
h. Since he worked hard during day time, he studied at night.
i. His teachers helped him much when he found any difficulties.
j. He did not sleep at night until he could complete his home work.
k. He did a lot of voluntary works for the society even though he
was busy. °0
S

English Grammar and Composition 139
Activity 3
Identify simple, complex and compound sentences from the following text.
(a) Once there lived an old king. (b) He had much wealth and he was happy. (c)
At the same time he had much curiosity to acquire knowledge and
information. (d) He wanted to acquire knowledge on different subjects so that
he could apply them in his personal life. (e) He asked his chief minister to
invite the scholars of his country. (f) When all the scholars came to his court,
he told them to provide him books on all sources of knowledge. (g) The
scholars were happy and they went to collect. (h) Ten years later the scholars
came back with 5000 books. (i) When the king saw all these books, he was
overwhelmed. {j) He told them to get the books return and reduce the
numbers. (k) In spite of having much responsibility of kingship, he did not give
up the hope of acquiring knowledge. (|) When the scholars returned again with
same 5000 books, quite a few years had gone by and the king had become
older and fallen ill. (m) He did not have much time to read all these books. (n)
Though the king was sick, he met the scholars and thanked them for their kind
efforts.
Activity 4
Fill in the blanks with the given words.
(and, but, or, both, and, not only—but also, therefore, who, when, , how, if,
whether, because, as, so that, since, though, although, before, after).
(a) Razia is a garment worker works from morning to late night. (b)
her father’s death , she became helpless. (c} She had to leave school

=

>

Q

140 English Grammar and Composition
her mother could not afford to bear her expense. (d) she works

hard, she does not get enough money to support her family and herself. (e) In
school she was a good student a good singer. (f) Her
mother married her off she was only 14. (g) When her husband died at
the age of 20 she had no alternative to join a garment factory. (h) She
works there at the same time studies in school programme of
Bangladesh Open University. (i) Her teachers helped her a lot she could
do well in the examination. (j) She struggled hard came out
successful in getting her degree.
Activity 5
Complete the following sentences.

1. Rashed is a slum boy who

2. Every day he starts working early in the morning so

that.

3. Though he works hard,

4. He collects waste papers, plastics and

5. In his free time he studies though

6. He tries to add income to his family as

7. If you talk to Rashed

8. He has dreams which

9. He is not seen sometimes when

co
§

English Grammar and Composition 141
9/4: Wh-
Questions
A Read the text and answer the questions that follow.
Preteen ae SO he gee Tt LOE IS - Ca vil cp
arenes Pye tt ene pigs eee ae ae i
extn OE ts, «Rete ot ons a
Rahmat, a farmer lives in the village of Tanoir. He cultivates the lands of others.
He leads a very ordinary life. He always shares his joys and sufferings with his
neighbours.
From the above text we can make Wh —Questions like this-
1. Who is Rahmat?
2. Where does he live?
3. Whose land does he cultivate?
4. How does he lead his life?
5. Who does he share his joys and sufferings with?
Activity 1
Fill in the gaps to understand what wh-question is.
A Wh-question is a question which begins with . The answers
to Wh- questions cannot be given by just or . Answers
should usually be in a sentence.
ho)
S Notice how wh- questions are made:

142 English Grammar and Composition

What:

Rafiq’s word made me laugh. His behaviour made me unhappy. | was thinking

of sharing my feelings with my friend, Aysha.

Wh questions - What made you laugh? What made you unhappy? What were

you thinking of?

Who:

Nipa is doing good in English. But her sister Sima is still quite weak in English.

Abir is teaching English to both of them.

Wh questions - Who is doing good in English? Who is still weak in English? Who

is teaching the sisters English?

Whose:

My book was stolen. | took Liza’s book. Aleya’s book was missing too.

Wh question - Whose book did you take? Whose book was stolen? Whose book

was missing?

Which:

It was a football match between the students of class 9 and 10. The students

of class 9 won the match.

Wh question — Students of which classes were playing the match? Which class

won the match?

Where:

We’re going to Rajendrapur tomorrow. We’ll stay in the Green Resort there.

From there we'll go to Tangail the next day.

Wh question - Where are you going tomorrow? Where will you stay? Where

will you go from there? 3
8

English Grammar and Composition 143
When:
The show will start at 7 pm. | am going there at 6.30 pm. My friend will meet
me there at 6.40 pm.
Wh question - When will the show start? When are you going there? When will
your friend meet you?
Why:
| didn’t go to school yesterday as | was not feeling well. | called my friend to
know the home work.
Wh question - Why didn’t you go to school yesterday? Why did you call your
friend?
How:
We'll go to Chittagong by train tomorrow. We’ll stay there for two days.
Wh question - How will you go to Chittagong? How long will you stay there?
Note: How is often used to express how far, how much, how many, how long,
how slow, how fast, etc. e.g. How far is Chittagong from Comilla? How long
does it take to go there by bus/train?
Activity 2
Now make Wh Questions from the given text (who, which, what, when, how,
which, why)

a. The liberation war took place in 1971.

b. The heroic sons of our country fought against the Pakistani

occupation forces.
c. Their main target was to set the country free.
d. People of all classes including young, old, and women supported
the liberation war.
S e. Many countries of the world came forward to help Bangladesh.
N

144 English Grammar and Composition
f. About 30 lac people laid down their lives to make the country
free.
g. Finally Bangladesh got victory on 16" December 1971
h. Every year we celebrate the day with great enthusiasm.
i. National dailies publish special features.
j. Different electronic media broadcast special programmes.
k. Government offices and important buildings are colourfully
decorated.
|. People celebrate the day with great joys.
Activity 3
Make Wh Questions for which the underlined words in the
following sentences could be the answers.
a. Bangladesh is famous for its garments industry.
b. The readymade garments of Bangladesh are very popular in
Europe and America.
c. About 80% workers are female in the garments industry.
d. They have to work for about 8-12 hours.
e. But their wages is not satisfactory.
f. Though they work hard, their standard of living is not good.
g. Sometimes they have to fight for the regular payment of their
salary.
h. Sometimes they have to face tragic death because of fire or such
other accidents.
i. The tragic incidents of Rana plaza took away lives of more than
1000 people.
j. Thousands of people were wounded.
k. Many people actively participated in the rescue work.
I. Some of the volunteers lost their lives while working there.
m. After that incident all concerned came forward to improve the
work condition of garments workers. %
S
XQ

English Grammar and Composition 145
9/5: Tag
Questions
A Read the following conversation:
Sam_: It’s anice party, isn’t it?
Zinia_: Yes, it is indeed. We’re going to stay the whole night, aren’t we?
Sam_: | think so. By the way, | haven’t seen you for a long time.
Zinia_ : | was in the USA for six weeks.
Sam__: Oh, really? You didn’t go there on business, did you?
Zinia : No, | didn’t. Actually | went there to attend my brother’s graduation
ceremony.
Sam_: You are not going away anywhere soon, are you?
Zinia_ : No, |l’m not. You missed me, didn’t you?
If we study the above sentences, we notice that each of the sentence ends
with a question. These questions are different from the wh-questions or
‘yes/no’ questions. These are called tag questions.
We also notice that, if the statement is affirmative, the tag question is
negative. If the statement is negative, the tag question is affirmative.
So, a tag question is a kind of question asked by the speaker after a negative or
an affirmative statement during conversation. They are normally used in
speech when we want to:
. confirm that something is true or not, or
. to encourage a reply from the person we are speaking to.
Forma-19, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

146 English Grammar and Composition
1. Intonation and meaning:
When a tag question is spoken, the voice can go up or down.
It is a nice party, ‘th it?
A falling intonation means the speaker is sure (or almost sure) that the
statement is true. He/she only wants to confirm. The tag is not really a
question.
A rising intonation means that even though the speaker expects to hear ‘yes’,
the speaker is less sure and wants to know.
You didn’t go there on business, did you?
B Why do we use tag questions?
We can use tag questions to verify or check information that we think is true,
or to check information that we aren't sure about.
The interesting things about tag questions are that they have varied uses. The
tag question is in fact a typical feature of conversation in English.
Different uses of ‘tag questions’:
C Read the following tag questions:

You have known Shumona for a long time, haven’t you?

Shumona is Bangladeshi, isn’t she?

She lives in Dhaka, doesn’t she?

She has lived here all her life, hasn’t she?

She went to Delhi for higher studies last year, didn’t she?

She speaks good English, doesn’t she?

She can help you, can’t she?

But she wouldn’t, would she? S

R

English Grammar and Composition 147
Note: If the verb used in the statement is an auxiliary verb, then the auxiliary
verb is repeated in the tag question. If a modal (can, could, will, should, etc.) is
used in the statement, then the same modal is used in the tag part. If the
statement doesn't use an auxiliary verb, then the auxiliary ‘do/ does/ did is
used in the tag question.
D Read the following tag questions.
He hardly watches movie, does he?
He never came back, did he?
Note: |f there are words such as seldom, hardly, barely, scarcely, nothing,
none, no one, neither, few, little, never in a sentence, it is considered as a
negative sentence. Therefore, notice that tag questions are in affirmation.
E Read the following examples.
Nobody likes to be criticized, do they?
Everybody wanted to talk to the celebrity, didn’t they?
Note: If everybody, all, somebody, someone, anybody, any one, no one, none
is used as a subject, then the subject of the tag question would be ‘they’.
F Read the following examples.
Nothing was easy, was it?
Anything will be all right, will it?
Note: If anything, something, everything, nothing is used as a subject, then ‘it’
would be used as a pronoun.
Read the examples below:
Take a seat, won’t you?
Help me, will you?
Close the door, would you?
ce Let us go out for a walk, shall we?
S
NN

148 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 1
Add tag-questions with appropriate punctuation mark to the following
sentences.
1. Flowers are the gift of nature .
2. Everybody loves flowers .
3. Today, people use flowers in different occasions :
4. Weneed flowers for decoration .
5. These are also used to greet important persons :
6. Now people cultivate flowers .
7. Flowers are also being exported now-a-days :
8. However, flowers cultivators lack financial support :
9. The government should come forward to support them i
10. These products can earn huge foreign currency .
Activity 2
Add tag-questions to the following sentences.
1. Ismail Hussain is a small trader.
2. First, he took loan from BRAC bank.
3. Then he started a poultry business.
4. He began to pay the interest of that loan from the profit he got.
5. Other people of the village were influenced by Ismail. S

English Grammar and Composition 149
6. They also took loan from BRAC bank.
7. Gradually all these people began to change their economic
conditions.
8. They are now quite solvent.
9. They are now able to send their children to schools.
10. They have hopes and take part in different social activities.
11. But many people are not still aware of the matter.
12. They do not consider the microcredit programme positively.
13. Some people criticise the prograrnme.
14. Yet micro-credit has got popularity in the outside world.
15. Some countries of the world are now operating micro-credit in
their countries.
Activity 3 Complete the following dialogue by adding question tags.
Tanim: Well, Neena, you went to see Hamlet last night, didn’t you?
Neena: Oh, yes. | did. But how do you know? You didn’t come to my house,
Tanim: No, | didn’t. Tell me, you couldn’t hear the dialogues very well from
where you sat,
Neena: No, | couldn’t. But how do you really know? I’m sure you were there,
?
Tanim: Yes, dear. | was sitting two rows behind you.
Neena: Why didn’t you come and talk to me after the play?
Tanim: You were with Harun. You wouldn’t have liked that, ?
S

150 English Grammar and Composition
9/6: Short
Answers

Short answers with yes or no_ eS
A Read the conversations. =

: Have you ever visited the Tajmahal? = ug , a

: Yes, | have. &

: Did you go alone? }) = mr Wr

: No, | didn’t. | went with my parents. | - | ‘

: Did you like it? .

: Oh, yes, | did. It was magnificent. >.

: Did you visit the whole complex? i s

: Yes, | did. It was fascinating
Notice that we could answer all the questions in the above conversation with
just yes/no. But in many contexts it wouldn’t sound very polite. Hence, a short
answer (Yes, | did. No, | didn’t, and so on) is more usual.
Usually we don’t use a full sentence to answer a wh-question, but to add
emphasis and, for variation we can sometimes use a full sentence.
Short Answers for requests, suggestions, offers and invitations.
Read the following texts and notice the short answers given:
Requests:
Would you like to have a cup of tea?
Yes, of course. Or yes, please. or
No, thanks/ sorry, I’ve just had one cup. S

English Grammar and Composition 151
Could you please come to the kitchen?
Yes, of course/ Yes/ ok/ Sorry, I’m busy now, etc.
Suggestions:
Shall we have some snacks now?
Okay.
Yes, we can.
Sorry, not now. The tea break is after half an hour.
Offer
Shall | get a taxi for you?
Yes, please. That’s very kind of you.
Thanks, but my brother is coming to pick me up.
Invitations:
Would you like to attend the wedding?
Of course, | would. I‘d love to!
I’d love to but | will be away at that time.
Yes, thanks a lot.
Note: Remember that when you give a negative answer, i.e. you say ‘no’, it’s
polite to give a reason.
Activity 1
Read the conversation between a doctor and his patient. Fill in the gaps with
short answers. Add yes/no where you can.
Doctor: Good morning. What has brought you along today?
S Patient: Morning, doctor. | haven’t been feeling well recently.

152 English Grammar and Composition
Doctor: Do you feel feverish?
Patient: Yes, | do.
Doctor: Do you have any headache?
Patient. . Actually I’m having headaches quite often.
Doctor: Have you taken any medicine?
Patient: No,
Doctor: Do you often feel tired?
Patient:
Doctor: Did you have sound sleep last night?
Patient: . But usually | don’t sleep well at night.
Doctor: Do you feel thirsty very often?
Patient: Well, not so much.
Doctor: Are you feeling thirsty now?
Patient: . Well, doctor, is it anything serious?
Doctor: Don’t worry. | think it’s just a cold.
Activity 2
Complete the answers. Put of course, okay, I’d love to, please, sorry, no, etc.
If the answer is negative, try to give a reason.
1. Would you like to go to the zoo? Yes,
2. Shall we take a taxi? ‘Yes,
3. Would you like to go for a walk? :Sorry,
4. Would you please lend me your camera for one day?
‘Yes,
5. Do you like ice-cream? ‘Yes,
:No,
6. Are you coming to the party tonight? ‘Yes,______. 'dlove = &
to, but Rg

English Grammar and Composition 153

9/7: Connectors ©
A Read the following text and notice the underlined linkers:
Recently in a meeting on ‘International ~~
Women’s Day’ it was discussed that violence re “% |
against women has decreased in the country. PR t yy
The social status of women has been fa »
improved and they are now taking part in Wf
family decisions. If women are empowered, \ | B77

i} z |
they will be good mothers. The present } Ta | (' \
government is providing a lot of supports to | ! |= \\
educating women so that they can become | S } 12 ~~
independent. They have come out of their { BUG
cocoons in order to change their lot. They are | [ \
working in the garment industries which /
contribute much to our economy.
A linking word is used as a conjunction to join two or more words, phrases
and clauses together.
Activity 1
Read the following text and notice and underline linking/ transitional words
in it.
Just as some people collect stamps or butterflies, if you have a camera you can
make a collection of certain kinds of pictures. One amateur, for example, has
been taking shots of homeless children on park benches. He has a large
collection of these pictures. Similarly, another enthusiast has made pictures of
various kinds of vendors and hawkers selling their goods on the streets of the
large town in which he lives. A third collected pictures of writings and paintings
on the bodies of buses and rickshaws. Later, he sold some of these pictures to
a cartoonist for a price with which he could buy a more sophisticated and
professional camera.
Forma-20, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

154 English Grammar and Composition
Let us study more about words used as linking words.

Use of that, and, as well as:

| know that he will help me.

This is the boy that helps you a lot.

We work that we may earn.

He went to market and bought a shirt.

They are very friendly as well as cooperative.
Here in each sentence ‘and, that, as well as, have been used to join two
clauses.

Use of but:

He is lean but he is strong.

Our country is small but it has got huge resources.

They work hard but they get very poor salary.
Here in each sentence ‘but’ has been used to join two clauses that express
opposite sense.

Use of since, as, because:

As he worked hard, he got GPA 5 in the SSC examination.

We could not attend the programme since the weather was very rough.

Bangladesh won the match because the players had a good team spirit.
Here in each sentence as, since, because, have been used to express reason.

Use of so that, in order that, lest:

They work hard so that they can support themselves about their study.

They study up to late night in order to do well in the examination.

Run fast lest you should miss the bus. S

English Grammar and Composition 155
Here in each sentence so that, in order that, lest, have been used to express
purpose.
Use of before, after:
The train had left the station before we reached here.
The train left the station after we had reached there.
Here in each sentence before, after, have been used to express time of
function.
Use of till, until, when, while, so long, as long as:
| will wait here until he returns.
When we were in Dhaka, we often went to the stadium to watch cricket.
You will be able to reach the goal so long your purpose is honest.
As long as you remain honest, you will succeed.
She was reading while | was sleeping.
Here in each sentence till, until, when, while, so long, as long as, have been
used to express time of function.
Use_of even though, although, though, in case, unless, provided,
provided that:
| have to go to office now even though it is raining hard.
| always listen to the teacher’s lecture in order that | can understand
clearly.
In case you fail to come in time, you will miss the train.
Though he worked hard, he could not come out successful.
« Here in each sentence even though, although, though, in case, unless,
S provided, provided that, have been used to express time of function.

156 English Grammar and Composition
Use of in spite of, despite:
He attended the programme in spite of illness.
He carried on working in spite of being ill.
| completed the task despite not feeling well.
We use in spite of, despite before a noun phrase or- ing form of verb.
Use of in case:
I'll write his name in case | forget it.
Take some water in case you get thirsty on the way.
We use ‘in case’ to talk about doing something because something else
might happen later.
Use of ‘both and’.
We both love and respect him.
Both karim and Rahim will join the party.
Kazi Nazrul Islam was both a poet and a philosopher.
We use ‘both- and’ to express two qualities or things.
Use of either—or/ neither---nor
Either he or his brothers have done the job.
Either you will do the work or you will let me do it.
Neither you nor your friend attended the party.
He will neither play nor study.
We use ‘either—or’ to express one out of two and we use ‘neither ---nor’ to
express none of the two. %
g

English Grammar and Composition 157
Activity 2 Complete the following exercise using the linking words in the
box below.
who, unless, also, as, even, nor even, if, so that, however, which
Illiteracy is a curse is a root cause of ignorance. Aman
is illiterate has to face lot of challenges in life. No development efforts can be
successful illiteracy is removed. Illiteracy in a country like
Bangladesh is a difficult task. No individual, community or organization
the government is capable of solving this huge problem
most of the people are careless in this respect. Students
are the future hope of nation should come forward to solve the
problem. one student take responsibility to literate one illiterate
man, the rate of illiteracy may reduce soon. Therefore, the government should
give incentive to the students they come forward to take the
initiative. Mass media can play a vital role to make the people conscious.
Activity 3
Complete the following text using linking words.
Many people live below the poverty line they cannot afford to
educate their children. the children start school in their early life,
they cannot not continue their studies. Their parents engage them in work
they can support their family. Food for education programme
started in the early nineties has largely contributed to motivating
the children to attend school. Many parents are now sending their children to
school they become educated. government has
financial and resource constraints, it is trying to provide maximum opportunity
for education.
re}
5

158 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 4
Join each set of sentences in a) and b) to make one sentence for each
number. Then write down the sentences in the form of paragraphs. You’ll
have two paragraphs of four sentences each.
a. 1. He had started early. He missed the train.
2. He missed the train. He took the bus.
3. He was late for an hour. He reached the meeting before it was
over.
4. He took a loan from the bank. He bought a car.
b. 1. My friend and | wanted to take a vacation. We wanted to go to
Bhutan.
2. | did not get leave from the office. We decided to go
somewhere new.
3. My friend suggested going to the Bandarbans. | thought that
was an excellent idea.
4. We arranged to go to the Bandarbans on Friday evening. We
planned to come back on next Monday morning.
sy
=

English Grammar and Composition 159
9/8: Punctuation
Marks
re ~ I Bs - ear ee
ee 7 Sex ay = “Fy
Use of Fullstop (.)
Many animals make noise for protection. A gorilla pounds his chest loudly. A
woodpecker taps his beak on a tree. Both sounds warn nearby animals. They
tell them to stay away. | wonder what signals fishes use to protect themselves
from danger and attacks. Think about it.
Periods or Full stops signal the end of all sentences except questions and
exclamations.
It may also be used to end an indirect question, and to end a mild command.
We use full stop to express abbreviation/initials:
He has an M.A degree in English.
The U.S.A stands for the United States of America.
Mr. Sharif Anmed and Mrs. Najma Ahmed are both teachers.
inva)
5

160 English Grammar and Composition
UseofComma (, )
We use comma to separate the items in a list:

| like mango, banana, guava and pineapple.
We use comma to separate the adjective.

The lady is very soft spoken, pleasant and friendly.

| have a red, blue and green striped dress.
We use comma in coordinating clauses.

! wish | could have gone to the show, but | had to go to the doctor.
We use comma before case in apposition.

Musfikur Rahim, captain of Bangladesh cricket team, plays very well.
We use comma with vocative case.

Kamal, come and show me your homework.

Tell me, my dear students, what can | do for you?

Do the work, Kamal.
We use comma after every pair, when there are many pairs of words.

Black and white, high and low, rich and poor, all are equal to God.
We use comma in direct speech.

He said, “I'll help you”.

She said, “Thanks a lot. That’s very kind of you.”
We use comma to separate numbers.

| need Tk. 4,87,900 only.

5

English Grammar and Composition 161
Use of Semi-colon (=; )
We use semi-colon to express pause longer than comma.
We went to a party; it was a big gathering; we enjoyed much.
United we stand; divided we fall.
When some coordinating clause is joined with therefore, yet, however, so,
otherwise, still, nevertheless, etc. and express opposite meaning, we use
semi-colon.
He worked hard; yet he could not come out successful.
Use of Colon (:)
We use colon to explain anything.
We wanted to attend the party: we had enough time.
We use colon between the speaker and the dialogue.
Kamal: Would you like to go for a walk in the woods?
Jamal: That would be great!
Use of Note of Interrogation/question mark (? )
A question mark is used to end a direct question:
What do you want to be when you grow up?
Note that if you write a series of questions, each is followed by a question
mark:
Uncle Karim asked, “What profession do you think you will enter?
Medicine? Law? Business?”
Note that the final question mark does not take a full stop (period) after the
quotation mark.
Forma-21, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

162 English Grammar and Composition
Use of Note of Exclamation ( ! )
An exclamation point is used after a sentence or a phrase or a word that
expresses a strong emotion:
Hurrah! We have won the match.
What a wonderful day!
How beautiful the picture is!
Leave me alone!
Use of quotation marks (“ “)
Quotation marks are used to enclose words, phrases, or sentences that are
quoted directly from speech or writing
The mayor said that he was “confident” that he would win reelection.
“Are you coming to the party this evening ?”, she asked.
Yesterday’s editorial went to say, “The Minister reassured the college
principals that he would hire more subject based teachers, especially
for English and Mathematics.”
Use of Apostrophe (‘)
To express possession:
This is Sam’s house.
Also, to delete any letter in a word:
What’s (what is) the matter?
Use of Hyphen (-)
To join different parts of a compound word we use hyphen
Father-in —law, brother-in -law
S

English Grammar and Composition 163
To complete an incomplete word in a line we use hyphen.
| talked to the Gover-
UseofDash (_ )
A dash indicates a sudden interruption in tone or thought:
! bought many things from the fair- books, shirts, pants, watch, etc.
A dash may be used to lend greater emphasis to an appositive:
My aunt Mona-a wonderful woman-is coming to visit us.
It may be used to set off a word, a phrase, or a clause that summarises a
preceding list:
Grown up men, women, children-people of all ages love picnics.
Use of Bracket ( )
John (a little boy) loves to eat kabab.
He likes any kind of kabab (tandoori, shik, or boti), as long as it is well
done and juicy.
We use bracket to express parenthesis, i.e. to enclose words, phrases that
are not essential to the meaning of a sentence but that clarify or comment
on a point made in the sentence.
Use of Capital Letters
1. Our liberation war took place in 1971.
The beginning word of a sentence begins with capital letter.
2. He said to me, “Where are you going?”
S

164 English Grammar and Composition
The first letter of the first word within inverted commas used for quotations
would be a capital letter.
3. Dhaka, Bangladeshi, North South Road
To express proper noun, proper adjective and title, capital letter is
used.
4. | shall be telling this with a sigh
Somewhere ages and ages hence:
Two roads diverged in a wood, and | -—
! took the one less traveled by,
And that has made all the difference.
Each line of an English verse begins with capital letter.
5. We are going to picnic next Monday.
Our examination will be held in November.
The Liberation War took place in 1971
Capital letter is used before days, months and historical events.
6. Alexander, the Great, invaded India.
To express title, designation, capital letter is used.
7. He is an M.A in English.
To express abbreviation, capital letter is used.
8. The teacher said to the boy, “Work hard and you will succeed.”
Capital letter is used in the first word of the quotation
9. My dear mother, Dear sir.
Capital letter is used to address someone in a letter.
10. The Quran, The Bible, The Daily Star. S

English Grammar and Composition 165
Capital letter is used to write the name of a famous book, newspaper
and journal.

11. Dhaka University, The Globe Publications, The United Groups.

To write the name of an educational institute, business group, name of
a publication, capital letter is used.

12. English, Chinese, Arabic, History, Mathematics.

Capital letter is used to write the name of a Language and name of any
subject...

13. The Titanic, the Tajmahal, The Tista Express.

Capital letter is used before the name of a ship, historical place, name
of a train.

14. The Muslims, The Hindus, The Christians, The Brahmans
Capital letter is used before the name of religious group, cast.

15. Small letter is used before directions but when direction is used as a
geographical region or area then capital letter is used.

The sun rises in the east and sets in the west.

But,

He spent his whole life in the East.
She studied in the West.

16. O Death! you so cruel!

To personify any object, capital letter is used.

17. It was | who gave him the news.

May God bless you.
O Allah, please help me fight all evil!
For pronoun ‘I’ and for Allah/God/ capital letter is used.
Ss

166 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 1 Punctuate the following sentences. Use capital letters where
necessary:

a many interesting things happen each night look over there did
you see that it was a shooting star How bright it was do you
know what a shooting star really is it is a burning meteor
travelling through the air it travels so quickly that it leaves a
glowing trail here look through my telescope watching the sky is
so exciting

b Once a crow stole a piece of bread and fled with it to a tree a fox
seeing her and wishing to get the bread for himself tried to
obtain it by flattery what a beautiful bird you are he exclaimed
your voice is very sweet and you deserve to be called the queen
of birds hearing the voice the crow was highly pleased and
opened her mouth to caw as she opened its mouth the piece of
bread dropped from its mouth the fox quickly picked it up and
went away

c hazrat omar(R) often went out for a walk in disguise at night to
see the condition of the people in his state once he was passing
along the street and heard the crying of some children from a
cottage he went to the cottage and saw some children were
crying for food their mother was boiling some water and was
consoling them that food was going to be prepared soon seeing
the scene Hazrat omar (R) was very upset he went to the palace
and returned with some sacks of food

2
BS

P| Introductory ‘it’ & ‘there’
Fe eae < Laie i te x See rs =
. ~ SS Sos Hee Speen ees

A Read the following letter and notice the use of ‘there’ and ‘it’ in it.
Dear Shovon,
I'm writing this to tell you about our day out at Savar yesterday. We went to
Jahangirnagar University to watch the migratory birds that come there every
winter. We started at 7 a.m. It was a very pleasant one and a half hour drive
from Dhaka to the University. It’s a beautiful campus! There is a lake running
through it. The scenic beauty of the place simply charmed us._There were
hundreds of migratory birds- some circling in the sky in flocks, some resting
on the lake water. There were red and white water lilies in full bloom in the
lake. We were not the only ones watching the birds, there were about a
dozen more visitors who came to enjoy the scene. There was this enchanting
sound of birds chirping, splashing water and fluttering winds all around us. It
was such a splendid experience!
It was almost 4 o’clock when we started back from there for Dhaka. By the
way, we had a wonderful lunch at the campus. There was a roadside eating
place just outside the campus gate that served the best rice and curry I’ve
ever had.
But no more today.
Love,

=

5 Lali

168 English Grammar and Composition
Grammar point
Every sentence must have a subject, but sometimes the subject does not
mean anything, like the introductory ‘there’ and ‘it’ in the above sentences.
When we don’t want to put a new information at the beginning of a sentence,
we write it in a different way using there/it at the beginning. ‘There’ and ‘it’ at
the beginning of a sentence are also called ‘empty subjects’.
Notice that there/it is followed by the verb be.
Form: There +be e.g. There is ... /There are ...
There was .../There were ...
It+be e.g. Itis.../ it was...
Use
We use the introductory ‘there’ to say that something exists or existed in the
past:
There is a lake in the university campus.
There were hundreds of migratory birds.
We usually use it to talk about something that we have already
mentioned:
What’s that bird? It’s a Siberian duck.
We can also use it when we talk about:
distance : It’s about 22 kilometers from Dhaka to Savar.
3
S
N

English Grammar and Composition 169
time : It was 7 a.m. when we started for Savar.
nature/quality
ofaplace : It’s quiet and peaceful here by the lake.
weather : It’s raining today.

We also use it + be + adjective to express our feeling about something:

It was wonderful to watch the migratory birds on the lake water!

It’s important to share your feelings with your close friends.

It’s good to know that you care for me.

Activity 1 Rewrite each sentence below by using ‘there’ or ‘it’ at the
beginning without changing the meaning of the original
sentence:

a Saying sorry is polite when you’ve done something wrong.

polite when you’ve done something wrong.
b Using mobile phone in the exam hall is forbidden.
mobile phone in the exam hall.
c Seeing your childhood friends after a long time is wonderful.
after a long time.

d A lady is waiting for you downstairs.

a lady downstairs.
Forma-22, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

170 English Grammar and Composition
e | first met her two years ago.
since | last.
f Hundreds of birds are on the lake water.
on the lake water.
Activity 2 Rewrite the following sentences so that they don’t begin with
‘there’, but would mean the same as the original sentences:
a There is a red rose in the vase.
b There are three golden stars on the baby’s cap.
c There were two dogs chasing the burglar.
d There was a gold fish in the bowl.
e There are many leaves on the ground.
20,
S

English Grammar and Composition 171
Activity 3 Fill in the blanks in the following sentences with ‘there’ or ‘it’ +
be. .
a What’s that in your hand? ,
a parcel. It just came in by post.
anything valuable in it? Why are you holding it so
tightly?
some books. Raju has sent them for you.
b We stood in front of the heavy curtains in the hall room.
something behind the curtains. | could sense it. |
pulled the curtains. a picture of a woman with a
child. hanging on the wall. a
sudden silence in the room. a tense moment.
cel
3
Q

“| Conditionals 11/1: First Conditional
Read some examples of first conditional sentences:
:Are you coming to my place? Possible
. ad peice F action/situation
:’ll go to your place if | finish reading the story book. in the future
:l guess I’m going to miss the train. Possibility immediately
. . after the present
:If you start now, you won’t miss the train.
moment
:What will you do, if your first attempts fail? first conditional in
questions
:If | don’t succeed at my first attempt, I’ll try again.
:I think you are going to be late. use of might: to tell
You haven’t sent the document yet. ADSLtia POSSIEIIiEY
:‘Hmmm....I think if | send it today,
Shaymoli might get it tomorrow.
:‘Thank you very much for everything. imperative in first
:No problem. Here is my card. canaimerial ig
advice
:lf you need any extra help, just give me a call.
&
g

English Grammar and Composition 173
How to make first conditionals?
First conditionals follow this pattern
If +subject + present tense followed by subject + future tense (will/may/might
+ verb) + extension (if needed)
Some conditions
There will be two parts in a first conditional sentence.
Fisrt conditional can be used in affirmative, negative, and question sentences.
If the if clause comes first, there should be a comma (,) where the if clause
ends.
Use of 1* conditional
1. We use 1* conditional to speak about a future possibility depending on
the present situation, the if-part is the present condition, and the part
with will/may/might is the future possibility.
2. We can use the first conditionals when we talk about possibilities
immediately after the present.
3. We can use may/might instead of will to say about the result of an
action in the first conditional.
4. We can use imperative in first conditional to give an instruction or
advice.
re}
S
Nn

174 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 1 Read the e-mail written by one friend to another friend. The
mail has some use of first conditionals but for each conditional sentence only
a part is given. Complete the conditional sentences by selecting and adding
the right part from the alternatives given below the mail.

Dear Mithila

Great to hear from you. It is also great to know that you are coming to North

Bengal. How many days are you planning to stay here? Are you going on

vacation or coming with any special assignment.

Please let me know the date of your coming and tentative stay period. I’ll see

you if Uf) eeateesecerresrersnctertictiparees came senrseeeersa lal also (b)

tisustisisseattsseasieseesssenasseaeeney HE | Can Manage my parents. Who else are

coming with you?

| often think of our lost days. They were really so sweet!

(C)...sccscestecesscsssersesteesseeeeesy LF YOU Can. | will copy them from you. And don’t

forget your camera please for new photographs.

However, we have a possibility to go on a study tour in March. Hope that will

not coincide with your stay here. Yet, if it happens, (d)

Stay fine. And keep in touch.

Raifa

will you Please bring your old try to receive you from have no exams
mind album Jaipurhat airport that time
2
ES

English Grammar and Composition 175
Activity 2
Mr and Mrs Bishwash are going to a wedding party. Complete their
conversation, using the words below in first conditional.
: yf Mrs Bishwash: If we don’t
ire H ale
Be 4 is to = ‘0 the party on time.
iA i we) TERRES 1 ESE Goa ary Mr Bishwash: Hmmm, (2)
ae Al a BOBS) coscsesessssesessseseseesreeesene Dit late.
12) °F SU at) EES LON on Pia
a tid eee cy flee ni Mrs Bishwash: I'm being
Yi oy Cae AP Crs I heat | panicked. What
| Cie aa aE a .
We rasae ee 8°) a a)
al Ve7p Jeol bem oar) i!
Nah} tes ae FRED ssscsssesseeoth Ore?
th 54 Le 16 re!
3 iy! | ka) “ait ‘ Mr Bishwash: I’m sure they (6)
al = sussesnees for ten fifteen minutes if (7)
sietessseeesereeeseeeees thELE.
Mrs Bishwash: But it’s embarrassing! We are the host. It (8)
teitiiieanaae If some of them leave. The guests too (9)
seettessteteeeeeeeeeeee WIth US if (10) uo ceeeeeeeseeeeees US there.
Mr Bishwash: Look, I’m already done!
(11) veces QUICKLY if you keep calm.
Mrs Bishwash: Do you think Ms Perraira will come?
Mr Bishwash: She will come if (12) uu... ceseccceeeeseesesssesesereeercreseeeeees LIME,
Mrs Bishwash: And what about her daughter?
Mr Bishwash: She doesn’t like party. But (13) ...........ssseeeeeee If YOU Insist.
Mrs Bishwash: Are you ready now?
Mr Bishwash: Yes. And hope if (14) .....ccasssseeeeeeees Dad traffic, we
2 will reach the party house in time.
S
N

176 English Grammar and Composition
1. we/ not get 2. it/not be 3. what/ happen
4. we/not be 5. the others/do 6. we/ not be
7. they/ wait 8. they/not see us 9. be/shame
10. guests/annoyed 11. guests/notsee 12. everything/do
13. herhusband/make 14. she/come 15.there/ be not
Activity 3
Read the following text which tells about some guidance for tourists in a new
city. The tourist guide is written in first conditional sentences. Half of the
each guidance is written in the first column and the rest half is given in the
right column. Match the texts in both the columns to make conditional
sentences.
If you travel in between November Seek help of the police
to March
If you travel during May to July Keep some warm clothes with you
If you go to any place alone Look at the city brochure
If you are lost Go to the memorials in the evening
If you want to shop It may have discount
If you want to avoid crowd Don’t forget your umbrella and wind
cheater
If you book early Don’t delay for late hours
If you love museums Don’t speak to any unknown person
co
S

English Grammar and Composition 177
11/2: Second
Conditional
A Read some examples of second conditional.
Atia : What would you do, if you came here a month ago?
Rozina : If came here a month ago, | would travel to some
more rural areas in Bangladesh. And if | came a here
in my childhood, | would not leave the country ever.
Kamal : How are you enjoying your present job?
Minto : Not very good. I’m leaving this office.
Kamal : Why?
Minto : Llove this office. | have been here for a long time.
But the salary is too low. If they could offer me a better
salary, | wouldn’t leave this job.
Tamanna : If you had lots of money, what would you do?
Sefali : If had ten million dollars, | would go for a world tour.
Grammar Point
USE
We use second conditional to talk about future depending about the past
situation.
Forma-23, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

178 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 1 You know the world is too much polluted now. Here are some
suggestions on how to make the world better. Complete the
sentences using the verbs and the second conditional. You may
need to use the options given to use more than once. The first
one is done for you.
1. If you didn’t start wars, the world would be a better place.
2. If CVEFYONE wees their Cars 1eSS, thEre....csccscessceeeceee SO
much pollution.
3. If people wwe MOre recycling, they ......eee the
environment a lot.
4. People ou... eee SO UNhealthy if they oes JUNK
food.
5. People ......c.eeeeeeeeeeees fFOM Stress if life oe eeeeeeee SO fast.
6. Celebrities .............cceeeeeee POPUlAar if PeOple ........eeeeeeees FEADINE
about them.
Activity 2 Complete this interview using the words in brackets and the
second conditionals. Use short forms where necessary.
Interviewer : If you could have another job, what ............s0se (it/be)
Interviewee : Well could be an NGO person. | would really be happy if | could
work with rural people for their development. Alternatively, if |
could do some research on Bangla literature, | might do better.
Interviewer : What NGO would you join if you had the chance? National or
international?
20,
S

English Grammar and Composition 179
Interviewee : | wanted to start with national level NGO. However, if |
continued, | would finally switch to international. | might have
more opportunities to work for my country.
Interviewer : And what kind of research would you prefer if you had the
chance to do that?
Interviewee : | think | would research on Jibanananda Das, if | really had any
opportunity.
Interviewer : Is he your favourite poet?
Interviewee: Yes, very much. | would do comparative study between
Jibanananda Das and Wordsworth.
Interviewer : But you are quite successful in your current profession.
Interviewee : Oh yes, I’m doing good. Yet, if | could develop as | dreamed, |
could do better, I guess.
Interviewer : Who knows... maybe you are right. But do you regret your
present occupation now?
Interviewee : Not exactly. Time has moulded me for my present job.
I
>
Q

Read the following conversations and notice the positions of -ing verbs.
1. Pantha : How many countries in the world use English?
present simple passive
Aditya : English is used by almost all countries in the world.
2. Salma_: Uttam, we are going on a picnic.
Uttam : Really! Great! Please tell me the plan.
Salma_: We are working on it. I’Il tell you later.
Uttam : Who is making the plan?
Salma_: The plan is being prepared by the class captains.
present continuous passive
3. Sylvi : Who invented radio?
Setu —_: It was invented by Marconi. past simple passive
4, Tahsin : This is a beautiful old building. When was it built?
Orin — : It was built in the Mughal era. past simple passive
Tahsin : Who built it?
Orin — : It was built by a Mughal emperor.
5. Shishir : You said you took the patient to the hospital.
Pranto : Yes, | did. Yet | couldn’t save the patient.
Shishir : Why?
. Pranto : Doctors did their best. . .
5

English Grammar and Composition 181
Medicines were being experimented. past continuous passive
But they didn’t work.
6. Pritu: Have you attended the meeting today?
Antu: Yes, I’ve.
Pritu: Would you please tell me the decisions taken?
Antu: It has been decided that some make up classes will take place in
next couple of weeks. present perfect passive
7. Teacher: Who will take the responsibility of booking the bus for the
picnic?
Student: Iqbal’s uncle is a bus driver.
So booking can be arranged by Iqbal. |= modal passive
Grammar Point
We use passive when object of the verb is more important than who does the
work (subject). Since object is more important in the passive, object is used as
subject in the sentence.
It is funny to say — Some people established the school in 1856.
So we say — The school was established in 1856.
Read the above texts (1-7) again and see if they prove what is said here
(Grammar Point).
Passives are more used in the formal situation such as media reports and
public information.
ce
=

182 English Grammar and Composition

Activity 1 Complete this story about a journey using the past simple
passive or past continuous passive form of the verbs in the
brackets.

My journey to Kuakata was painful. First of all, | was late to get up from my
bed. | (take) to the bus stop by a rickshaw but the rickshaw
(stick) in traffic jam because the road
(repair). When | got to the bus stand, | (tell) that there was

a problem and the bus would be late. When the bus came |

(give) a seat beside some noisy young boys and girls. During the journey all

through the passengers (entertain) with some cheap music

and video. Suddenly the bus (stop) by some policemen and

it (check) thoroughly. It took nearly half an hour. | was

inwardly burning. When | arrived at Kuakata after evening, it was raining. |

went to hotel where some other tourists were waiting too. We
(charge) higher than the regular tariff. However, finally |
(take) to a room. The door (unlock) by the

porter and | was happy to see the tidy room. | just threw myself in the bed.

Activity 2 Complete these news stories, using the passive form of the

correct verbs in the box. The first one is done for you.
build
A new bridge is going to_be built over the river Padma. The plan
in 2014. The construction work will end in 2019. |
Ss

English Grammar and Composition 183
come to know about it from TV news. The whole project
by the government of Bangladesh without any

support from any donor countries or agencies. The people of southern districts
hugely as soon as the bridge

. The bridge will connect the southern districts to the

capital city. This will save the travel time of the people living in those districts.

The report says that several national and international companies have started

their work. The construction sights by Communication

Minister and other high officials.

Activity 3

Complete this conversation between two friends, using the words after it (a-i)

and the correct passive forms. The first one is done for you.

Antara: Have you seen my recent posts in Facebook?

Amy : Yes, they are lovely. (a) Where were the photographs taken?

Antara: On my way to Barishal from Dhaka.

Amy : Okay. And (b)

Antara: Last week when | went to my cousin’s wedding party.

Amy :(c)
so | didn’t know.

Antara: {d) much
early. And sorry that not :
fe)

A big party (f) :
2 Amy i(g)__ CCCs the previous one?
S
N

184 English Grammar and Composition
Antara: All family members only — roughly about 15-20.
Amy : How (h) in the next one?
Antara :A few hundred, | guess.
Amy : I’m (i) . It should be like that.
a. Where / the photograph/ take
b. When / they/ take
c. |/not/ invite
d. The party / not/ plan
e. Many people / invite
f. Abig party / arrange/ soon
g. How many / people/ invite
h. How many / people/ invite
i. | / not/ surprise
Activity 4
Read the following sentences and compare between active and passive
forms.
Present simple
Active : How many people do you invite ?
Passive: How many people are invited ?
Present continuous
Active : Is Jami videoing the programme ?
Passive: Is the programme being videoed by Jami ?
Past simple
Active : We didn’t plan the programme much earlier.
Passive: The programme was not planned much earlier. S

English Grammar and Composition 185
Past continuous

Active: My uncle was planning the whole programme earlier.

Passive: The whole programme was being planned by my uncle earlier.
Present perfect

Active: We have already sent the invitation cards.

Passive: The invitation cards have been already sent.
Modal

Active: You can download the photo from the net.

Passive: The photo can be downloaded from the net.
Going to

Active: The programme is going to take place on 13" of May.

Passive: The programme is going to be taken place on 13" of May.
We use active or passive depending on what we are most interested in. We
use the active if the subject of the verb needs to be focused. But if the action
itself is important, then we use passive form.
Sometimes we use by+agent, when both action and agent (doer) are
important to be focused. for example .
Piya: Look, these paintings are quite interesting, aren’t they?
Lira: Sure! They should be. They are painted by Jainul Abedin!
Piya: And what about that one — people with big muscles?
Lira: You really don’t know? That’s painted by SM Sultan. All figures of Sultan
are muscular.
Forma-24, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

186 English Grammar and Composition

Activity 5 Read the information in a brochure and change the active
sentences into passive.

Welcome to Green Valley School. We are situated at Pubail which is only a few

kilometres from Dhaka city. We request you to send your kid to us. Here are

some reasons why we claim our school different from other schools.

i. We have a spacious campus near Dhaka. Its only 30 km away
from the zero point.

ii. We take extra care for slow learners.

iii. We have residential facilities. Students can learn staying away
from the din and bustle of the city.

iv. Our school buses come to the city on Friday and Saturday and
stay from morning till evening.

v. We do alternative assessment of our learners. It prepares them
for final exams.

vi. Learners do not need extra hours to study and they do not need
private tutors.

vii. | This is a whole campus program. Here students learn academic
matters. They take part in physical activities like games and
sports. They also take part in cultural activities and social welfare
programs.

viii, | We send students to different institutions home and abroad as
part of our exchange programmes.

ey
ES)

English Grammar and Composition 187
Activity 6 Complete this conversation by putting in the correct active and
passive verbs in the box.

will be contacted are checked would find

was being carried has been stolen couldn’t be detained

collect are needed was wearing

can be unattended saw is seen

is pasted had kept is broken

will be sent will be interviewed has got

was coming can be identified

Passenger =: Oh hello! | guess, my lUggage .....-.esssescesesseeeessseestetssestsessnetseeseeete «
| Jseesseeeeeeeee MY luggage here and went to the fresh room.
When I’m back it’s gone.

Officer : Write your name and problem here in this paper which
siteeete setters: tO the next room. Then you
(imunnanneannwadcanannesws DY a PEFSONs

Passenger _: Ok.

Officer : Did you see anyone taking your luggage away?

Passenger =: Ol yes. I did. WheD1 | ..........sssssssssssssesesessesssssersrseseeeeseeeees OUT OF the
wash room, | assesses that my luggage
seieteitsetestsestiesteniersseeese AWay by a man. Before | could run to
him, it was taken outside. Due to crowed and barriers the man

cx Officer : Did he wear any uniform?
S
NN

188 English Grammar and Composition
Passenger : I’m not sure whether that was a uniform. He
seeissessteeieetissseseeneeee MAVY Dlue trousers and green T-shirt.

Officer : Then it must be someone from the Lost and Found Dept. In the
AirPpOrt NO |UGZAE ......sssecscesessceseecceeee « LF SOMETHING ....ceceeeeee
like that, Lost and Found Dept. ...............0:0. it. Unattended
DAgS veecscsccssecessssesssestseceteseseseeee FOF SECUFILY reasons.

Passenger — : Is there any possibility that | ..........cccssssssssecesssccossesesceetesseeseeenees
my luggage back.

Officer : There are incidents when passenge’s .......1.ssseeeeeeeeeeee ChIP
luggage back. For this exact time, location and descriptions
sesseseetesssesesteeseteeeestessinseetstaseseeeee «« ANd the contents in the luggage
too. What did you have in the luggage? Also tell about your
luggage such as colour, size and other characteristic features that
seeteteeeteseeseaeteeaetesaneseatinesatisesssacteeasteeaeseeeeeee @ASIY DY anyone.

Passenger =: OK. | ssseseseessseeeeeeeee Personal belongings, some books,
umbrella, shoes, and some gifts. It’s a green trolley bag of
overhead cabinet size (22X18). One of the wheels
seseesseeeesseeeneteteeetetseeteteteeeneteteteee oC cceceeeeeteeeeeteteeeeeeeeeees @ FED band in
the handle. My name card is also ...........eeeeee ON the top.
The manufacturer is Zbangla.

Officer 1 Sit COWN please. YOU veces SOON,

Activity 7 Rewrite these instructions using simple commands instead of
the passive.

An A4 size paper needs to be used for this type of experiment. First of all, it has

to be torn into four smaller pieces. This is done as follows:

1. It has to be folded in the middle and then it can be torn intotwo
pieces. Ss

English Grammar and Composition 189
2. Each piece is folded again across the middle and torn to make a
total of four equal-size pieces.
Now one of the pieces is placed on the table with the long sides pointing
down. A horizontal line is drawn across the top of the paper about a quarter of
the way from the top. Then two vertical lines are drawn downwards from the
horizontal line, so that the bottom part of the paper is divided into three
equal-size parts.
Next, the paper has to be torn along each of these vertical lines as far as the
horizontal line sothat three flaps are created. Then the left flap is folded
toward you and the right flap is folded away from you — the folds are made
right at the top of the flap. The centre flap should not be folded, though.
Now a paper clip has to be found and this is attached to the bottom of the
centre flap. Finally, the whole thing has to be raised high and is then allowed
to fall...
(adapted from Communicative Grammar Practice by Jones L, 1998)
Activity 8 Rewrite the following newspaper headlines in complete
sentences using the passive.

a. Theft of valuable things at Dhanmondi. 2 killed. 3 injured.

b. War criminals hanged in Bangladesh. People rejoice.

c. 10 killed at Dhaka Aricha highway.

d. Russian airline crashed in Sinai. More than 300 hundred dead.

e. Polythene seized, 10 shop owners arrested.

f. 5,00,000 saplings planted for roadside afforestation.

re}
5

190 English Grammar and Composition

Activity 9

Work in pairs. Ask and answer the following questions. The questions are not

in complete sentences. Complete them using the verbs in the brackets and the

passive.

You take long time to complete your work. Why don’t you work fast?

| work meticulously. | don’t Want .......ceceeeeseseeeseeeeeeeeteteteeeeeeeeee-(Criticize). It

takes time.

When is your next play coming?

’'m still writing. Hopefully it... esessineenereees (Stage) in

next March.

| know you have visited the Pyramids. How is that?

It’s great! You know the pyramids. The pyramids .........sscsssesseseesesssessssseseneeesees

(Visit)... EVErY Yar.

What do you know about the Heathrow airport?

It’s one of the busiest airports in the world. The airport .........cessssseseseeeteseeeeees

(use)........... nearly 1.5 million people.

Who built the Taj Mahal?
sy
S
N

13/1: Basics of Changing
Speech
A Read the texts below.
Context 1
Monika said, “You’re late!”
(reporting speech) (Reported speech) =
3
Mohammad said, “I expected that you would come on time”. 3
(reporting speech) (Reported speech) &
Farhana said, “We have been waiting for you for a long time.
We are hungry. ”.
(reporting speech) (Reported speech)
“I'm really sorry. I’m hungry too. Let’s go to a restaurant”, said Soma.
(Reported speech) (reporting speech)
Context 2
We told Mithun that we were going to Sagardari to Michael's place. 2
She could join us. 3
Mithun told that without speaking to her mom she wouldn’t be 2
able to decide anything. 8
Abid responded that was ridiculous as they all were grown up.
% Mithun replied that it didn’t mean they were out of any bindings.
8

192 English Grammar and Composition
What differences do you find between the statements in Context 1 and
Context 2?
Grammar Point
A reporting speech is the statement of the person who reports about
something. We use reported speech when we are speaking or writing about
something that another person said.
A reported speech is the statement what is being reported by a speaker. This
statement is made by one person but reported by another person.
In direct speech we say exactly what was said or thought by others using verbs
like said, thought, told shouted, etc. (as in Context 1).
The common feature of direct speech is

inverted comma (“....”) before and after the speech (made by other

than who is reporting).
When we report what someone is saying or thinking now we use indirect
speech after says, thinks, hopes etc. (as in Context2). Here we often use that
but that is not obligatory.
Example
| was speaking with Ranjan. He says (that) he has just left Barishal.
We also use this form when we say about something that is always true.
eg. He says he doesn’t like band music.
or
Dipika says we can create a better world by loving each other.

=
x

English Grammar and Composition 193
B Now read these sentences.
We said to Mithun that we were going to Sagardari to Michael’s place.
She could join us.
Mithun told that without speaking to her mom she wouldn’t be able to decide
anything.
Abid responded that was ridiculous as they all were grown up.
Mithun replied that it didn’t mean they were out of any bindings.
Abid hoped that her mom will finally allow Mithun to go.
| felt it wouldn’t be that easy.
However we all wished good luck for Mithun.
Grammar Point
We use said to report someone’s words/statements
We use told when we make its clear who the speaker was speaking to.
We can use verbs that express the feeling of the speaker when we report what
someone has said or thought. For example, hope, feel, be afraid, want, wish.
C Read the following conversations. How does the reported speech
change when they are made indirect from direct?
Direct
Boby : Hi Probir, It is good to see you in Facebook.
Probir : Hi Boby. Good to see you too. How are you?
Boby : I’m good. Well, I’ve got three tickets for the cricket match.
Would you like to go with me?
Forma-25, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

194 English Grammar and Composition
Probir : Hmmm... | have an appointment with my doctor. I’m sorry.
Boby _ : Okay. Next time.
Indirect
Boby greeted Probir and told it was good to see him in the Facebook.
In exchange Probir also greeted Boby and said that it was good to see
him too. He asked Boby how he was.
Boby replied that he was good. He also told that he had three tickets
for cricket match. He asked Probir if he would like to go with him.
With hesitation Probir told that he had an appointment with his doctor.
He was sorry.
Boby replied that it was ok and hoped they would go together next time.
In indirect speech we report things that people say. We often use said and
change the tense of the verb of the speaker used in the following way:
Actual words Reported speech
present simple past simple
present continuous past continuous
past simple/ past perfect
present perfect
will would
can could
am/is/are/going to was/were going to
5

English Grammar and Composition 195
Grammar Point
In informal speech we sometimes use the same tense that the person used
in the direct speech. Besides when we want to say something that someone
says about future we use the same tense used in the direct speech
Example
Hannan: I’m going to Bandarban tomorrow.
Hannan says that he is going to Bandarban the next day.
Activity 1
A bus was going from Dhaka to Khulna. Suddenly it stopped on the way and
couldn’t move for a long time. Report what people said using the correct
reported speech forms of the words in the parenthesis. The first one is done for
you.
— aa
Seog)
7 = =
TA aoe f
1. The guide said that he was sorry for the delay. (I’m sorry)
2. The driver said due to a road accident
ahead. (‘All traffic is suspended’)
3. One passenger sitting next to me said to
3 get stuck for hours. (‘It is horrible’)
N

196 English Grammar and Composition
4. I said a wash room as
well. (‘1am hungry. | need...’)
5. Another woman from my back said for her
connecting bus. _(‘I’ll be late’)
6. Some children cried that outside. (‘ We are fed
up and want to go’)
7. Asenior citizen said . (“My pressure is rising
up’)
8. The driver said that
last week too.
{I’m so sorry but the same thing happened’)
Activity 2
Suppose last year you met a friend of yours, Mathin, after many years. These
are some information about Mathin that she herself gave you.
1. I’m living in | 10. | can come to your
California with my 7 ' “~ place on Saturday.
| uncle. | | ’ . -
2. My father died a 4 9 if 9. I’m going to stay
few years ago. V7, = il = Vi here for a month.
& a + ) i 4
i} y ,
3. My mom is living | OB hades i» \ 8. I’ve got some
here with my elder sad \ friends in California
brothers. \ “Sasa? but friends here are
i +2 , :
. ee special.
4.1 came to 1 as .
Bangladesh the day é 7. ’'ve regular contact
___ before yesterday. with Mim and Raja.
5. Tomorrow I'll go to 6. | always miss
our school to see Bangladesh, my friends
teachers there. and family members x

English Grammar and Composition 197
You met another friend, Lailee, in the evening. Use reported speech to tell
Lailee what Mathin told you about her life. The first one is done for you.
1. Mathin said that she was living in California with her uncle.
te
Be
Qo
5. ee
6.
To
8. —$ $$
9.
10,
A_ Read the texts below to see how direct speeches are converted to indirect
speech when they are placed in a passage which is commonly known as
‘passage narration’.
Direct speech
Sales person: How can | help you?
Customer: Thanks. I’m looking for one of my friends working here.
Sales person: What’s his or her name?
Customer: She is Sohana. Do you know her?
Sales person: Sure. And your name, please?
Indirect speech
The sales person asked the customer how she could help him (the
~ customer). The customer thanked her and told he was looking for one of his
R

198 English Grammar and Composition
friends working there. The sales person asked what his friend’s name was.
The customer replied that she was Sohana. He also asked whether she
(sales person) knew Sohana. The sales person answered in the affirmative
and asked his name politely.

Activity 1

Compare both the speeches and find out the changes in the indirect
speeches by answering the following questions.
a. How do the modals change in the indirect speech?

b. How do the interrogative sentences change?
c. How do the yes/no questions change?
d. How do the information question (wh-questions) change?
Grammar point

We use ask + object + question word to report questions that ask for
information.

We use ask + object + if/whether to report questions that ask for the
answer yes or no.

Activity 2

Read the text with direct speeches. Change them into indirect speech and

write them in one passage following the clues.

Direct
“When are you starting for Burimari?”, Moni said.
“The day after tomorrow’, | said.
“Will you visit Dalia too?”
“I’m not very sure. | have some fixed programmes. They will occupy me the
next few days’, | answered. ‘But why are you asking me that?’
‘| wanted to accompany you’. Moni said.
oe}
‘Are you sure?’, | wanted to know. S

English Grammar and Composition 199
Indirect
Moni asked me . | told it was the day after
the next day. She then asked me . | was not
sure. | told that | had some fixed programmes. They would occupy me the
next few days. | asked . She told
that she had wanted to accompany me. | wanted to know
Activity 3
Report what happened in this conversation using question words (what,
where, when, etc.) and correct reported speech verb forms. The first one is
done for you.
Things the interviewer Things | told
asked me
Where are you from? I’m from Uttara.
Why are you late? | knew that the meeting will take place at
ten o'clock.
Who did you speak to? | contacted with one of my classmates,
Tonmoy.
What can | do for you Please give me a chance to attend the
now? meeting.
How can you avoid this Next time |’ll contact the office.
situation?
oO
3
N

200 English Grammar and Composition
Things the interviewer asked me Things | told
He asked me where | was from. | told him that | was from Uttara.
Things the interviewer asked Things | told
me
He asked me where | was from. | told him that | was from Uttara.
He | a
He Po
He I a
He I
Activity 4
Now read the following text which is a conversation between a tourist and a
tour operator. At the left hand side you see the questions the tourists asked
the operator. At the right hand corner there are incomplete sentences. You
complete them using if/whether or a question word and the correct speech
verb form.
Questions a tourist asked the tour
operator.
Can you guide us to the local A tourist asked me whether |
museum? could guide them to the local be
museum. S

English Grammar and Composition 201
What time does the museum He also asked
open? me eT
How much does a ticket cost? Then he asked
How long does it remain open? He further asked
Is there any café inside the Next he asked
museum?
Will you wait for us when we finish Again he asked
our tour?
Have you purchased our ticket? He continued to ask
ls there any tour guide inside? Finally he asked
Activity 5
Make a list of the words used in the reported speeches to show continuation
of speeches. One is done for you.
a. also
b.
Cc.
d.
e.
fi
Forma-26, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

202 English Grammar and Composition
B Read the following texts.
Direct
Mathin told Lailee, “Listen to me. I’ve some important business now and so |
have to go. Please come at my place in the evening.” “We will chat together and
have tea together”. “How fantastic!”, said Lailee. I’ll definitely come.” I’m free in
the evening. Can | invite Nikhil to join us?” “Wow! What a great interesting
idea! I’m sure, he must be very happy to join us. Please ask him to join. Let’s
have dinner together, not tea”, said Mathin.
Indirect
Mathin asked Lailee to listen to her. She had some important business then and
so she had to go. Mathin requested Lailee to go to her place in the evening. She
told that they would chat together and have tea together. Lailee expressed her
joy (or exclaimed in joy) and said that it was a fantastic idea. She confirmed that
she would go as was free in the evening. Lailee asked Mathin if she could invite
Nikhil to join them. Mathin expressed her joy too and said - that was a great
idea. She hoped that Nikhil would be very happy to join them. She then
proposed that they would have dinner together instead of tea.
25
3
Q

English Grammar and Composition 203
Activity 6
Identify the changes or differences when the speech is converted to indirect
from direct speech and answer the following questions.
a. What do we use in place of said in P
the direct speech is an imperative E f r . ~Sy 1
sentence? ia es,
b. What do we use in place of said oo = 7 “_
when the direct speech is an : iy =
exclamatory sentence? Me =
c. What could be used in place of said .. \ z=
when the direct speech is an tz
exclamatory sentence with a sad | a
news? Pom! <S > 1
= a ae ai
d. What do we use in place of said 1 WES SS
when the direct speech begins with bb, tS L
Let? : /
e. What change do you notice in the
indirect speech for verb when the direct speech has Let?
Note that when we change direct speech to indirect speech we do not
change word by word. We do some fine tuning to make the language lively.
Otherwise it becomes mechanical and unnatural. This is why in the above
indirect sentence it is written -
She confirmed that she would go as was free in the evening. We didn’t write
— She said that she would definitely come. She also said that she was free in
the evening.
This type of fine tuning is important for changing speech from direct to
indirect especially when you have a whole conversation to change.
corel
8

204 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 7
Imagine that you went to your school the other day and there you met
your friend, Nandita. She told you about her friend. This is what she told
you:
Jibon and | have been friends for two years. | first got to know him at a
friend’s birthday party. But we saw each other at another occasion before
that. He arrived at the party very late. He didn’t recognize me when we first
talked. People were asking me to sing. He also requested. He wanted to sing
with me too. | told him | didn’t really want to sing. Anyway, later | agreed.
Although he was a singer we sang together for some time. We didn’t leave
the party till 10 pm. Later we met each other frequently and gradually we
became good friends. We have so many differences but we respect each
other. Sometimes we fight but we never leave each other. This is why our
friendship is so unique.

S

English Grammar and Composition 205
Activity 8
Now read the following speeches. The first one uses direct speech and the
second one uses indirect speech. Underline the differences from direct to
indirect speech. Then read the texts in the boxes to understand the
changes.
Direct
It was a nice rainy morning. Bishu and Chimeg were
seeing the rain through a window. Bishu asked
Chimeg, “Do you have rains like Bangladesh?”.
“No”, said Chimeg, “Mongolia doesn’t have
monsoon rain. Mongolia has winter. But sometimes
we have little rain and they are unlike this rain. |
have never seen such rain in my life.” Bishu said, “|
would like to get drenched in the rain. Will you
follow me?” ” Let us run”, said Chimeg.
Indirect
It was a nice rainy morning. Bishu and Chimeg were ; - -

The information here is
seeing the rain through a window. Bishu asked | | a fact. So verbs do not
Chimeg whether they (Chimeg) had rai @ | | change to past form
Bangladesh. Chimeg answered in the-iegative. She
added-that Mongolia doesn’t have monsoon rain. When the same person
Mongolia has winter. But sorretimes—they have speaks more than one
little rain and they are unlike rain in Bangladesh. ime, We use added,

continued, also said etc.
Chimeg also said that she had never seen such rain
in her life. Bishu desired to-get-drenched in the rain ifanyone wants todo

. . ~ anything, we can use
and asked Chimeg if he would follow her. Chimeg desivedinasadotseid
proposed to run in the open field.
” Let us run” —this is a
proposal and we use
proposed instead of said
in the indirect speech.
=
S
N

206 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 9

Re-write the following story using the correct reported speech forms. Use
say (that) ...., tell + object (that)...., ask + object + to infinitive, or tell +
objective + to infinitive.

There was a wedding party beside my house and the people were enjoying
music in loud volume. It continued until mid-night and that was too much. |
went there and said, “There are many students and patients around. It is
mid night as well. Please turn down the volume of your music. It is creating
disturbance for all.” One of them said, “It is a party. Who are you to tell us to
turn it off? Leave the place and go home. Don’t disturb us.” | felt very
offended. Finding no other alternative to make them understand, | called on
the police by telephone. | said, “I’m speaking from Adabor area. It is mid
night and some people are having a party with high volume music. |
requested them to volume down their music. They insulted me and asked
me to leave the place. Will you please come and do something needful?”
The police said “Don’t worry. We are coming in five minutes”. After some
time the police came and told the people, “It is time for people to sleep.
Turn down your music or switch it off. You can enjoy your party without
disturbing others.” Then they switched off the music.

S

Part 2 Composition

=~
S
AQ

Informal communication takes place in intimate circles, usually among friends
and family, and formal communication takes place among people whose
relationship is formal. In informal writing and speaking, we use lot of
contractions such as I’m, you’re; I’ve, I’d etc. Idiomatic expressions or phrasal
verbs, exclamation, repetition, tag questions and use of slangs etc, are features
of informal writing and speaking. The following letter is an example of an
informal letter.

1. Read the letter and examine the features of informal style in this letter.

Dear Shuvro,

It’s really, really good to be here in Sylhet. We got here on Saturday
evening. The journey was HORRIBLE, the bus moved like a local bus, it
stopped quite a few times to pick passengers. It was really irritating. It
took twelve hours to get here! But the place we’re staying is very nice —
the surroundings are beautiful. I’m having a good time with my family
now, but | miss you a lot.

It’s now Tuesday afternoon and I’m sitting at a tea- garden chatting
with some local boys. The weather is fantastic! It can lift your spirit.

With lots of love,

Rupom
Dhaka
12/06/16
Forma-27, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

210 English Grammar and Composition
2. Now rewrite the letter changing some words and expressions to make
it sound a little more formal.
3. Here is another informal letter. Read the following letter and say what
aspects of the letter make it informal?
Hi Stella,
It seems hard to believe that I’ve been here in Sylhet for a whole week
now. | promised to write and tell you how | was getting on-so here it goes.
When | first got here, | could not just get used to the new environment
with new friends, in new school. Now, though, I’m learning to take things
easy and I’m beginning to feel really at home. My first impression of the
Sylheti people is that they are really, really friendly and heipful.
I’ve managed to make friends with a few girls. The countryside round the
town is marvelous and very green, because it rains a lot here, but too
much of rain can really be boring.
Sorry this letter is short, but you know how bad I’m at writing letters. Do
write back when you’ve a spare minute. | miss you so much.
All my love,
Sumi
4. Now convert the letter into a somewhat more formal one.
5 Further tasks:
e Write a letter to your younger sister congratulating her on her success
in the JSC examination.
e Write a letter to your younger brother advising him how to prepare for
JSC examination.
e Write a letter to a friend inviting him to come and stay with you for a
week during the school holidays. %,
3
Q

English Grammar and Composition 211
e Write a letter to your friend narrating your experience of seeing a new
film.
e Write a letter to your mother informing her that you had a bad cold,
but now you are good after you took some antibiotic prescribed by a
physician.
e Aska friend to join your birthday party.
Review:
All personal letters are informal letters, but the degree of informality varies;
some are highly informal, some others are semi formal. The informal letters
are characterised as already mentioned above, by:
1. Use of colloquial words
2. Conversational tone
3. Use of contractions
4, Use of two word verbs
5. Use of slangs (in very intimate circle}
As mentioned earlier, degree of informality varies. For example,
When writing to parents, a letter may be a little less informal in its choice of
words and tone than a letter written to a very close friend. Contractions and
group verbs can be used with parents and other relations who are senior to us
and whom we respect, like our uncles and aunts etc. In such personal letters
highly emotional words and expressions and slangs should not be used.
&
>
N

212 English Grammar and Composition
14/2: Formal Letters
A Read the following letter and see Pa
how a personal letter is also see, Rely
sometimes formal depending on Ss) e. a.
the relationship. However such (iE y— <=
letters may have a conversational 2 , wy §
tone and hence, may be EY ———
seml-formal, f= \
Al / |
Look at the following letter written by a son to his father.
Boys’ Hostel
Collegiate school
Rajshah!
45 Jonuary 2017
Dear Father
f could not write to you for the last few days as | was too busy with my
annual examination. As you know, our examination is over. Let me tell you
that | have done well In ail the papers. | hope the results will be good.
However, as the new class starts from 7 January, | need to buy same new
books. Please send me Tk. 2000.00 extra for the purpose. Also send money
for my reguiar monthly expenditure for the month of January.
f hope everybody at home is fine. | phoned mum and Sumi yesterday and
learnt about Rita’s birthday party. May the Almighty keep you in good
health] Please pray for me.
Yours,
Shuvro 3

English Grammar and Composition 213
Activity: How is the style of this letter different from the style of the
preceding informal letters?
A formal letter is a letter that you write in formal situations, such as, a student
writing to the Head Teacher/Principal of an educational institute for a
scholarship or the waiver of the fees; a person writing an application for a job,
or someone writing a letter to the editor of a newspaper; or any other kinds of
business letter, such as an order or a complaint letter, etc.
In formal letters, no contraction, idioms or phrasal verbs, no colloquial or
conversational style or tone is used. An objective, detached style is used in
formal writings. Features of informal style mentioned above are not used in
formal letters.
B Read the following letter of complaint.
House 2, Road 2
BIHAS, Rajshahi 6205
5 December 2015
The Manager
Quality Leathers
222/R.D. Market, Rajshahi
Subject: A complaint letter regarding customer service
Dear Sir or Madam,
lam writing to complain about a leather jacket which | bought from your
store 3 weeks ago. | had tried a jacket on in the shop and checked it
carefully before | decided to buy it. When | went to the cash desk,
however, the assistant persuaded me to take one which was already
packaged and assured me that it was perfect.
When | reached home and tried the jacket on, | found a large rip under the
& side pocket. As you will realize, | was extremely upset to discover this.
=
S
N

214 English Grammar and Composition
The jacket was very expensive, and | only bought it from you because of
your reputation for quality. In fact | always recommended your shop to
friends in the past. | was shocked.
lam returning the jacket with this letter and looking forward to receiving
an apology with a full refund of the cost, Tk. 2950.00.
| look forward to hearing from you as soon as possible.

Yours sincerely,
Moinur Rashid
Note: A formal letter usually has 6 parts:
1. Writer’s address and date on the top right corner
2. Recipient’s designation and official address on the left side but two
paces below the date in number 1.
3. The salutation Or (addressing)
4. The body
5. The subscription ( Yours truly)
6. The signature or name on the bottom right corner. However it can be
given on the bottom left corner too.
This format is called a semi-block style. The letters above are examples of
semi-block style.
is}
S

English Grammar and Composition 215
Cc There is also a full-block style in which all the parts are left aligned.
Here is a request letter written in the block style:
Ocean Building
20 Lake Circus Road
Dhaka- 1000
10 November 2016
The Manager
Fashion Garments
5 Gulshan DIT Market
Dhaka
Dear Sir or Madam
| saw the advertisement of your Fall and Winter collections in yesterday's
newspaper The Timely News and would like to buy a jacket.
Please send me your latest catalogue showing winter jackets. | am interested
in purchasing a leather jacket preferably brown colour costing between
Tk. 1000 to Tk. 1500.
Your sending this catalogue by 25 November will be appreciated.
Yours sincerely,
(Ahmed Jamal )
Notice that the first part of a formal letter usually states the reason for writing.
Some useful phrases are:
| saw your advertisement in ------ and would like to --------
| am writing to you about--------
With reference to your letter/ advertisement ------
S Thank you for your letter of ---------
N

216 English Grammar and Composition
The middle part of a formal letter usually explains the situation in detail.
The ending part should normally include some polite remark. Some common
remarks include:
| look forward to hearing from you soon.
Thanking you,
| would be grateful/thankful if you would -----
D Read the following letter of application for free studentship.
25 January 2016
The Head Teacher
Pabna Zilla School
Subject: Application for full free studentship
Dear Sir
| have the honour to state that | am a student of class IX in your school. |
have been in this school since class three. A notice has been posted on the
school notice board inviting application for a special scholarship. | would
like to apply for one of the scholarships.
In this connection, | would like to inform you that | stood first in all the
classes so far. | also regularly take part in school debate and extempore
speech competitions, and have won prizes a number of times. My father is
a small government employee who manages a large family of six members.
Four of us are studying at different levels. It is almost impossible for my
father to manage all the family expenses including our educational
expenses. &
ES

English Grammar and Composition 217
| would be very grateful if you kindly grant me one of the scholarships for
free studentship.

Yours obediently,
Mohammad Samiul Haque.
Class IX (Science)

Roll no: 01

In this formal letter of application to the Head Teacher, all the parts of the letter

are left aligned, and thus it follows the block style.

Activity 1

Answer the following questions:

a Where do you put your address when you write a formal letter?
b Where co you put your name?
Cc Where do you put the date?
d Where do you write the recipient’s designation and address?
e What do you write in the subscription?
f What do you write in the salutation?
Forma-28, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

218 English Grammar and Composition
E Here’s another type of formal letter, a letter to the editor of a daily
newspaper for publishing a report. See the following example.
15 March 2016
The Editor
The Daily Star
Dhaka
Subject: Request for publishing a brief report on Victory Day celebration
Dear Sir
| send herewith a report on the celebration of Victory Day this year in our
school. | would appreciate if you kindly publish it in your highly esteemed
daily.
Yours truly,
Labib Sajjad
(On behalf of the students of Rajshahi Collegiate School)
Activity 1
Write an order letter to the manager of Fashion Garments (use the details in
Letter no. C above) to buy a leather jacket. You can use the following hints:
Thank you for --------
Please send by parcel/courier post the following items: ----
One brown -----, catalogue number ------, price ----------
One black -------, catalogue number ------, price ------
Total price -----------
| shall appreciate ------------ these goods by 20 December 2016
A cheque for Tk ------- is enclosed s

English Grammar and Composition 219
Activity 2
Write a letter to the Deputy Commissioner asking permission to publish a
literary journal of your school.
Activity 3
Write an application to the District Education Officer inviting him to join a
seminar on the Importance of Learning English in your school.
Activity 4
You need a seat in your school hostel. Apply to the Head Teacher of the school.
e Write an application to the chairman of your Union Council/
Municipality for the installation of a tube-well in your locality.
Write a letter to the manager of a bookshop to order a copy of the latest edition
of the Oxford Learner’s Dictionary. Mention how you are going to make the
payment.
14/3: Report writing
A A Report on the celebration of Victory Day at Rajshahi Collegiate
School
Rajshahi Collegiate School observed the Victory Day 2015 in a befitting manner
this year. All the students and teachers gathered in the school ground at 7:30
a.m. The day wore a festive look. Every one of the students held a national flag.
With a big banner, the teachers and students took out a rally that marched
towards the Central Shahid Minar. They sang songs of the liberation war and
placed floral wreaths in the pedestal of the Shahid Minar. Hundreds of other
organizations also went to the Shahid Minar. About 5000 students of the school
joined the programme. Various competitions were held in our school.
Throughout the day there were cultural activities of different types. We also
co commemorated the war martyrs by offering prayers.
Ss
N

220 English Grammar and Composition
14/4: Formal and
Informal English
A Read the following dialogue. Guess the relationship between the two
speakers by using their style and tone of speaking. Is the style formal or
informal? Show clues in support of your decision.
Robin : Say, Rumi, how you doing?
Rumi_: Robin!, Hey, how are you?
Robin : Not bad. Where you going?
Rumi: Over to Runu's. How about you?
Robin : | just got off work. Boy, I'm so hungry!
Rumi: Where are you working now?
Robin : Janata Bank. It's a real pain. But | guess | shouldn't complain.
Lots of guys are out of work these days.
Rumi _ : Yeah, that's the truth. Well, | better let you go get some supper.
Robin : Yeah. It was great seeing you again. Maybe we could get
together sometime.
Rumi_ : Sounds good. I'll give you a call.
Robin : O.K. Great. Well I'll be seeing you.
Rumi_ : O.K. Robin. Enjoy your meal.
Robin : Thanks. Bye.
Rumi_ : Bye.
S

English Grammar and Composition 221
Informal passage
A Discuss what makes the following passage informal.
Well, they had us take a look at the kids every day, and we’d write down lot of
things they did and said. There was this one teacher the kids really did things
for. This was because she was damn good at maths and could turn the kids on
to it. At the end of the week we all got together to talk about what we’d found
out since we got there. We all felt that you could pick up an awful lot about how
to teach just from watching what the kids did whenever the teacher told them
to do something.
B The passage below is the formal version of the above passage. How is
this passage stylistically different from the preceding passage?

We were assigned to observe the teacher daily to record their actions and
speech. What impressed us most was one teacher that the boys and girls
responded to eagerly because she knew her math thoroughly and made it
exciting. At the end of the week, when we met to discuss our conclusions, we
agreed that anyone can learn a good deal about teaching methods from merely
observing the children’s responses to the teacher’s directions.
Now find out the formal expression used in passage B for the following
informal expressions used in Passage A. In the blanks under Formal
expressions write down each informal expression.

Informal expressions in Formal expressions used in

passage A passage B

take a lot of

kids

write down

damn good at math

ial
S got together

222 English Grammar and Composition

what we’d find out

all felt

pick up

an awful lot

what the kids did

the teacher told them to do something
Activity 1
Read the following passage and identify the informal expressions in it. Then
change those with formal expressions.
One problem that plagues beginning teachers, and older teachers as well, is the
seeming lack of self- control of underprivileged children. Because their homes
are often characterized by an awful lot of fragmentation and instability, their
behaviour reflects their inability to keep real cool in situations involving adults.
... We think it important, therefore, that the teacher be calm and
understanding. For the teacher to be able to exhibit this kind of behavior when
confronting a bunch of adolescents, he must have achieved terrific level of
integration and security, so that his own psychic life is completely okay.
Each of the following sentences has expressions not suitable for formal writing.
Underline those, and give the formal expression for it in the line provided
against each sentence.
1. He has a_ lot of nerve. wane nnn een nnn nnnmnn enn n nn nnnmnnannnennn
2. There were a bunch of kids. motte nnn en enmnnn nnn nennnmnnn nnn nnnnnnnnnnnnennnn
3. We got out of there in a hurry. macnn nec erence n nc enn cnc nnn ane nnnn enn nnnnnannnanee
4, I’ve got to get a move on. wate nnn enna
5. He is a pretty nice guy. mann nnn nnn nnn nnn nnn nnn
6. War and Peace is an awfully nice book. -----------------------------------------------

is}
ES

= CV & Cover Letter 15/1: Writing CV
All/most of you will have to write effective Curriculum Vitae, in short, CV,
(called ‘resume’, in American English) for various purposes such as, to get a job
or scholarship, etc. Writing a good CV is a skill all of you will need for your
career.
The CV is meant to introduce you and your background to somebody who does
not know you. It should present you in the best possible light, in a concise and
well-structured manner. A regular CV for business purposes should definitely
not go over one A4 size page. If one wants to use it for academic purposes and
not for a job, the CV can pass that limit, and the additional space is used to
describe academic activities, like conferences, publications list etc.
A well written CV shows first what is most important, but contains all relevant
information. To this goal, it is advised that you adapt it to suit your target
(specific type of job or scholarship). Pay attention to the order in which you
present information in your CV.
Here is a guideline for writing a good CV. although there are a number of ways
for writing CV, they agree on some common details.
The information you need to provide in your CV are:
Personal details: Here you should include your date of birth, contact address,
telephone number and nationality. In case you have a permanent address
different from your temporary address, include both. Personal details can be
written with smaller fonts than the rest of the CV if you want to save space. You
should write your name with a bigger font than the rest of the text, so that the

« reader can easily see whose CV s/he is reading.

3

N

224 English Grammar and Composition
Objective: You should state very concisely what you accurately want to do. Say
something like, “To develop a career in .....”, or you can be more specific like “to
obtain a position in ... where | can use my skills in...” You can write a few lines to
describe that specifically, but keep in mind that you should show what you can
do for the organization or company you are sending the CV to more than what
the company can do for you. Writing a good objective is difficult, so take some
time to think about what exactly you are going to write there.
Academic achievements: After your personal details, give details about your
education. It is suggested that you present details about education in reverse
chronological order i.e., you start with the latest degree and go gradually back.
You should mention all your academic achievements _ including
grades/divisions/classes. You should also mention scholarships and awards you
received along with your achievements in co-curricular and extracurricular
activities in your academic life.
Mention the scholarships if you have received any or other types of awards
such as best student’s award, best debater’s award, award for poetry recitation,
extempore speech, sports and games and so on.
Experience: Here you should include experiences, if you have any, relevant to
the position you are applying for. You should show that you are a person who
can take initiative, has creativity and is innovative. You should be able to
convince the employers that you will be the best pick for the job.
Extracurricular activities: If you are writing a professional, and not an academic
CV, you should mention activities/programmes you have attended/participated
in.
Language Skills: You should also mention your level of competence in any
language you know in all the four skills, i.e. whether you are average, good, very
good or excellent in Reading, Writing, Speaking and Listening in the languages
you know. ee
ES

English Grammar and Composition 225
Computer skills: Write if you know—Microsoft word or anything else of
computer.
Hobbies: List your hobbies if space is left on the page. They look fine on a CV,
showing that you are not a no-life workaholic, but a normal person.
You can introduce other headings that suit your needs. Have a references
section, where you should list contact details of 2 or 3 persons who would write
letters of recommendation or reference letters for you.
These are the usual components of a CV.
Print the CV on plain-white paper. You should never send a CV without a cover
letter. If the advertisement does not say anything about a cover letter, you still
should send one. Send the CV with covering letter in a matching A4 size
envelope.
Activity 1
Refer to the guideline of CV writing above, and answer the following
questions:

i) |Whyis a CV important?

ii) What is the basic purpose of writing a CV?

iii) What points should be included in CV
Activity 2
Next, fill in the gaps in the following sentences with appropriate information
from the passage.
Length of a CV for business purposes should be ----------------page/s. A CV for
academic purposes should include ----------- like----------------.. In American
English a CV is called ---------. A CV should be sent with a ---------------------. The
CV should present one in the -------------------. If there is space problems
--------------------can be used for personal details. What you want to do should be
included precisely in ---------------------.Academic records should be presented in
----------------order. Experience shows the --------- of a candidate. In a
professional CV, one has to mention the list of ----------------------s/he attended.
Forma-29, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

226 English Grammar and Composition
A Look at the following sample CVs. The first one is of a university
graduate.
CURRICULUM VITAE
of
MD. SAKHAWAT HOSSAIN
Contact No.: 01714-821999 Photo
E-mail: sakhawat.ru.iba@gmail.com
Objective: e To work in a responsible position where | can use my
creativity, interpersonal skills and my knowledge to
contribute to any development sector of Bangladesh.
Permanent e Md. Sakhawat Hossain (Shakil)
Address C/o. Md. Abdur Rashid Mollah
Village-Dashpara, Post office-Dublia, District - Pabna
Mailing Address =e Md. Sakhawat Hossain (Shakil)
Room 241, Rajshahi University
Rajshahi
PERSONAL INFORMATION
Full Name MD. SAKHAWAT HOSSAIN
Father’s Name Md. Abdur Rashid Mollah
Mother’s Name Fatema Khatun
Date of Birth 01/08/1986
Nationality Bangladeshi (by birth)
Gender Male
Marital Status Unmarried
Language e Speaking, writing and reading skills of Bengali &
Proficiency English.
25
S

English Grammar and Composition 227
Interests: ° Traveling, reading & sports.
Computer Skill ° Computer application course (MS-Word, MS-Excel,
MS-Access, MS-PowerPoint), Internet, Hardware &
Networking etc.
EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATION
CGPA-3.17 out of 4 | University of
Rajshahi
M.B.S National
Accounting University
B.B.S(Hons) 2008 National
Accounting University
References e Dr. M. Shahidullah
Professor, Department of English
and
Director, IBS
University of Rajshahi
Phone: 0721-750767
Mobile: 01711-400879
Activity 3
« Now make a CV of your own with authentic information.
Ss
N

228 English Grammar and Composition
15/2: Writing a
Cover Letter

A Cover Letter is a letter that has to accompany a CV. It usually refers to the

advertisement for the post a candidate is applying for, with dates and

source of the advertisement and a brief note on the applicant’s background

and qualification. The applicant’s CV has to be enclosed/attached with the

cover letter. The following sample cover letter shows what a cover letter

usually contains:

a. Cover Letter 1

25 January 2016

The Librarian

Pabna Community Library

15, Sadar road, Pabna

Dear Sir

| would like to apply for the position of the Library Assistant in your library

advertised in the Daily Star on 25 November 2016. Please see my CV and

other relevant papers send to you as attachment with this mail.

I'll be looking forward to your responses.

Best regards.

Nikhilesh Adhikary
20,
S
qQ

English Grammar and Composition 229
b Cover Letter 2
25 January 2016
Manger
WESTEC
Bashundhara City, Dhaka 1206.
Dear Sir/Madam,
I’m interested in applying for the position of a weekend sales assistant
advertised in the daily Bangladesh Today on 20 January 2016. | have some
experience of working as a salesperson in supermarkets like Agora and
Nandan. | attach my CV to provide you with details of my educational
qualifications and experiences.
Yours sincerely,
(signature)
Activity 1
Now answer the following questions.
e Where is the date put?
e What other information are provided in the cover letters?
Note: When writing a cover letter to apply for a job,
e Mention the position you are applying for and where you learnt about
20 the vacancy.
S
N

230 English Grammar and Composition
e Provide some information about your background and experience
related to the advertised post.
e Provide information about your interest and suitability for the job.
Show that you have some knowledge and skill about the job.
e Mention that you have attached a copy of your CV with other necessary
documents.
e Have a good, clear format of your letter. Use the lay out and format of a
formal letter.
e = Print out in an A, size offset paper. Use a laser printer.
e Use Microsoft word programme to process the letter.
Activity 2
Here is an advertisement for a few part-time jobs for school students. Apply
with a cover letter (block style) and a CV for at least three positions.
The Daily Star 20 December, 2015
Holiday Jobs for School Students
A reputed international organization dealing with different children’s issues is
recruiting some school children for holiday jobs. The jobs will be only during
school holidays, both weekly holidays and long and short vacations. It will be an
interesting experience for students. Payment will be on hourly basis but quite
attractive.
Positions:
e Data collectors: From students of primary school about their opinions
regarding their English Textbook from different districts. Number of &
positions: 50 from each district S

English Grammar and Composition 231
e Data collectors: From school drop outs regarding their willingness to
continue their studies and causes of their dropping out. 50 from each
district
e Motivators: Motivating poor parents to send their children to school. 50
from each district
e Teachers: for school beginners from poor families: 50 from each district
e Assistants for children’s Libraries cum Child Centres to be established in
each district: 20 for each district
Application dead line: 20 March, 2016
Qualification: Only students of class IX and X can apply
A testimonial from the Head Teacher is required.
oO
3
N

We write and send various types of e-mails every day. They may be friendly,
professional, resumes, planning for events etc. Writing an effective e-mail is
indeed very important.

How to get attention

It is important to get the receiver to read your e-mail; it is also important to get
the e-mail noticed by the receiver, and then keep the receiver engaged till s/he
finishes reading it. Here are some tips for you for writing an effective e-mail.
Five tips for writing an effective e-mail

1. Clear purpose: It is important to know the purpose of your e-mail. The
receiver should be sure about the point.

2. Use the subject line wisely: Take the time to select a meaningful,
straightforward subject line that tells the reason for the e-mail clearly.

3. Make sure your identity: There are many cases where e-mails are ignored or
bypassed because the receiver is not familiar with the sender of the e-mail.
Take time to make sure that your full name is placed as the sender so that the
receiver will know who you are.

Avoid using initials or nicknames as many people tend to ignore e-mails that
are not sent with whole names which they can recognize.
4. Get to the point: Make sure your e-mails are concise.

People want to know what the e-mail is ”

about as soon as they open it. After a brief a
greeting followed by a comma, make sure =
the next few lines are related specifically to
the subject of the e-mail. wo

5

English Grammar and Composition 233
If this is a reply to another e-mail, reply immediately to any questions posed in
the original e-mail.

When composing the e-mail do not use unnecessary words. Short sentences
and paragraphs are better than long ones. Use an active voice such as "We are
sending your order today" instead of "Your order will be sent by us today."

5. Make sure your e-mail is readable: There is nothing more annoying than an
e-mail that cannot be read for various reasons, whether it’s because of poor
grammar or spelling, or the use of inappropriate fonts and abbreviations, or
even worse, an e-mail written in bright colors or all capital letters. It is always
best to use the proper format when sending an e-mail.

Check your e-mail text before sending it, and keep the formatting simple.

Put a blank line between paragraphs.

Remember: An e-mail is a form of communication; it is not a piece of artwork.
Why e-mails are bypassed

After you send your e-mail, you might not receive an answer for a number of
reasons.

In many cases, important e-mails are sometimes bypassed because the receiver
simply looks at the subject and decides that it is not worth reading, or puts the
e-mail aside for later reading (which may, or may not, happen!). This can be a
problem if the information within the e-mail is essential.

To avoid e-mails being bypassed or deleted just follow the five key points. You
will get the attention of the receiver.
Forma-30, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

234 English Grammar and Composition
Examples of some e-malls:
Example 1; An official note
& * y i Ki a
Team Members
|
Subject: Changes to Agenda
TiesNewRomn * s(t)’ gy Ev ity By BYU sly ave —4
Dear colleagues,
The following stems will be on the agenda for our meeting on Friday:
© Changes to protocol
© New software installation
Email monitoring policy
Failure to provide additional items by tomorrow will result in delay of the issue until proper,
tumely submissions are made.
~Margo
~
R

Engllsh Grammar and Composition 235
Example 2: A personal mail
ra
Subject | Thank You - Assistant Account Executive Interview
Dear Ms. Smith,
It was very enjoyable to speak with you today about the assistant account executive position
at the Smuth Agency
The job seems to be an excellent match for my skills and interests. The creative approach
to account management that you described confirmed my desire to work with you.
In addition to my enthusiasm, | will bring to the position strong writing skills, assertiveness,
and the ability to encourage others to work cooperatively with the department
| appreciate the time you took to interview me. | am very interested in working for you
find look forward to hearing from you regarding this position
Sincerely,
Jane Jones
Jane Jones
sae
(855)
x
&

236 English Grammar and Composition
Example 3: An informal personal mail.
t a Grew * > 6 xX
#304 raqimsal jthes Y=
sees ge beckeurts G Shege I Geese are Pree scree C) patcenceen ith J utcet tet nT on RT thatthe ints [) BRGLEE . toe bosch
fore = Mal Sewch = News Spots, Firurce «= Coketety, «Wether «Games Ames Fecy Mts Merv 0 Try Yates Mal on Findon »
i yy A 0
uBREOe
© Compose ro F PO! sours
Span 63] : DAILY FANTASY
tab itt sie ?
iam A WEW DAY, A NEW LINEUP.
eptet bade
‘ f
bear Rt AWEW WINNER.
Dew
bey Feetiney Conteh Fat pm Ho wept OH
_ This is just to say you bello,
: < Hoaw are: you doing in Bogra? Hope all is well.
mats Ini passing a very hectic time here, Working round the dock, To be hienest, | need
es Jest, Lwould fike ta go ta the hilly region to make my holiday this tine. You justcome
from Bogra and then together wee will make it. How aboat all three hilly districts and
be . tox's Bazaar including the St. Martin's istaned and Mafeshichali?
ty ba (1)
oy Tone soon.
«“o Don't see yor for ages. Missing you a lot.
ton Probir
fe
Ea Gisigh@=¢= i +
. ww
2 Ba0B8 64 G Q- Brew o« om
ove)
bi
3
AQ

17 | Short Composition: | 17/1: Characteristics and
Paragraphs Types of Paragraphs
You have done a good deal of work on paragraph writing up to Class 8. Now
reflect on your previous experience and note down what you understand about
the following:
1. What is a paragraph?
2. What are the characteristics of a paragraph?

Activity 1
Read the following text and then answer the questions that follow.
In the dinosaur age the earth was infested by dinosaurs of different shapes and
sizes. Some dinosaurs were very huge; they were heavier than dozen elephants.
Some dinosaurs walked on powerful hind legs and stood as tall as palm trees.
Still others had short legs, square bodies and were as big as army tanks. These
dinosaurs had long horns and ugly, hooked beaks. Dinosaurs were so strange
and terrible that other animals ran away from them in fright. The dinosaur age
ended with the extinction of dinosaurs.

a What is the main idea of the passage?

b Which sentence states the main or the topic idea?

c Are the other sentences related to the main idea? Does the

passage give an impression of unity or oneness?
The passage is an example of a paragraph.
Now read the passage below and note down the points made about a
paragraph and its characteristics.
A paragraph is a unit of written discourse (may be spoken discourse also). It may
be self contained i.e. complete in itself, or may be used as part of a longer
discourse such as an essay or other assignments. The main idea of a
well-written paragraph is usually expressed in one sentence. This is called the
« topic sentence. Then the idea is developed sentence by sentence. It is usually
S made up of a number of logically connected sentences written on one single

238 English Grammar and Composition
topic. Each sentence of a paragraph should be closely related to the topic, and
the paragraph should have a good structure with a beginning, middle and end.
An effective paragraph, according to Donald et al (1978) should have 3 major
characteristics which are:
e  |t develops one idea only, called the controlling idea or thesis
statement.
e Itshould have sufficient details to support the controlling idea.
e It should have a beginning, a middle, and an end, that is, it requires a
topic sentence, a body to develop the topic sentence and a conclusion.
“ The beginning or topic sentence introduces the topic or subject of the
paragraph.
“+ The middle or body develops and provides support to the topic or
thesis statement.
“ The conclusion or end sums up and reaches a conclusion about the
topic/subject.
Activity 2
Discuss in pairs or groups what the above text says about paragraph and its
characteristics.
Activity 3
Read the following texts and see which one is a paragraph and which one is
not. Explain why you think so.
Text A
Besides care for personal appearance, he should pay close attention to his
manner of talking and finally, an applicant must show self confidence. For a
successful interview, an applicant should demonstrate some qualities. The
applicant should be elegantly, not too casually or too gorgeously, dressed.
Firstly he should be knowledgeable; a good degree also is necessary. Good
preparation for interview is also needed. Job interview is important for
everyone. SI
AQ

English Grammar and Composition 239
Text B

Paragraphs can be classified in various ways. In essays paragraphs are classified
into introductory, development, transitional, summarizing etc, types.
Depending on the purpose of the writer, on the other hand, paragraphs may be
classified into persuasive, argumentative, descriptive, narrative etc, types.
According to techniques of development they can be classified into cause and
effect, contrast, comparison, definition etc. types In short, these are the major
classifications of paragraphs.

Activity 4

The following sentences are not in proper order to form a coherent
paragraph. Rearrange them in a logical order. Put a number in the bracket
against each sentence according to the sequence you would like to arrange
them in.

(_) Last Friday was a frustrating day.

( ) But my father called me and asked me to type a few official letters for him
before | went.

(_) It was my aunt from next door calling to check if | could give her some
time.

( ) It was a beautiful, warm and sunny day. | decided to go out and enjoy the
lovely weather.

( ) When | finished typing, | got up quickly and hurried towards the door.

( ) | got dressed, took my fishing rod, and got my bicycle out to go fishing.

{ }) When | got back home, the sun had already set. | was still dressed to go
fishing, and the cycle and the fishing rod were there leaning against the
gate.

( ) Just at that moment, the door bell rang.

( ) She needed me to take her to the hospital.

( ) Her daughter, my cousin, has just given birth to a baby boy.

~ (_) As | took the cycle and the fishing rod inside the house | realized that |
S had spent the day doing things | never thought I’d do.

240 English Grammar and Composition
( ) | left the fishing rod and the cycle standing against a wall in the courtyard,
ready to go the moment | would finish typing the letters.
Activity 5
Look at the sentences below. They do not fit into one paragraph. They refer to
two different topics. Separate the sentences for two different paragraphs and
rearrange them into two logically connected paragraphs.
e My first day in the new school was difficult.
e There were some benches and an outdoor oven in the picnic area.
e Inthe National Park of Shalna we found perfect setting for our picnic.
e | got stuck in the traffic jam and reached school fifteen minutes late.
e Everyone had gone to class and | found no one to ask for direction.
e Nearby we found a football field, and not further away, a big pond
where some of my friends went swimming immediately. .
e Twice | was embarrassed when | walked into classroom that was not
mine.
e Behind the picnic area was a forest where some of us went for a walk
after lunch.
e The building was so huge that it was hard to find my classroom.
e Finally, | decided to go into my classroom
e When | ultimately got to my class, | was almost in tears.
e We liked the place so much that as we rode home on bus, we agreed to
have next year’s picnic in the same spot
Types of Paragraphs
There are many types of paragraphs. The major types are:
Descriptive paragraph Narrative paragraph Cause and Effect paragraph
Comparison paragraph _— Contrast paragraph Expository paragraph
Argumentative paragraph Persuasive paragraph Listing paragraph
Some of these types are dealt with elaborately from lesson 3 onward. S

English Grammar and Composition 241
17/2: Topic Sentence

Writing an effective topic sentence
A good topic sentence introduces the topic to be developed in a paragraph. It
controls or limits the focus of paragraph, and once the focus is mentioned,
there is no scope to go outside it. Anything outside its scope will be redundant
or unnecessary. On the other hand, if the paragraph does not sufficiently
support the topic statement that proves another weakness of a paragraph.
Remember that although the topic sentence usually comes at the beginning of
a paragraph, it may sometimes come at the end or even in the middle of the
paragraph. Sometimes the main idea of a paragraph can be so obvious that it
need not be stated explicitly.
Activity 1
Read the following paragraph from a thank-you note and then answer the
questions that follow.
You have made everybody in our family happy by giving me the raincoat. Sonia
is happy because she won’t have to lend me her raincoat again. Mother is
happy because we have stopped arguing over who is going to use the one
raincoat we have had. Father is happy because he doesn’t have to buy one now.
Even old grandpa is happy because now the house is quiet and he can sleep
peacefully. | am the happiest person of all because you gave me a wonderful
gift.

a What is the topic sentence of the above paragraph?
Forma-31, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

242 English Grammar and Composition
b What is the topic?
c How do all the other sentences add up to explain the main idea of
the topic sentence?
Activity 2
In each of the following paragraphs, the topic sentence is missing. Supply
the topic sentence for each.
a. Tourist Spots in Bangladesh
The first and most important tourist attraction in the country is Cox’s Bazar
sea beach, which is the longest sea beach in the world that has a sloping
sandy beach where people can go swimming and have sun baths. One can
also go for drive long the beach. The hilly area beside the beach has a
wonderful natural beauty. The scene of sun-rising and sunset seen from
the beach have unique beauties of their own that can only be felt, and
difficult to express in language. The second attraction for tourists in
Bangladesh is the Sundarbans, the largest mangrove forest of the world.
The dense and tall tropical forest is remarkable for its natural beauty. The
streams running through the forest, and its habitats, the Royal Bengal
tigers, striped deer and other animals make it one of the world heritage
sites of the world. Kuakata beach of Barisal and Patenga beach of
25
3
Q

English Grammar and Composition 243
Chittagong are some other places of natural beauty worth visiting in
Bangladesh. The country has many other scenes and sights worth visiting
for local and foreign tourists.

b, Developments in Rural Transport System
A revolution has taken place in the rural transport sector in Bangladesh.
About a decade or so ago, there were hardly any mechanized mode of
transport in the rural areas; people had to walk long distances. Students
used to walk three four miles to go to school and another three four
miles of walking back home from school. Farmers used to carry their
goods either on their heads or by bullock or buffalo driven carts. But
with the improvement of roads in the rural areas, non-conventional
mechanized transports are seen frequently moving along the roads,
carrying both people and goods. This mechanized transport system that
includes engine driven vans, tempos, auto-rickshaw and the like have
changed the face of rural Bangladesh. The farmers can easily market
their products by using these transports. It has brought mobility in rural
life and it is largely contributing to the economic growth of Bangladesh.
Thus it is noticed that very significant change has taken place in the rural
transport system of Bangladesh.

3

N

244 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 3
Use the topics below and compose a topic sentence for each one. The topics
are too broad for developing into single paragraphs. Think of an idea about
each topic and then state the idea in a topic sentence.
For example, A Good Friend might have the topic sentence “One quality | look
for in a friend is loyalty.”
a A good friend
b The value of my hobby
c How I spend my weekend
Activity 4
Complete the plan for a paragraph shown below. Add more supporting details.
Then write the paragraph thanking the host of the party mentioned in the
outline below:
Main Idea and Point of | Topic Sentence | Supporting Details
View
Writer enjoyed a party | just wanted |1. The raffle draw was so
to show appreciation you to know much fun.
for being invited how men 1] 2. The food...
mae YOur! 3. And | was so glad to...
Party. meet
20,
Ss

English Grammar and Composition 245
17/3: Descriptive Paragraph
Description is that kind of writing that pictures a place, a person, or an object.
In learning to write description, you should sharpen your powers of observation
i.e. train your five senses- sight, hearing, smell, touch and taste. Try to picture
for your reader the people, places or objects you are familiar with and have
observed carefully. This will help you describe them vividly by using details that
would appeal to your reader.
When you write a descriptive paragraph, tell who or what you are describing in
your topic sentence. Here is an example for you. Read the paragraph below and
look for details that appeal to the senses.
Activity 1
Read the paragraph below and answer the questions that follow:
The rainstorm was becoming more intense. Outside the wind roared and
raindrops splashed against the window panes. The wind rattled the windows
and slammed the shutters against the front of the house. Water began to drip
from the living-room ceiling in big noisy splashes. Then a loud burst of thunder
vibrated the house and made everybody jump. Five year old Rima hid her face
in her mother’s lap and began to cry.
Which details in the paragraph above help you hear sounds? Which help you
see the rain?
Activity 2
A good paragraph helps the reader see something exactly as the writer sees it.
Think of details of your own to describe the following things. Try to use your
five senses: sight, hearing, taste, touch, and smell.
a The clouds in Autumn, or in the rainy season
b The star fruit
c Your favourite flower, or your favourite food
ial
S
N

246 English Grammar and Composition

Describing People

A Read the following extract taken from Ernest Hemingway’s story, The
Short Happy Life of Francis Macomber:

Francis Macomber was very tall, very well built if you did not mind that
length of bone, dark, his hair cropped like an oarsman, rather
thin-lipped, and was considered handsome. He was dressed in the same
sort of safari clothes that Wilson wore except that his were new. He was
thirty-five years old, kept himself very fit.

Notice that the details in the above passage describe the physical
features and appearance of Francis Macomber.

B Now read the paragraph below from another story, The Capital of the
World, by the same author and see how it describes both the
appearance and some of the nature of the person being described:

: He was a well built boy with very black, rather curly hair, good teeth and
a skin that his sisters envied, and he had a ready and unpuzzled smile. He
was fast on his feet and did his work well and loved his sisters, who
seemed beautiful and sophisticated; ..... and he loved his work.

Cc Read the following paragraph and notice how the topic sentence
expresses the main idea of the topic, i.e. my little sister acts like my big
sister. And then notice how this is developed through illustrations or
examples in the following sentences:

My little sister might as well be called my big sister. I’m twenty years old,
and Urmila is only twelve. But Urmila acts like a sixty year old lady, not
only with me but with everyone else in the house. She is regularly
advising my father on what to wear, what to eat, when to take rest. My
mother merely smiles when Urmila advises her on what to cook for the
: day or if the curry was a little too salty. Maybe we all pamper her a little.
0}

English Grammar and Composition 247
and accept her adult acting. But last month when | came down with the
flu, | realized how precious she was to me. She sat beside me all the
time, putting an ice-bag on my forehead, bringing me water and fruit
juice to drink and often, in her usual manner, scolding me if | did not take
medicine on time. And all through those days she tried to cheer me up
by telling me the “little stories” of her life. That one time she really was
my ‘big” sister.

Activity 3

Write a paragraph on a brother or sister (or any close relation) of yours. Write

a topic sentence telling the reader about a characteristic thing of his or her

nature. Then write sentences to develop that idea.

Activity 4

Write a paragraph describing your best friend. You can describe some features

of his/her appearance as well as some aspects of his/her nature, or can

describe just one of the two.

Describing a Place

D Read the following paragraph in which the writer is describing a street
in the early morning as he or she sees it.

A Street in Early Morning
In the early morning streets are scenes of serene beauty. | live on the eighth
floor of a high-rise building by a very busy street in Dhaka city. But in the early
morning the street wears a very different look. When | get up early, | often stand
on the balcony overlooking the street. The sun has just come up and its light
bathes the whole street with a golden glow. The street lights, after the night’s
vigilance, say goodbye as they are turned off. On the footpath the street dogs
that were awake all night curl up for a bit of sleep. On the other side of the
oO
S street, a few unfortunate homeless people pull up their torn bed sheets to

248 English Grammar and Composition
shade them from the sun and go back to sleep again. A car, with its headlights
still on, rolls by slowly as if sorry to disturb the morning calm. A few rickshaw
pullers paddle their vehicles slowly towards no particular destination. A tea stall
lights its fire and the smoke from it fills the quiet morning with heavenly mists.
A light breeze brushes my face as | stand there enjoying the serene beauty,
trying not to think of the noise and hustle of the day that will surely follow in a
few short minutes.

Activity 5

Write a paragraph describing a busy city street.

E Here is another descriptive paragraph. Read the paragraph and find
out the topic sentence, developers and terminator or concluding
sentence in it.

a) Rural Life in Bangladesh
The majority of the people of Bangladesh live in the rural areas. People live a
very plain and simple life. Majority of the rural people are farmers. They work
on their lands and earn their livelihood by cultivating their own land or working
on other people’s land. They work hard from morning till night. Some of the
farmers are quite well-to-do, but there are many landless people also. The
affluent people of the rural community send their children to schools, colleges
and universities, but the poorer section cannot afford their children’s
education. In most cases, their children become child labourers. They work as
day labourers in other people’s houses or turn rickshaw or van drivers. These
days, most of them can, however, earn enough to manage two square meals a
day. Some of them go to the nearby towns and cities to work as rickshaw
pullers, garments workers, taxi or auto-rickshaw drivers. Whatever is the
amount of money they earn, they are happy with what they have. These days
the rural people have modern facilities of life too. Most houses have electricity,
television; the rich people also have refrigerators, improved sanitation system. S

English Grammar and Composition 249
In every nook and corner of the villages, there are small bazaars, where people
go for shopping and spend their leisure time taking tea, gossiping, watching
movies, sports etc. together. Most villages have primary schools, there are high
schools and colleges in every two/three villages. The rate of education in the
rural areas is increasing rapidly. Rural people have a good community life. They
help each other in their weal and woe. The villages have been modernized over
the last two/three decades.
Activity 6
Write a paragraph describing a reading room in a library.
Further Tasks
Think about the following topics, note down as many points as you can think
of. Arrange the points in a logical sequence, write a topic sentence, and then
develop a paragraph on each topic.
a Ahistoric place/site
b The Parliament House (Sangsad Bhaban)/The National Mausoleum
c Anold house
d Asummer evening an — | : :
e Acrowded market aa
f Adouble decker bus ‘a a 2. =
>>.) Bh | Ve
—_, é
oY it P
a ‘i
Forma-32, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

250 English Grammar and Composition
Describing an event:
Activity 7
Look at the picture below and describe what is happening.
— Kine pie SA Sony,
-~ we t ioe =
ae rd . ‘ee a
; . >
: ee as ™ “ h A " ¥) y
aang bee “se ¢ Neer te i. — 8
. , i -_ i ron Hy
or a u Ar
17/4: Narrative Paragraph
The purpose of narration is story telling. Narrative paragraphs narrate or tell
about some past incidents or events. The simplest kind of story is the kind of
writing that tells us about a series of actions, usually in time order, in a single
paragraph. A good narrative paragraph often tells us not only ‘what happened’
but also ‘how it happened’. While writing a narrative paragraph you should
keep in mind the following guidelines:
a present the subject in a topic sentence
b include information about the people and the setting
c tell the action in chronological order
d use transitional words, such as, first, soon, next, then, later, etc.
e write a concluding sentence to bring the incident to a definite end S
8

English Grammar and Composition 251
Here are some examples of narrative paragraphs.
A Horrible Childhood Memory
Some of the past memories are not forgettable. Here | narrate one such
memory of my life. | remember a fateful day when my friend, Sameer,
almost got drowned. During our summer holidays, our school was closed.
There was a big pond close to our home. My friends and | often went there
to take our bath and have a swim. On that bright colourless summer day |
had gone with my two friends, Sameer and Arif, to the pond. We got into
water, swam for a while and were thoroughly enjoying ourselves. At one
stage, when we were quite far away from the bank | heard Sameer cry out
for help. He was going under water. At first | thought he was making fun, but
soon | realized that there was something wrong. | saw Arif swimming
toward Sameer. But Sameer was drowning, his body was under water. We
could not find him. It was a serious situation; everybody was tensed. | was
puzzled and could not decide what to do. Then | swam towards the bank
and cried out to the passerby to do something to rescue Sameer. Hearing
my shouts a young man rushed to the spot, took off his shirt and jumped
into the pond within moments. He dived into the water, searched for
Sameer a few times, and after about five minutes found him and brought
him on the surface, and carried him to the bank in an unconscious state. We
were still not sure about his condition. Then he shook Sameer in a special
way for sometimes. After about 40 minutes Sameer had some movement
and opened his eyes. It was a_ terrible experience of my life.
My First Day at School
I still remember my first day at school. A few months before | was taken to
school, there was a kind of preparation in the family for helping me start a
new chapter of my life, my school life. A new dress was tailored, a new bag
and a few new books were purchased. (In)On a fine morning in January, my
grandmother and my mother dressed me up for school, hanged my school
bag with the books inside at my back, and my grandfather, who was
3 excessively fond of me, held me by my hand and led me to school. It was
N

252 English Grammar and Composition
primary school about half a mile away from our home, not very far, but |
had never been there before. From a distance | could hear the noise of the
students learning their lessons in a loud voice, and there was a sound like
the singing of a chorus. When I reached the school, | saw a large number of
boys and girls sitting in five different clusters, each cluster was a class. |
could see them all, as there was no partition to separate the classes. | was
afraid to see so many boys and girls, and the noise they were making.
Moreover, the teachers were quite old and seemed rather unfriendly to me.
My grandfather took me to the Head Teacher for admission, completed
some formalities, gave me some advice and left me in the school. But five
minutes after my grandfather had left, | felt so helpless among these
strangers that | decided not to continue. Within moments, | took my bag
and started running after my grandfather. | managed to overtake him in a
few minutes, but he was surprised to see me thus run away from school. He
tried to take me back to the school, but | started crying piteously. This
moved my grandfather, who carried me back home. When | think of this
now, it provokes laughter.

See how the above paragraphs begin, develop and end.

Activity 1

Write a narrative paragraph about an unforgettable experience in your life.

You may use the following questions to help you generate ideas.

What? Where? When? How? Why? etc.

Activity 2

Write a narrative paragraph on any one of the following topics:

a) A birthday party you attended

b) Celebration of Pohela Baishakh in your school last year

c) A picnic/ outing that you enjoyed very much

d) A sad experience of your life

20,
Ss
qQ

English Grammar and Composition 253
17/5: Cause and Effect Paragraph

This type of paragraph begins with a statement of the effect first, and then

goes on to give the causes that contribute to that effect.

A Read the paragraphs below and see how they begin, and what follows
in the body and conclusion in each of them. Also find what is the effect
and what are the causes in each paragraph?

1. Causes of Road Accidents in Bangladesh
Road accident is a regular phenomenon in Bangladesh. Many people die of
road accidents every year; many others become permanently disabled, so it
is considered a curse. Road accidents occur for various reasons. Many
factors are responsible for road accidents. The most common cause is
drivers without driving license. Many of the drivers in Bangladesh do not
have driving license. Even if there is a driver with license, sometimes the
conductors drive and the licensed driver take rest. Secondly, some of the
drivers drive very recklessly and they try to overtake, which in most cases
are one of the major causes of road accidents. Thirdly, many of the drivers
overwork. They drive by day, and sometimes they drive night coach also on
the same day, which cause much fatigue and the drivers feel sleepy which
may cause serious accidents. Fourthly, mechanical troubles such as break
failure, also cause accidents. The drivers, in many cases, do not properly
check the engines before they start driving. Fifthly, there are too many
buses on the roads. Moreover the roads are two-lane roads without any
dividers. So, sometimes there are head-on collisions and sometimes the
buses skid off the roads. There are other reasons also, but these are some
of the major reasons of road accidents in Bangladesh.
=
R

254 English Grammar and Composition
2. Causes of Students’ Failure in Examination

Many students fail in different public examinations every year. There are
many causes of students’ failure. The main cause is lack of students’ interest
in some subjects. Students do not enjoy learning and the system cannot
make learning interesting. The major motivation is to pass and get a good
grade, but beyond that, they do not seem interested in learning things for
their relevance in life. Students’ motivation to learning is very poor.
Another important reason for students’ failure is that the content students
are required to deal with does not seem to have any relevance for their
practical and professional life. Third important reason for failure of
students is that they study seasonally before the exams and neglect their
studies throughout the year. Moreover, teachers in the country are not
skilled enough to motivate the students and make their learning an
interesting experience. A well planned education that actively considers
students’ age and interests and designs meaningful, need-based
curriculum, develops meaningful interesting textbooks and materials for
learners, with skilled teachers can improve the situation significantly.

3. Causes of the Spread of English as a Global Language
English has emerged as the major international language of the world. The
importance of English has increased many times in the present world. There
are many reasons for this. Firstly, interdependence of nations in the world
has also increased after World War II, for trade and commerce and for many
other purposes. Secondly, people are moving from one country to another
for education, tourism, diplomatic and other reasons. A common language
is required for interaction among people from different countries and
contexts, who speak different languages. Without a common language it is
difficult to perform different activities at the international level. English has

%
8

English Grammar and Composition 255
assumed the position of that common language. Thirdly, it has also become
the major library language of the world, as most of the library books in the
world are in English. Education of international standard is not possible
without good command of English as most of the books and journals in
libraries all over the world are in English. Fourthly, English is also the
language of technology. It is difficult to live in the present world without
computers, internet, facebook, twitter etc, which are used globally by
people across borders and English is the dominant language for those.
These are some of the major causes of the emergence of English as a
global/international language.

Notice that each of the above paragraphs begins with a statement of the

effect as topic sentence and then in the body of the paragraphs, the causes

are given.

Activity 1

Write a cause and effect paragraph on each topic below following the above

models of development.

a) Causes of environmental pollution

b) Causes of poverty in Bangladesh

c) Causes of moral degradation among the young generation of today
oO
Ss
N

256 English Grammar and Composition
17/6: Listing Paragraph
Listing paragraph provides a list of items in support of the topic sentence.
The following paragraph provides a list of the major fruits of Bangladesh.
Fruits of Bangladesh

In Bangladesh, many kinds of fruits are available, and the fruit market in the
country also is expanding. Firstly, the name that comes to our mind is
mango which is the most popular and tasty fruit grown in plenty in different
districts of the country. Another very popular and tasty fruit is the leeches
which also grows abundantly in some northern districts of Bangladesh. The
third popular fruit is the jack fruit which is also our national fruit. Fourthly
we can mention bananas which too is_ very delicious and nutritious that
grows in plenty in most of the districts in Bangladesh. Fifthly, the name of
guava, which is very rich in vitamin C is available round the year. Among
other fruits, we can mention orange, pineapple, apple which used to be
imported in our country, but now growing in some regions of our country.
Now Fruits are available in all the seasons, but some fruits are available in
some specific seasons. Foreign fruits like apple, orange and the like are also
grown in Bangladesh now and they are available round the year. People in
the country are becoming increasingly fond of fruits, so growing fruits has
also become lucrative for the growers also.

Activity 1

Notice how the paragraph begins and develops. Find out the topic sentence,

and terminators, comment on their effectiveness. Are they well developed?

Here are more examples of listing paragraphs. Notice their structure

(beginning, middle and end). Comment on their effectiveness.

is}
ES

English Grammar and Composition 257
Stages of Bangladesh Education System
Education system of Bangladesh has few distinct stages. The first stage is
the pre-primary stage which comprises the two years of nursery school
education. The second step, which is the first official step in the country, is
the primary level that comprises classes | to 5 and now ends with Primary
Education Completion (PEC) Examination. The next step is the Junior School
level which comprises three years of education from Class 6 to class 8 and
ends with Junior School Certificate (JSC) Examination. The fourth step,
officially third step according to the new Education Policy 2010, is
secondary education that includes two years from class IX to class X and
ends with Secondary School Certificate (S.S.C) .The fifth step is the Higher
Secondary level education for two years and includes classes XI and XII and
ends with Higher Secondary Certificate (H.S.C) Examination. The next step is
Higher education that comprises 4 years of Bachelor’s (Honours) degree
and one year Master’s degree, or 3 years of Bachelor’s (pass) degree
followed by two years’ Master’s degree. After these levels, there are also
research programs for M.Phil. and Ph.D. degrees. These are the different
steps of the education system in Bangladesh.
Literary Genres/Forms
There are a number of major literary genres marked by their distinctive
characteristics. First, Poetry is a major genre of literature marked by
connotative, suggestive or ornamental use of language, rhyme, and rhythm.
This makes poetry different from other genres of literature. Poetry again
has sub-genres like lyric, sonnet, elegy, epic etc. Another major genre of
literature is drama or play which is written both in prose and verse. Drama
is primarily a performing art, not a narrative art, and is meant to be staged
in a theatre. It is composed in dialogue, and is marked by action of the
actors and actresses. Drama has subgenres like tragedy, comedy,
tragi-comedy and history plays. The third major genre of literature is fiction
Forma-33, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

258 English Grammar and Composition
which is a narrative art, written usually in prose, has one or more narrators
telling the story/stories. Fiction has sub-genres like novel and short story.
The fourth genre of literature is non-fiction prose. Creative writers in all
ages and all countries have tried their hands in all these genres and
entertained readers of all ages with their writings.

Activity 2

Write listing paragraphs on the following topics:

a) Picnic spots in your district
b) The major sources of entertainment of the time
c) Tiers of local government
17/7: Comparison Paragraph
This type of paragraphs shows similarities between two persons, places, things,
objects, actions or ideas. The topic sentence shows how we are comparing the
features or qualities of two subjects. To use this technique, we can have two
procedures:
a) Wecan compare two subjects’ features or qualities point by point, or
b) We can state all the features or qualities of a subject first and then
compare these with those of the other subject.
Read the following paragraphs and see how it has been developed. Notice its
topic sentence, development and conclusion.
A Paragraph and an Essay
Despite differences in length, a paragraph and an essay have a number of
similarities. Firstly, a paragraph has a beginning which is the topic sentence
that introduces the topic. Similarly, an essay has a beginning called the
introduction which also introduces the key idea(s) of the essay. Secondly,a 3
Q

English Grammar and Composition 259
paragraph has a body comprised of a few sentences called the developers
which develop the idea introduced in the topic sentence. Similarly, an essay
also has a body comprised of some paragraphs that develop the idea
introduced in the introduction of the essay. A paragraph has a terminator
or concluding sentence that logically draws the idea of the paragraph to a
logical conclusion by restating the idea of the topic sentence. Similarly, in an
essay, the concluding paragraph sums up the idea of the essay and
concludes with reference to the idea(s) in the introductory paragraph. In
addition to these, both have a sense of unity. The different sentences in a
paragraph contribute to one idea stated in the topic sentence and thus
create a sense of unity; the different paragraphs of an essay, similarly,
contribute to the central argument of an essay. Thus a paragraph and an
essay are largely similar structurally.

Read one more paragraph of comparison. Comment on its development

A Short Story and a Novel

Although different in length, a short story and a novel have many
similarities. Both belong to the category of literature known as fiction; they
are fictitious. Both of them have a story outline or plot. A short story has a
setting, both time and space settings; similarly a novel also has time and
space settings which contribute to the meaning or theme. Both are
narrative arts and have story teller to tell the story. Both are written in
prose. Both the genres have some characters, and episodes and both have
themes. Thus, a short story and a novel have many similarities.

Activity 1

Write a paragraph of comparison on the following topics:

a Your father and your mother

b  Alibrary and a museum

c Abrother or sister of yours and yourself
=
N

260 English Grammar and Composition
17/8: Contrast Paragraph
Contrast paragraphs show the differences between two things.
A Here is an example of a paragraph which presents a contrast between
the stars and the planets.
Stars and Planets

Although stars and planets shine in the night sky, they differ from one
another in many ways. In fact, most of the shinning lights in the sky are balls
of fire called stars. We do not feel their heat because they are very, very far
from us. Our sun is a star. The planets, on the other hand, are balls of cold
gas or solid rocks, and revolve round the stars. Our Earth is a planet that
goes round the star sun. Mars is another planet that revolves around the
sun. Stars come in different sizes and colours. The new stars are
bluish-white in colour. Often their heat is so intense that they look white
and are called “White Dwarfs”. Then there are large stars that have burnt
most of their fuel and are red in colour. They are often so big that astronauts
call them “Red Giants”. Like stars, planets also vary in size and colour. Our
Earth is a small planet compared to Jupiter, which is a ball of gas, many
hundreds of times larger than Earth. The Earth looks blue, the Mars is red,
while the Jupiter is orange.

B Read the following example of a contrast paragraph and see how it

begins, develops and ends.
Summer and Winter in Bangladesh
Summer and winter are two contrasting seasons of Bangladesh. Each has its
own characteristics that distinguish it from the other. Summer is
constituted of the months of May and June; winter, on the other hand, is
constituted of the months of December and January, as it really happens
these days. Summer is very hot and humid season. Temperature shoots up =
qQ

English Grammar and Composition 261
to 45 degree Celsius sometimes in some places of the country. During the
noon time, the roads become empty in the towns and cities as people are
afraid to go out in the sun. Sometimes people have heat stroke when they
work under the scorching heat of summer. The humidity causes profuse
sweating. On the contrary, winter is a very cold season; sometimes mercury
goes down to 3 or 4 degree Celsius in some places of the country. Often
there is dense fog in winter, and it continues for 3 to 5 days. The sun is not
visible for those days. Summer is the season of delicious local fruits like
mango, jack fruit and guava among others, whereas, winter is a season of
vegetables and flowers of different types. Thus the two seasons of
Bangladesh, summer and winter, are marked by distinctive differences.

C Here are two more examples of contrast paragraph. Read these and
notice their organization. See what differences between the two topics
in each paragraph are mentioned.

A Novel and a Drama
A novel and a drama are two different genres of literature with distinctly
different features. The first is a narrative art that has story and one or more
story tellers. It is written in prose. But drama is an action, not a narrative. It
is written in dialogue and the characters act out these dialogues on the
stge. It is a performing art. A drama is not a drama unless it is acted out on
the stage. Drama has an audience, but novel is meant for reading. The
narrator introduces and describes the characters in a novel, but in a drama
the characters are revealed through the action. Briefly these are some of
the major differences between a novel and a drama.
Objective Test and Essay Test
Objective test and essay test are two different types of test which focus on
different skills. Both have comparative merits and demerits also. An
objective test tries basically to test recognition and recall, some form of it
can test basic knowledge and understanding also, but it cannot test
analytical and logical thinking of the students and their originality and
creativity. Most common types of objective tests are MCQ tests, gap filling,
&9 yes/no, true/false type questions etc. Objective tests are easy to score, even
& machines can score objective tests. So scoring is highly reliable. Marks do

262 English Grammar and Composition
not vary among examiners for the same level of answers. Correct answer
will get full credits; wrong answers will be given no credit. So whoever the
examiner is from wherever, marking is reliable in this type of test. On the
other hand, essay tests focus on logical thinking, analytical skill and
creativity in presenting an idea, which are very important for all learners for
their intellectual development. However, marking is highly subjective in this
type of tests. Two examiners may award two different marks for the same
type of answers, or even the same examiner may award different marks for
the same level of answer if marking at two different times or on two
different days. Therefore, scoring of essay tests is not reliable. Thus the two
types of tests focus on different aspects, and both have their distinctive
merits and demerits and both are needed.
Activity 1
Write paragraphs of contrast on the following topics:
a_ Town Life versus Rural Life in Bangladesh
b The Old and the Young generations
c Two books you have enjoyed reading
d Two of your teachers you have liked
2
S
AQ

Short 18/1: Narrative writing
Composition

A short composition or a brief essay possesses the following characteristics:
a It is a composition of several closely related paragraphs.
b It develops the writer’s view on the subject concerned in a clear,

precise and well-organized manner.
c It is different from a paragraph in length, but quite similar to a
paragraph in structure.

It is made up of three essential parts:
a The introduction __: Presents the idea/s going to be discussed
b The body : Develops the ideas presented in the

introduction
c The conclusion : Summarises what is discussed in brief
No inclusion of new idea/s

A Read the following extract of narrative writing from Jonathan swifts
Gulliver’s Travels (Chapter 1)
My father had a small Estate in Nottinghamshire. | was the third of five
sons. He sent me to Emmanuel College in Cambridge, at fourteen years
old, where | resided three years, and applied myself close to my studies.
But the charge of maintaining me (although | had a very scanty
allowance) being too great for a narrow Fortune; | was bound
apprentice to Mr. James Bates, an eminent surgeon in London, with
whom | continued four years; and my father now and then sending me

x small sums of money, | laid them out in learning Navigation, and other
AR

264 English Grammar and Composition

parts of the Mathematics, useful to those intend to travel, as | always
believed it would be some time or other my fortune to do. When | left
Mr. Bates, | went down to my Father; where by the assistance of him
and my uncle John, and some other relations, | got forty pounds, and a
promise of thirty pounds a year to maintain me at Leyden; There |
studied Physics two years and seven months, knowing it would be
useful in long voyages.
Soon after my return from Leyden, | was recommended by my good
Master Mr. Bates, to be surgeon to the S, Captain Abraham Pannel
Commander; with whom | continued three years and a half, making a
voyage or two into the Levant, and some other parts When | came back,
| resolved to settle in London, to which Mr. Bates, my master,
encouraged me, and by him | was recommended to several patients. |
took part of a small house in the Old Jury; and being advised to alter my
condition, | married Mrs. Mary Burton, second daughter to Mr. Edmund
Burton, Hosier, in Newgate Street, with whom | reached Four hundred
Pounds for a portion.

B Read the following short composition and see how Rashed narrates a
sad experience of life.

When | was in class three, | had one of the saddest experiences of my
life. It was at this time when | lost one of the dearest persons of my life,

my grandfather. That was the first death in my family that | experienced.
After that, | have lost a few more relatives, my grandmother (paternal),
and my maternal grandparents with a few more other members of my
family. But as a little boy, my grandfathers’ death proved a crushing
blow difficult to bear for me.

My grandfather was the centre of earth for me. | strolled around him as

a little boy. He held me by the hands and took me to different places,
fairs, mosques and temples, to the Eid prayer and also to see Durga
Puja. He often lulled me to sleep. | also used to sleep with him at night. s

English Grammar and Composition 265
Like other nights, | was sleeping beside my grandfather that night. He
was quite hale and hearty. | could not realize what went wrong with
him. He was quite good when he went to bed, he went to toilet but
came back groaning, went unconscious within minutes. | was frightened
and cried to the top of my voice. It was late night. My parents and
others in the house came rushing to our room. A doctor was called, he
gave some medicine, an injection also was given, but there was no end
to the groaning. The doctor looked serious, everybody around started
crying. My parents started crying piteously, my father being the only
son felt very miserable. | was crying too. Then all groaning stopped. My
grandfather breathed his last. | hope, you can imagine the situation.

In the morning our relations started coming, the neighbours also came.
Preparations were being made for his burial. As it was the first death of
one of my closest persons in my life, | felt emotionally paralyzed. It was
a feeling that can only be felt, cannot be described in language. | could
not understand at that point of time how human beings survive after
the death of their near ones. My existence seemed meaningless
without him.

When people took him for burial and put him in the grave, it seemed my
joys were all buried with him. This feeling continued for a long time; |
did not feel like going to school, even if | was sent to school, life seemed
joyless to me.

Till today, the agony of losing him pains me whenever | think of that day.

Forma-34, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

266 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 1
Write a short composition on a sweet memory of your life.
Activity 2
Think about the following topics, note down some points, plan and then
write short compositions on them. Try any one in class.
e Your experience of PEC and JSC Examinations
e Aninteresting experience of your primary school
e Experience of a school picnic
18/2: Descriptive Writing
A A short composition describing a tour to Cox’s Bazar
After my final examination of class IX, our family which consists of 4
members only—my father, mother, elder sister and myself—decided to
go to Cox’s Bazar. We sat together to plan our journey. We decided to
travel by train. We would take the 7 a.m. train to Dhaka, and the same
day we will take the afternoon train to Chittagong. Accordingly train
tickets were booked in advance.
On December 25, 2015 we started our journey from Rajshahi Railway
Station by Silk City Train. We had our seats in the AC chair coach. | hada
front facing window-side seat from where | could look through the
window and see the scenes outside. The train journey was quite
comfortable. We took some food with us, and had our breakfast on the
train.
At 1.00 p.m. we reached Kamalapur Railway Station, Dhaka, but the
Chittagong train, Suborna Express was in the afternoon at 3.00 p.m. So, .,
we decided to take our lunch at Kamalapur Station. We went on the first &

English Grammar and Composition 267
floor in a restaurant, rather a good restaurant with our bags. After lunch,
we came down to the platform where the Chittagong bound train was
supposed to leave. The train was on time. It came near the platform half
an hour before the scheduled time. We got into the train comfortably
and took our seats in AC chaircoach in this train too. It was a very
comfortable train.

The train started exactly at 3.00. After Noakhali we were excited to see
the scenic beauty of the region. We saw the small hills on both sides of
the train. As my sister and | never had been to this part of the country
before, we had not seen hills and mountains before. So it was a dream
coming true for us. We were really very excited. At 8.0 p.m. we reached
Chittagong station. We spent the night in our cousin’s house. Chittagong
City captivated our heart. It is so beautiful. The houses on hill tops look
fascinating.
The next morning at 8.00 a.m., we took a bus to Cox’s Bazar. My sister
and | were amazed by the bewitching beauty of the natural scenery of
the hill stretching for miles. We, for the first time, saw that our lovely
country has such a beautiful landscape; the topography of the hilly
regions offers a contrast to the plain lands of the country. We reached
Cox’s Bazar around 12 noon. We went to the hotel rooms which my
father reserved for us in a motel on the beach, called ‘Probal’. The motel
is just on the beach and from the hotel room, the sea is visible, and roars
of the sea are audible. We decided to change our dresses and go to the
beach and take our lunch in a sea side hotel.
We went to the beach at 1.30. What a spectacular scene it was! The vast
expanse of the sea water in front of us, the big waves with foams and
roaring sounds rushing to the shore! We were just stunned by the
magnificence of nature!
We were in Cox’s Bazar for two days. We spent most of the time during
s the day on the beach, we walked along the shore, bathed in the sea,
N

268 English Grammar and Composition
basked in the sun, did some shopping every day. We ate sea fish for our
lunch and dinner. | fell in love with the sea and did not really feel like
coming back. We forgot our home for those two days. The sea cast a
spell on us. We could not realize how the two days were gone.

B Now read a short composition by an eminent person describing his

village.

| come from a village in the district of Pabna. It is about six miles east of
Pabna town and about one kilometer north from Pabna —Sujanagar Road.
A One Pacca Road from Sujanagar Road goes through our village and at
one point in our village the road has another branch and both the
branches go through our village and through many other villages and
finally the roads meet Pabna Ataikula Road at two different points. The
village now has a touch of modernity. There are two bazars now on the
roads in three different places of the village. It takes only forty minutes
now to go to Pabna town, and to come home from the town. The villagers
now are daily trafficking to the town with motor cycles, bicycles, CNG and
auto-rickshaw. The non-mechanised and mechanised transport system in
the villages has changed the economy of the village. Mobility of the
people has improved significantly. The village has many graduates from
different public and private universities of the country. Many of them are
working in government offices, non-government organizations and
banks.

The villagers still depend largely on agriculture. However, the entire
village has irrigation schemes with deep and shallow tube wells. Most of
the villagers work in their fields during day time, and in the evening they
sit in front of television sets in the bazars and watch various satellite
channels together. Most of the houses have television, many have
refrigerators. The houses are mostly tin shed houses. There are some
buildings as well. The economic condition of the people are good now.
The landless people also can earn enough to meet their daily expenses.
Even the day labourers now send their children to school. 8

g

English Grammar and Composition 269
The village has two primary and one high school. Many boys and girls
read in these schools. The schools have changed the face of the village.
Our girls can easily study up to the S.S.C level almost free of cost. In every
house we have qualified girls now. Many of these girls are studying in the
major universities of the country.

The village has a wonderful scenic beauty. During season, the lands are
full of green crops which present a wonderful sight. To the north of the
village, there is a big bee/ area, which these days do not have much water,
and so has become the hub of paddy production. The entire village is full
of trees. People have developed an interest in tree plantation. There are
some mango orchards, small ones though. People also grow seasonal
crops and vegetables, very fresh, and green vegetables.
Majority of the people are now economically solvent. Some people are in
business. The businessmen seem to be economically well of. However,
there is a kind of friendliness and fellow feelings amongst the villagers.
Boys and girls play together. They organize cultural and sports activities in
the village. One drama is staged annually by our club, Ansar Smriti
Sangha. The club organises some sports and games competition every
year. There is often a football competition, volleyball competition,
badminton championship, /udu, carrom and some other indoor sports
competition. At one side of the village there is a very large and beautiful
graveyard. People from the nearby villages bury their dead in this
graveyard.
The villagers have fellow feeling for each other; they have a good
bonding. They help each other in times of need. If anybody is maltreated
by outsiders, the entire village comes forward and stand beside the
distressed man. For wedding and other social occasions, they organize
big parties for the villagers. They stand beside each other in their weal
and woe. The village has the most shaping influence on me. | now live in
a city, and am lost in the busy schedule of professional responsibilities,
but the memories of my early life in the village are always fresh with me
fe and beckons me to visit it. So | visit my village and my relations still living
S there whenever | can make some free time.

270 English Grammar and Composition
My Mother’s Village
(From N.C. Chaudhury’s Autobiography of an Unknown Indian)
To pass from Banagram (where the writer’s ancestral home was located)
to my mother’s village, Kalikachcha or Kalikutch, was to pass into a
world so different, so humble, so full of humility, and so self effacing in
bamboo and cane greenery, that it brought tears to one’s eyes....The
country round Kalikutch was open, but the village itself was thickly
wooded, in places so thickly as to have the appearance of a tropical
forest. It was only at Kalikutch on our side of East Bengal that | saw thick
undergrowth at the foot of tall trees, climbers of all sports and cane
clinging to them, and bamboo, reed, and scrub all jumbled together.
Sometimes through small gaps in the bushes we could see real wild cats
(Felis Chaus), not merely the domestic cat become feral. These animals
at times stared at us very gravely, at times dozed without paying us the
slightest heed, and at times also caterwauled. The distance within
which we considered it safe to approach them was never less than one
hundred yards. So after all there was not much occasion for the cats to
take us very seriously.
There were also patches of wood which were more open, and through
them we could see the sun rise and set with bizare effect, looking very
big against the tree trunks which took the appearance of dark and thick
stripes on its body. Besides the woods, there was almost everywhere
about us some water-way, marsh, pond, pool, or tank. The tanks were
mostly, but not in every case, in tolerable condition. That could not ,
however, be said of the other domiciles of water. They were all choked
with weed and smelt of rotting vegetation. The water of the little pond
in which we washed our mouths after meals was of the colour of lightly
brewed tea without its pleasant smell. The smell of the water was of the
vegetation just mentioned. The great attractions of this pond were the
moor-hens and water-hens, whose calls we always heard but whom we
rarely saw. Even when we saw them it was only a glimpse of fluttering
wings that we caught. bo
Ss
AQ

English Grammar and Composition 271
Activity 1
Imagine that you have been sent to a boarding school in a foreign country
(choose a country of your liking) for study. This is your first time away from
your parents. Moreover, you are in a foreign country with no relatives and
friends. You feel home sick. Write a short composition on your feeling in that
imaginary situation.
Activity 2
Imagine that you have been captured by some sea pirates from Cox’s Bazar
who took you to the deep sea, but chased by coast guards, they left you in a
distant island where there is no other human being. You have no food to eat,
no house for shelter. Write a short composition describing your imaginary
situation.
Activity 3
Imagine that you have become the Prime Minister of Bangladesh. Write a
short composition describing your plan of action for the next five years both
for Bangladesh and the world.
Activity 4
Imagine that you are the Education Minister of Bangladesh. What would you
plan to do to help the school students learn English?

Ice)

S

AR

272 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 5
Imagine that you are an English teacher. Write a short composition on what
you will do for your students’ effective learning of English.
Further Tasks

e Write a short composition describing your village/home town.

e Write a short composition narrating the experience of an interesting

happening in your life.
e Write a short composition describing the cultural activities of your
school this year.

Activity 6
Write short compositions on

a Are you interested in students politics? Why/why not?

b The contributions of your parents in your life

c_ Print media versus electronic media

d The use of computers in Bangladesh

e What would you like to be after ten years

f Society and students

g Abook/film you have enjoyed much

h My country my pride

S

We all like to listen to stories. But it is not always easy when it comes to telling
or writing a story well. It requires a lot of planning and organization in building
up the plot and the characters.
There are some common techniques of telling a good story. For example, how
you begin it, how you carry the story forward, and how you end it. Before you
start to write a story, you must have the whole plot clear in your mind, and the
main points arranged in their proper order.
Read the following story, one of Aesop’s well-known fables, and see how the
story has developed.
The Seven Sticks

Long ago and far away, there was an old farmer who had seven sons. When he
thought that he was about to die, he gathered his sons about him. He told a
servant to bring in a bundle of seven sticks tied together. Handing the bundle
to his oldest son, the father said to him, “Now break the bundle”.
The son tried with all his might, but he could not break the bundle. One by
one, the other brothers tried. None of them was strong enough.
The father smiled, “Now, my sons, untie the bundle. Each of you take a stick
and try to break it.” This time they had no difficulty doing as their father bid
them. In a few moments all the sticks were broken.

“In unity there is strength,” said the father.
Activity 1
Following are some hints for another of Aesop’s very well-known fables. The
moral of the story is, “Where there’s a will, there’s a way”. Try to complete
the story by filling in more details. Use the moral in the right place of the
story.
Forma-35, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

274 English Grammar and Composition
A thirsty crow came upon a pitcher ....... his beak was short and the water was
very low ....... a bright idea.....took a pebble ....another one .....then another
one......water began to .......he dipped his beak and drank.......

Activity 2

Write stories with the following sentences as the beginning. Remember that
before you start to write, you must first think out the steps in the story
clearly in your mind and arrange them in the right order.

a There was acrash and shuttering noises. As Selim looked back, he found
people rushing to the corner of the road. He also ran and after parting
his way through the crowd, he saw ......

b It was almost mid- night and Abir had still a long way to go. The country
road was deserted. Only a faint light from the house far to the left
reached the spot. All around him was quiet with the occasional hooting
of an owl somewhere. The trees looked dark and ominous. Then
suddenly ......

c Mukta got up from the bed as usual. She finished her morning chores
and ran down the streets to catch the bus to school. That was when she
remembered that it was the morning of May 23........

Activity 3
Write stories using the following sentences somewhere in the middle of the
stories.

a_... Finally the two men jumped into the river. The current was fierce but
they tried to swim as fast as they could. It was a matter of life and death «

English Grammar and Composition 275

b_ ... The two of them sat looking at each other. They could not believe
what they had just heard. Could it be true ....

c.. She looked at the picture again. Her hands were now shaking
perceptibly as tears rolled down her cheeks .....

Activity 4
Write stories with the following lines at the end of the stories.

a The night finally ended. The sun was rising with its red morning glow
and everything seemed nice and quiet again.

b We all stood there quietly as the car rolled of silently. The Headmaster
turned his head slowly from the back of the car to take a last look at the
school. He tried to smile at us but tears were already rolling down his
cheeks.

c The bus stopped at the school gate but it took some time before all the
students got off. They were all tired and exhausted by the day’s
happenings. It was quite an adventure for all of us.

Activity 5
Look at the picture and write a story about it using your imagination.
Writing or completing a story involves
imaginative thinking and _ involves
crafting of an imaginary story that will
have a reflection of real life. It involves ie
description of an imaginary situation ee
with creative use of language.
Sometimes you are required to develop 2m
a plot. =
x
&

276 English Grammar and Composition
Write stories using the following hints.
Activity 6
A poor farmer has a son, who is extraordinarily bright, financially insolvent, the
boy drives auto rickshaw and earns expenses for education, does very well,
admitted in medical college, passes MBBS with gold medal, had to struggle
hard all along for earning, father could not help much, obtains MBBS, becomes
an MBBS doctor, obtains FCPS, becomes a famous doctor, serves the poor,
parents are very happy, built a house for the parents and they live happily.
Activity 7
An honest officer; lives a simple life; somehow manages both ends meet; has
difficulty funding for children’s education; temptation for bribe, but retains his
principles; his subordinates and colleagues, who are not like him, do not like
him, they try to put him in trouble; once they took a large amount of bribe, and
for safety hid the bag full of money in his office. The bribery was reported,
police came to search for the money, it was found in his room, he was arrested,
sent to jail , was suspended from his post, finally he was found not-guilty; got
a compensation pack, and the real culprits were arrested and punished.
20,
Ss

Writing
Summaries

A summary is a restatement of someone else's words in your own words.
There are many different kinds of summaries, and they vary according to the
degree to which you interpret or analyze the source. Some are pages long,
while others are just one or two sentences. However, for all types of summary,
the writer is responsible for generally stating, in his or her own words, the
main information or argument of another writer.
Purposes of the Summary
Summaries benefit the reader because they offer a concise, general version of
the original information. For a busy reader, summaries provide quick
overviews of material. Summaries also show readers that you have
understood the general point of a text, and in this way, teachers can test your
knowledge. The process of summarizing someone else's material enables you
to understand that material better.
What and When to Summarize
Many student writers tend to quote when they should summarize material.
Quote only when the author expresses a point in a particularly telling or
interesting language. Otherwise, simply summarize. Use a summary to restate
an entire argument. Use a summary to present information.

2

S

N

278 English Grammar and Composition
How to Summarize

e Read the original passage or text very carefully.

e Use a pencil to highlight or underline what you take to be the main
point/points of the original text, or make notes in the margins or on
another sheet of paper.

e If you're summarizing an entire essay, outline the writer's arguments.

e These notes and outlines should be brief. Using this list of points, you
write down the summary, referring to the original text only when you
want to make sure of some point. This will help you to reproduce the
substance of the passage in your own words.

Summary Conventions

e Summaries can range in length from two sentences to several pages.
What you have to remember is that when you write a summary of
something you have read, you make your summary shorter than the
original. Usually a summary is one third of the original in length, i.e. if a
passage is of 150 words, the summary of it would be about 50 words
long.

e In any case, use complete sentences to present the main points or
information the text you are describe an author's general points to the
reader. Don't quote extensively. If you quote, use quotation marks and
document the quotation. If you fail to document the quotation, even
one word that the author used, you are plagiarizing material
(presenting another person's information as if it were your own).

=
S
AQ

English Grammar and Composition 279
Example Summary
The following is a well-known fable by Aesop. After the fable, a typical
summary of it is given.
Dede ST
{RBA
Y aeiel: \\% ——
——__ rite _
fess | | Laon
Nig OS
_—_ _ eS \
ip SSeS
The Lion and the Mouse
A lion was sleeping in his den one day, when a mischievous mouse for no
reason at all ran across the outstretched paw and up the royal nose of the king
of beasts, awakening from his nap. The mighty beast clapped his paw upon the
nose thoroughly frightened little creature and would have made an end of
him.
“Please,” squealed the mouse, “Don’t kill me. Forgive me this time, O King, and
| shall never forget it. A day may come, who knows, when | may do you a good
turn to repay your kindness.” The lion smiling at his little prisoner’s fright and
amused by the thought that so small a creature ever could be of assistance to
the king of beasts, let him go.
Not long afterward the lion, while ranging the forest for his prey, was caught in
the net which the hunters had set to catch him. He let out a roar that echoed
through the forest. Even the mouse heard it, and recognizing the voice of his
former preserver and friend, ran to the spot where he lay tangled in the net of
% ropes.
&

280 English Grammar and Composition

“Well, your majesty”, said the mouse, “I know you did not believe me once

when | said | would return a kindness, but here is my chance.” And without

further ado he set to work to nibble with his sharp little teeth at the ropes that

bound the lion. Soon the lion was able to crawl out of the hunter’s snare and

be free. (254 words)

Now read the summary:

Once, a playful mouse ran across the paw and up the nose of a sleeping lion.

The lion awoke, caught the mouse, and was about to kill him when the mouse

begged forgiveness, saying he might one day return the kindness. Amused, the

lion released him. Soon afterward, the lion was caught in a net set by hunters.

The mouse heard the lion’s roar, recognized his friend’s voice, and came to

help. His sharp teeth cut the ropes, setting the lion free. (82 words)

Note: The writer of a summary must be able to tell the difference between a

main idea and a minor idea. In the above fable, the idea that the lion was

caught in a net is essential to the story, and is therefore, a main idea. But it is

not necessary or essential to know that when the lion was caught, or that he

had been ranging the forest for his prey.

Here is a one sentence summary of the fable:

A mouse, whose life had once been spared by a lion, later returned the

kindness by freeing the lion from a hunter’s net.

Activity 1

Read the following passage and answer the questions that follow.

There are many different reasons for reading. Sometimes we read for pleasure,

i.e., just to be entertained. Sometimes we read for information, or for direction

or instruction. Often we read to find out about the people around us and the

world we live in. %
S
N

English Grammar and Composition 281
We read different kinds of material in different ways. We don’t always read
everything at the same speed. With certain kinds of material we need to read
slowly and carefully, for example, when we are trying to understand difficult
ideas in a text like science or economics books. We also read directions and
instructions slowly and carefully. We usually read stories, magazines,
newspapers, where the material is usually written in an easily understandable
way, at a normal speed, neither too slow nor too fast. Whereas, when we read
something we have read before, or we know about, we usually read very
rapidly. A good reader suits his or her speed to what he or she reads.
Skimming and scanning are additional ways of helping us read more efficiently.
They save time. When we want to get the overall idea or the gist of a text, we
do not need to read every word in it. We can skim or look over the text quickly,
often read the first paragraph, then the first and last sentences of the other
paragraphs quickly. The final paragraph often summarizes the content. This
kind of reading is called skimming. On the other hand, when we want to find
specific information in a text, we scan the text searching for words or phrases
that would give us the information we need. This is called scanning.
1. Choose the best answer from the alternatives a, b, c, d given after

each question.

i) Agood reader

a) reads novels and poetry.

b) reads before sleep.

c) reads different kinds of material with ease.

d) knows when to stop.

ii) You are preparing a dish from a cook book. You’d read the recipe.

a) carefully. b) loudly.

c) for fun. d) witha friend.
Forma-36, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

282 English Grammar and Composition
iii) To find out the time of your favorite programme from a television guide,
you’d
a) skim it. b) scan it.
c) see it. d) recite it.
iv) To get the gist of a text you’d
a) read it slowly. b) scan it.
c) skim it. d) discuss it.
v) You’d read a letter from a friend
a) by scanning. b) by skimming.
c) half-heartedly. d) normally.
2. Match a quotation from A with a reading purpose in B.
i) “llove this poem!” i) For instruction.
ii) “Do you have the time table for | ii) For pleasure.
the intercity train service?”
iii) “Oh, dear! We should have put | iii) For knowledge.
the eggs first!”
iv) “At the moment I’m reading a | iv) For information.
book about the Greek
civilization.”
3. Write a summary of the above passage. Give the main ideas only.
25
S

English Grammar and Composition 283
Activity 2
Following is an extract from a story by Isaac Asimov, the great master of
science- fiction writers. Read the passage and then answer the questions
that follow.
‘Tony is a robot. His actual designation on the company files is TN-3, but he will
answer to Tony. He is not a mechanical monster, nor simply a calculating
machine of the type that were developed during World War Il, fifty years ago.
He has an artificial brain nearly as complicated as our own. It is an immense
telephone switchboard on an atomic scale, so that billions of possible
“telephone connections” can be compressed into an instrument that will fit
inside a skull.
‘Such brains are manufactured for each model of robot specifically. Each
contains a pre-calculated set of connections so that each robot knows the
English language to start with and enough of anything else that may be
necessary to perform his job.
‘Until now, US Robots has confined its manufacturing activity to industrial
models for use in places where human labour is impractical- in deep mines, for
instance or in underwater work. But we want to invade the city and the home.
To do so, we must get the ordinary man and woman to accept these robots
without fear. You understand that there is nothing to fear’
‘He can’t get angry with you, my dear. | told you that the switchboard
connections of his brain were pre-determined. The most important
connection of all is what we call “The First Law of Robotics” and it is merely
this: “No robot can harm a human being, or, through inaction, allow a human
being to come to harm. All robots are built so. No robot can be forced in any
e way to do harm to any human,’
N

284 English Grammar and Composition
1. Choose the best answer from the alternatives given below.
i) TN-3
a) is amonster. b) works in deep mines.
c) has acomplicated brain. d) is an industrial model.
ii) The robot’s brain works like
a) anold calculating machine.
b) atelephone.
c) amechanical toy.
d) aswitchboard with billions of connections.
iii) No one should be afraid of a robot because
a) it works under water.
b) itis just a calculating machine.
c) it has a complicated brain.
d) it can’t be forced to harm a human being.
Activity 3
Fill in each of the blanks in the following summary of the passage with a
suitable word.
A robot knows a language and enough of anything else to(a) his
job. TN-3 is the actual (b) given to (c) by the company.
Tony has an (d)__———CS_-sé# rain which is (e)___—S————SOourrs. The robot
manufacturers are now trying to bring robots to cities and (f)
That’s why they are trying hard to make people (g)_ sth there is no
reason to (h) a robot.
S

English Grammar and Composition 285
Activity 4
Read the following selection. On your paper, write down the key words. Then
summarise the main ideas of the paragraph in a few sentences.
On farms and in small towns a hundred and fifty years ago, family members
learned to depend on each other for recreation and fun. There were no radios,
television sets, movie houses, sports stadiums, museums, so forth. Parents
and children had to invent their own pleasures. In the evenings after the work
was done, some members of the family read aloud to others. May be they
played games, or sometimes the whole family sang together. Modern families
do few things together as a group. Parents often go out together as a couple,
apart from their children. Each child has his or her friends. Some families have
more than one television set so that all the members do not even watch
television together. Instead of families making their own fun together,
individual members tend to go to recreational facilities for entertainment.

5

286 English Grammar and Composition
Activity 5
Read the following poem. Write a summary of the poem in 4 to 5 sentences.
Strange Dreams Come True
In years gone by
Men thought and dreamed
Of things that could not be-
Like the traveling
Up in the sky,
Or, deep down in the sea;
Or, watching things
That eyes can’t see-
Too little- or too far-
Or hearing distant
Voice or sound,
No matter where you are.
But now we have
The radio,
And subs and cars and jets,
And phones and trains,
And microscopes
And television sets.
So many things
Have seemed absurd,
But in men’s minds they grew-
The dreams which were
Impossible
Have in the end come true!
2
8

Describing
Graphs and Charts
How to describe graphs and charts?
Do not copy information from the question paper, use your own words. Make
sure that you describe the most important information and that your figures
are accurate. Paraphrase the information in the question. Avoid repeating the
same words and phrases and try to vary the sentence structures you use. Give
an overview of the most important trends or patterns.
When describing trends of graphs and charts, it is best to use:
- the simple past to talk about ‘finished’ time, e.g. in 1950, last year.
- the present perfect to talk about ‘unfinished’ time, e.g. since 1950, ever, this
year

- a future tense to talk about future time, e.g. in 2030, next year
We often use the following expression when talking about future or predicted
data, because the simple future is a little too certain:

... are/is (un)likely

.. are/is predicted to

.. are/is expected to

For example: Between 1950 and 2030, the proportion of the world's

population is expected to double.
OR we use a verb such as predict and a future tense.
For example: It is predicted that the proportion of the world's population will
double by 2030.

co)
& To emphasise a difference, you can use: many, much, far, and significantly.

288 English Grammar and Compasition
The amount of waste material being recycled In 2011 was much more than In
1985.
For small differences you can use: slightly or nearly as ... as.
The percentage of garbage being recycled [In 1970 was sfightly higher than In
1960.
How to describe bar diagrama:

When you first see a bar chart, ask yourself the following questions:

1) What do the numbers on the vertical/horizontal axis measures?

2) How bs the Information grouped on the other axis?

3) What do the different shades of the bars show?

4) When was the data collected?
The answers will give you the essential Information for understanding It.
Make sure you know which units are belng used to measure quantitles.
Example 1
The chart below gives information about science qualificatians held by
people in two countries. Summarise the information by selecting and
reporting the malin features, and make comparisons where relevant. Write
at least 150 words.

Science qualification in two countries
= Malaysia Singapore
Master's degree =
Bachelor's degree =
roles I —
=
o% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% $$

English Grammar and Composition 289
Model answer
The bar chart illustrates the percentage of people who has a science
qualification in Singapore and Malaysia. A prominent feature about both the
countries is that a significantly low percentage of people have science
qualifications at the Master’s and Bachelor's level. Less than 5% of people hold
a qualification in science at Master’s degree level in both Singapore and
Malaysia.
There is a significant difference in the percentage of people with science
qualifications at Bachelor level. While this number is 20% in Singapore, it is a
only 10% in Malaysia. The percentage of people doing science at school
leaving exams is slightly higher in Malaysia than in Singapore. 35% of people in
Malaysia have a science qualification at this level, whereas in Singapore it is
30%. Finally, more than half of the people in both countries have no science
qualification at all.
Activity 1
The bar chart below gives information about the percentage of the population
living in urban areas in the world and in different continents. Read the
following model answer and fill in the gaps to report the main features, and
make comparisons.

Percentage of populationin urban areas
Source: UN, World Urbanization Prospects: The 2005 Revision (2006) and Carl
Haub, 2007 World Population Data Sheet.
Forme-37, Engllah Grammer and Composition, 9-10

250 English Grammar and Compasiticn
bycontra =s in spita of compares smallar
héghast double marked shores

The bar chart the urbantzation percentaga of the world In

1950 and this with the percantage In 2007 and the projectad

parcantaga for 2030.

Batween 1950 and 2040, the proportion of the world's population reskfing In

Cities Is expected to growing from 25996 to BO. Howevar, this

rata is bass In soma continants than others.

For example, 649% of the population of North Amarica was urban In 1950,

Increasing to 79% by 2007. Just 15% of the African

population was urban In 1950, but this rose te 37% by 2007. This represents

ona of the urbanization rates In the world, evan though
the parcentage of Africans In urban areas i still than the
world average.

It is also daar from the graph that, urbanization In Latin America Is projectad

to ba higher than Europe In 2036, baing lower In 1950.

Activity 2

This bb a graph on GOP growth In Bangladesh over a pariod of tan years. Tha

first few samtences are written in the modal ansurar but the dascriptian ls not

camplote. Completa the dascriptian In your own language.
CAM LETS COP CacrerT es RATE
oinn.Men .

English Grammar and Composition 291
This graph presents the GDP growth rate of Bangladesh from 2006 to 2015.
The data presented in the graph shows that there has been ups and downs in
the GDP growth rate. In 2006, it was 5.95, but it rose to the highest ever
growth in 2007 which was 6.63, but
Activity 3 Now describe the following graphs in 150 words.
National income per capita
Us 5 In 2010
2240
2500
2000
4446 1340
1500
700
1000
o
Vietnarny india Sei Lanke Bangladesh
Activity 4 Describe the following graph in 150 words.
Annual per capita income change
1990-2010 (%)
5.95
4.90
oo0 4.22
5.00 3.49
4.00
3.00
2.00
1,00
20 0,00
3 Vietnam India Sri Lanka Bangladesh
N

292 English Grammar and Composition
Example 2
The diagrams below give information on transport and car use in Edmonton.
Summarise the information by selecting and reporting the main features, and
make comparisons where relevant. Write at least 150 words.
Tips for comparing information in graphs or charts
When you describe two figures, ask yourself the following:
1) What do both figures relate to?
2) What kind of relationship is evident? (a similarity, a difference, a cause
and effect relationship or some other type of relationship)
3) Which aspects of each figure should be highlighted?
4) Should | describe the figures in separate paragraphs, or should |
compare different aspects of the figures within a series of paragraph?
pomenr [ Se |
@ LRT (Light Rail Transit)
— m Bus Taking children to 40%
a school °
People’s reasons for using the car in city
e0
§

English Grammar and Composition 293
Model answer
The table shows the reason why people in Edmonton use their cars in the city
and the pie chart explains what type of transport people prefer to use most of
the time.
Looking at the pie chart first, it is clear that the car is the most popular means
of transport in this city. 45% of the people say that they prefer to commute by
car. The second most popular form of transport is the LRT, while buses and
taxis are the main means of transport for the rest of the people.
The table gives more detailed information about why people use their cars.
Surprisingly, 55% of the people need to commute to work by car. Cars are also
used a lot for taking children to school or business purposes. Only 15% of
drivers are doing their shopping and, similarly, 15% need to travel by car for
leisure.
Overall, people in Edmonton make good use of alternative methods of
transport but there is a heavy dependence on cars for work.
Note: There are sometimes two or three pie charts that you must compare.
The pie charts may represent different years and show trends over time. You
need to describe the changes and similarities / differences between the pie
charts.

=

S

N

24 English Grammar and Compasition
Activity 5
The ple charts below show the average household eqrenditures In lapen and
Maleysla In the year 2010. Summarisa tha Information by selecting and
reporting tha maln features, and make comparisons where relevant.
Average Household Expenditures by Major Catagory
Japan Malaysia
shHousing @ Transport Food SHegttcare mB Other goods and services
Read the textual description. Complete the text by filing the gape with a
word from the boa below.
main But than higher
pmaiest in contrast compared with lower
higher overall Indicntes while
The ple charts show the proportion of money spent on various househokl
expenses in Malaysla and Japan in 2010,
We can see that in Malaysia the greatest proportion of expenditure (34%) was
on housing, ....0... in Japan housing accounted for just 21% of the total. ....000,
in Japan the greatest single expense was other goods and services at 29%,
aon 269 in Malaysia. Food came in second place in Japan, at 2496, while in F

English Grammar and Composition 295
Malaysia the actual proportion was .......... (27%). In Japan another major
expense was transport, at 20%, but this was much .......... In Malaysla (1056). In
both countrles the .........percentage of expenditure was on health care.
sien, the data ......... that in both cases food, housing and other goods and
services were the .........€XPenses, ......... that in Japan, transport and other
goods and services took up a........... proportion of total expenditure .......... in
Malaysia.
Example 3
The graph below shows the number of books read by men and women at
Burnaby Public Library from 2011 to 2014. Describe the graph In your own
language.
Burnaby Public Library
16000
14000
3 12000
3 10000
8000
S 6000
8
2 4000
= 2000
0
2011 2012 2013 2014
— Men —Women
Model answer
The graph gives information about the number of books people read in
Burnaby Public Library between 2011 and 2014.
As can be seen from the graph, there were different trends for men and
women. The number of books read by men Increased steadily between 2011
and 2012, from about 3000 to 4000. After that, the number rose dramatically
~ 014000 In 2014. This was the highest figure In the given period.
8

296 Eng/ish Grammar and Composition
Women started off reading more books than men, but thelr numbers followed
a different pattern. Between 2011 and 2012, there was an Increase from 3000
to 3500 in 2012, and 8000 in 2015. Then there was a gradual rise to 10000
books in 2013. However, in 2014, the numbers fell back to 8000 again.
Overall, there was a strong upward trend in the number of books read by men.
Although women read more books than men from 2011 to 2013, their reading
fell to below the level of men In 2014.
Activity 6
The line graph below shows the changes In the share price of Outokumpu
companies In euros between January 2006 and December 2010. Describe the
graph by filling the gaps in the model answer.
Outokumpu share price, €

35

30

2s

20

is

10

oe 2006 . 2007 , 2008 , 2009 , 2010

Source: NASDAQ, OMX Helsinki
Model answer
The graph shows the changes in the share price of
Outokumpu In a five-year period from _ sé thrrouigh
At the beginning of this period the share price was at EUR 13 per share. There
were several undl fate 2006 when there was a sudden
from EUR 21 to EUR 31. This higher price did not last long, 3
N

English Granmwnar and Composition 2397
however, and It before rising strangly again In 2008, From
mid-2008 thers was a sonar) trend through the
thes year. Thistimeltfelltothe sip In this
period at just over EUR? per share. Afterthatthesheraprice
and, despite some fluctuations, continuedto_ nti It reached
a peak of EUR 17 In early 2010. Until late 2010 the Was
downward again, ending the year at Just over EUR 12.
Qutokumpu made significant and during
this period but overall kast around EVA 1 per share,
Activity 7
The chart below shows maternal mortality rate of three different countries.
Summarise the chart by comparing information. Writs at least 150 words.
Maternal mortality ratios
1000

900 Bangladesh, 870

800

700

600 India, 570

500 Bangladesh, 500

400 india, 390

- EL, ngladesh, 340

200 Vietnam, 170 india, 230

100 vietnam Vietnam, $6

5 Sri Lanka, 91 Sri Lanka, ST — Sri Lanka, 39
1990 2000 2008

Example 4
The table below shows the results of a survey that asked 6800 Scottish adults
{aged 16 years and over) whether they had taken part [n differant cultural
activities In the past 12 months. Describe the chart by reporting the main
features. Make comparisons where relevant.
Ferma-ta, English Geaananar and Cem pasttion, 2-10

298 English Grammar and Composition
Participation in cultural activities, by age
16-24 25-44 45-74 All aged 16 and over
% % % %
Any performance* 35 22 17 22
Undertaking
11 17 22 19
any crafts
Cultural purchases 11 17 18 16
Any visual arts 30 16 11 15
Any writing 17 6 5 7
Computer based 10 9 5 6
* Dancing, singing, playing musical instruments and acting
Model answer
The table shows details of participation in a variety of cultural activities over a
year, according to the age of the participants.
Overall, any performance, which includes dancing, singing, playing musical
instruments and acting, had the highest level of participation, with 22% of
respondents participating in the previous 12 months. By contrast, computer
based activities had the lowest level of participation (6 percent).
People aged between 45 and 74 years old were most likely to undertake any
activity to do with crafts (22 percent), while performances were more likely to
be participated in by those aged 16 to 24 (35 percent). The differences
between age groups were particularly marked in the case of visual arts and
writing categories, where participation rates were around three times higher
for younger people than for the older ones. It is clear from the evidence that
age plays a significant role in the popularity of the cultural activities listed. %
im)
Q

English Grammar and Composition 299
Activity 8
The table shows the worldwide market share of the mobile phone market for
manufactures In the years 2005 and 2006. Fill In the gaps In tha sarnpla
answer to summarise the information and make comparisons where
relevant.
Worldwide Mobile phone Sales in 2005 & 2006 (% share of market)

325 35

17.7 21.1

127 118

63 74

67 63

49 24

| _Others | 192 162

100.0 1000
Sample Answer
The given data shows the —“‘CSNOOONC_COMaarrket: share
worldwide for the year 2005 and 2006. As is observed from the given data,
Nokia has the highest market share of cell phone worldwide both in 2005 &
2006.
As Is presented, had the largest market share (one third of
total) In 2005 and their market share Increased by In the
next year. had the second largest market share comprising
over in 2005 and their market share as
well in the next year by almost 4%. Samsung had been able to maintain the

for their worldwide mobile phone market share. Their
share to 11.8% in 2005 compared to 12.7% market share in
the previous year. On the other hand, Sony Ericsson and L.G both had more
than 6% market share In 2005. In 2006, though Sony Ericsson’s market share
by 1%, L.G’s market share . BenQ Moblle
had the smarrkett share In the cell phone manufacturing
3 worldwide.

300 English Grammar and Composition
Answer key :

Unit :2/ Pronouns and Possessives

Activity :2

1.you 2. my 3. Her 4. Yours

5. My 6. His 7. Yours 8. Their

9. Our 10.Our 11. Their 12. Theirs

13. mine

Unit : 6 Kinds of Verbs

6/4 -ing form of verb : Participle

Activity : 1

a.running b. going c. flying d. working

e. shining f. loving g. change

Activity : 2

a_ sleeping. b. barking c. passing d. walking

e. walking f. increasing g. burning

Unit : 21

Activity : 2

Answer Key

This graph presents the GDP growth rate of Bangladesh from 2006 to 2015.

The data presented in the graph shows that there has been ups and downs in

the GDP growth rate. In 2006, it was 5.95, but it rose to the highest ever

growth in 2007 which was 6.63, but there was a gradual decline to 2012, the

rates were 6.43, 6.19, 5.75 and 5.57, the lowest ever, respectively in 2008,

2009, 2011, and 2012. In the next two years, there was a significant

development. It rose up to 6.46 and 6.52 respectively in 2013 and 2014. Again

there was a fall in 2014 and 2015, and the rates were 6.01 and 6.12

respectively. Thus growth rate has been fluctuating in the last 10 years. &
S
qQ

English Grammar and Composition 301
Activity : 6
Answer key
The graph shows the changes and a decline overall in the share price of
Outokumpu in a five-year period from January 2006 through December 2010.
At the beginning of this period the share price was at EUR 13 per share. There
were several fluctuations until late 2006 when there was a sudden increase
from EUR 21 to EUR 31. This higher price did not last long, however, and it fell
before rising strongly again in 2008. From mid-2008 there was a sharp
downward trend through the end of the year when it fell to the lowest point in
this period at just over EUR 7 per share. After that the share price recovered
and, despite some fluctuations, continued to rise until it reached a peak of EUR
17 in early 2010. Until late 2010 the trend was downward again, ending the
year at just over EUR 12.
The company made significant gains and losses during this period but overall
lost around EUR 1 per share.
Activity : 8
Answer key
The given data shows the mobile phone manufacturers’ market share
worldwide for the year 2005 and 2006. As is observed from he given data,
Nokia has the highest market share of cell phone worldwide in both the years.
As is presented, Nokia had the largest market share (one third of total) in 2005
and their market share increased by 2.5% in the next year. Motorola had the
second largest market share comprising over 17% in 2005 and their market
share increase as well in the next year by almost 4%. Samsung had been able
to maintain the third position for their worldwide mobile phone market share,
their share decreased to 11.8% in 2005 compared to 12.7% market share in
the previous year. On the other hand, Sony Ericsson and L.G both had more
than 6% market share in 2005. In 2006, though Sony Ericsson’s market share
increased by 1%, L.G’s market share decreased. BenQ Mobile had the lowest

« Market share in the cell phone manufacturing worldwide.

S

N

302 English Grammar and Composition

Sample Question

SSC Examination

English-Paper Two

Total Marks:100

Time: 3 hours
[Answer all the questions. Figures in the margin indicate full marks]
Part A: Grammar
1. Fillin the blanks with the words from the box. You may need to change
the forms of some of the words. You may need to use one word more
than once. %x10=5

Obesity is a medical condition caused (a) excess body fat. The
increase of body fat has an effect (b) human health. Obesity
increases (c) likelihood of various diseases, particularly heart
disease, diabetes, certain types of cancer etc. Obesity most commonly occurs
due to a combination (d) excessive dietary calories, lack of physical
activity, and genetic factors. The primary treatment (e) obesity is
dieting and physical exercise. To supplement this, anti-obesity drugs may be
taken to reduce appetite or reduce fat (f) . In severe cases, surgery is
performed to reduce stomach volume or bowel length. Obesity is a leading
preventable cause of (g) worldwide. Authorities view it as one of
the most serious public health problems of (h) 21st century.
Obesity is considered as (i) illness in much of the modern world
though it was once widely perceived as (j) symbol of wealth and
fertility.
2. Fill in the blanks with suitable words. %x10=5
The development of a nation is not (a) easy task. It depends
(b) the willingness and sacrificing attitude of the valiant sons and
daughters of (c) soil. They don't work for any appreciation or
reward (d) themselves. Their vision is to (e) the world .
a better place to live (f) . They are always proud (g) Ss

English Grammar and Composition 303
undertaking selfless ventures. Their mission is to serve (h) greater
interest of humanity. They spend their lives for the welfare of people, the society
and the country as (i) whole. People (j) such vision
and mission help uphold the dignity of a nation.
3. Make five sentences using parts of sentences from each column of the
table below. 1x5 =5
, to have patriotic feelings
Hence, to every nation its flag need
For that we has | dearer than any other thing.
Every independent country of the world | is its own flag
We the symbol of independence and
The National flag sovereignty of a nation.
to safeguard its prestige.
4. Complete the following text with right forms of the verbs given in the
box. %x10=5
rain be see start scatter curse get blow look go
It was the month of Baisakh. The sky (a) overcast with cloud.
Cold wind had started (b) from the west. Looking upward, I could
only see the thick clouds (c) here and there. The earth was dry and
thirsty as it (d) not for a long time. I had no watch with me and it
was not possible to know the time by (e) at the sun. After 20
minutes it (f) to rain heavily. The rain continued ceaselessly for
a couple of hours. When the rain had stopped, a rickshaw puller was (g)
waiting for passengers. He was wearing a bamboo hat to save
his head from rain water. It became dark once again and the rickshaw puller (h)
back to his hut with a broken heart. He cursed the weather and
= also kept (i) his fate. If it had not rained that afternoon, he ( j)
S some passengers.

304 English Grammar and Composition
5. Change the narrative style of the following text. 5
I saw a young boy standing before me with utmost politeness. He said," Uncle,
my parents are calling you." I came out of my house and saw an elderly man
and a woman. The woman said, “Bhaiya don’t you recognize me? I am Salma.
We looked for you everywhere but didn't find you.” “What a surprise!" I said
with admiration.
6. Change the sentences according to directions. 1x10 = 10
a) In the field of education Sir Salimullah’s contribution was greater than any
other educationists. (Use positive degree of adjective.)
b) Institutions associated with his name still receive donations. (Make
complex sentence.)
c) He played a vital role in establishing the University of Dhaka. (Make
Exclamatory sentence.)
d) The orphanage established by him is still providing shelter and education to
the poor and the orphans. (Make interrogative sentence.)
e) These institutions always remind us of the open handed charity of this great
man. (Use passive voice.)
f) It was he who had founded the All India Muslim league. (Make simple
sentence.)
g) He did not live long. ((Make affirmative sentence without changing the
original meaning.)
h) At the age of 48 he died. Make compound sentence.)
i) He has attained one of the most honorable positions in the society.(Use
comparative degree.)
j) With love and gratitude he will be remembered by every Bangladeshi. (Use
active voice)
5

English Grammar and Composition 305

7. Complete the following sentences. 1x5=5

a) ------------------------- if he had asked me.

b) Students go to schools not only to gain ---------------------------------------,

c) Walking which is a -------------------------------------.

d) Finishing her work --------------------------------,

@) --------------------------------- she went out without an umbrella.

8. Complete the text adding suffixes, prefixes or the both with the root
words given in the parenthesis. % x10 =5

Mr. Habib was driving to his office in the morning. He had started late as usual.

His car stopped at a traffic signal. As the lights became green, the car in the front

was not moving. The driver got down from the car and was asking for (a)

sistetststseseeeeeeeeee (ASSiSt). Mr. Habib became so (b) ...............--+. (anger). He had

become very (C) ...............++----- (popular) in the office for being late every day.

He was (d) ................:-. (certain) going to be late again. He could see the face

of his boss in his (e) ..................... (imagine). An important (f) oe

(agree) would be signed in his office and he had to reach a bit early. He would

(2) .esseeeeseeseeeeee (probable) lose his job for that irresponsible act. His boss

won't be (h) ...............2++ (different) to his irresponsible acts any more. Mr.

Habib got nervous thinking of his fate. So many people have become (i)

tessitessereeeeeeees (EMploy) in last few weeks! His hands were trembling as he

started driving fast. But he should think about his safety and drive more (j)

seseestsesaeeeeseeseess (CATE).

9. Make tag questions of these statements 1x5 =5

(a) My father scolded me. I was upset. Later I told him, “You don't like me,

iad
Forma-39, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

306 English Grammar and Composition

(b) My friend, Raja, was very down. I told him, “ Let’s play badminton,
pie

(c) Whenever I go to Cox’s Bazar, I think that the Bay of Bengal is beautiful,

?

(d) There was heavy traffic in the city in the morning. I entered the class
hurriedly and told, “I’m notlate, 9”
(e) Sudipa is very introvert. She never passes any comment about others,

?

10. Complete the passage using suitable connectors. 1x5 =5
Many schools have a uniform. Students sometimes do not like the idea of
wearing uniforms, (a) , there are arguments for and against. One
argument for school uniform is that you don’t have to waste time in the morning
thinking what to put on. (b) , if pupils were allowed to wear
clothes according to their own choice, they would tend to wear expensive
clothes. (c) , some clothes may not be suitable for schools. (d)

, a person’s choice of clothes reflects his/her personality and
taste. (e) , wearing a school dress does not allow a person to
express his/her individuality in this way.

11. Use capitals and punctuation marks where necessary in the following
text. 5
who are happy those who have fit bodies are the happiest ones if we are
physically sound we will be mentally sound too we need to take care of our
health as well as be positive in thinking how lucky they are who are both ways
fit.

ES

im)

Q

English Grammar and Composition 307
Part B: Composition
12. Suppose you are Rubina/Raihan and you have passed SSC. You have seen a
vacancy ad for the position of an assistant mobile operator in a mobile
company. Now write a CV with a cover letter for the post. Your CV should
not exceed one page. 8
13. Suppose you are Salma/Salman, an SSC candidate of Pirbari High School,
Manikgonj. You and your classmates need some extra lessons on English
composition. Now write an application to your Head teacher on behalf of
your class requesting some extra lessons after your regular classes. 10
14. Suppose, once on a rainy day you got drenched in rain water. Write a
paragraph in 250 words on “A Rainy Day You Remember”. 10
15. From your childhood you have a desire to be a cook in a famous restaurant.
Write a composition on “Your Dream Job” narrating why you have decided
to be a cook and how you will prepare yourself to get this job. 12
Answers
1. Fill in the blanks with the words from the box.
(a) by (b) on (c) the (d) of (e) for (f) consumption (g) death (h) the () an (j)
the
2. Fill in the blanks with suitable words.
(a) an (b) on (c) the (d) for (e) make (f) in (g) of (h) the (i) a Gj) with
3. Make sentences using parts of sentences given in the table.
i. The national flag is the symbol of independence and sovereignty.
co ii. Every independent country of the world has its own flag.
S iii. Hence to every nation its flag is dearer than any other thing.

308 English Grammar and Composition
iv. We need to safeguard its prestige.
v. For that we need to have patriotic feelings.
4. Gap filling with right forms of verbs
(a) was (b) blowing (c) scattered (d) had not rained (e) looking (f) started (g)
seen (h) went (i) cursing (j) would have got
5. Changing narrative style
I saw a young boy standing before me with utmost politeness. Addressing me as
uncle he said that his parents were calling me. I came out of my house and saw
an elderly man and a woman. Addressing me as bhaiya the woman asked if I
didn’t recognize him. She added that she was Salma (or, She introduced herself
as Salma) and said that they had looked for me everywhere but had not found
me. I exclaimed in wonder that it was a great surprise.
6. Changing sentences
a) Inthe field of education no other contribution of the educationists was so
great as that of Sir Salimullah.
b) Institutions which are associated with his name still receive donations.
c) What a vital role he played in establishing the University of Dhaka!
d) Isn’t the orphanage established by him still providing shelter and education
to the poor and the orphans?
e) The open handed charity of this great man will always be remembered.
f) He founded the All India Muslim League.
g) He lived a short life.
h) He died and he was 48 then.
i) Very few have attained as honourable position in the society as he.
j) Every Bangladeshi will remember him with love and gratitude.
S

English Grammar and Composition 309

7. Completing sentences :

a) I could have told him if he had asked me. ;

b) Students go to schools not only to gain knowledge but also to develop

manners.

c) Walking which is a good exercise can keep everyone fit.

d) Finishing her work she went to bed.

e) Although it was raining, she went out without an umbrella.

8. Adding suffix, prefix or both

(a) assistance (b) angry (c) unpopular (d) certainly (e) imagination (f) agreement

(g) probably (h) indifferent (i) unemployed (j) carefully.

9. Tag questions

(a) My father scolded me. I was upset. Later I told him, “You don’t like me do you ?”

(b) My friend, Raja was very down. I told him, “Let,s play badminton, shall we?”

(c) Whenever I go to Cox’s Bazar, I think that the Bay of Bengal is beautiful,

is,nt it ?

(d) There was heavy traffic in the city in the morning. I entered the class

hurriedly and told, “I’m not late, am I ?”

(e) Sudipa is very introvert. She never passes any comment about others, does she?

10. Complete the passage by using connectors

(a) but (b) Besides (c) Moreover (d) On the other hand (e) Therefore

11. Punctuation

Who are happy? Those who have fit bodies are the happiest ones. If we are

physically sound, we will be mentally sound too. We need to take care of our
2 health as well as be positive in thinking. How lucky they are who are both ways
R fit!

310 English Grammar and Composition
Guidelines for question setters and markers for English
1. Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
MCQ can be set for testing a number of strategies and skills related to reading such as
scanning, skimming, reading for gist, inferencing (guessing the meaning from the
context) comprehension check etc. Each MCQ item will carry % mark. However,
depending on the level of difficulty some items may have 1 mark as well.
In preparing MCQ item, question setters will make sure that learners have to apply
certain skills or strategies of reading in order to be able to choose the right options.
Depending on the level of the learners, items will be set to test learners' lower order
thinking skills (knowing and understanding) as well as higher order and more critical
thinking (analyzing, synthesizing, and evaluating). Use synonyms in the questions to
avoid quoting directly from the original passage. Make the questions a bit round about
so that learners think.
For example :
Text : The Great Wall of China, one of the greatest wonders of the world, was first
built between 220-206 BC.
Question : When was the Great Wall first built? (Don't make this type of question.
Student will just get the answer from the question paper as 'was bom!' is common in
both the text in the question paper and the answer.)
Question : What is the initial construction period of the Great Wall? (This question is
Okay as learners has to understand that 'was built' and ‘construction period’ are same.)
Students will write the question number and then write only a/b/c/d that refers to the
correct answer. Whole sentence from the question paper is not required.
The same text can be used for guessing the meaning from the context and Question
Answer (open ended and close ended). However, the same text cannot be used for
Question-Answer and True/False. Depending on difficulty level and text length,
information transfer and True/False questions can be set from the same text or from
two different texts. Two different texts are preferred to a single text.
Please note the following points while setting MCQ test items :
e Phrase stems as clearly as possible. Confusing questions can generate wrong ie
answers from students who do understand the material. S

English Grammar and Composition 311

e Avoid redundant words and phrases in the stem. Extraneous details make a
question more complex and less reliable.

e Include any language in the stem that you would have to repeat in each answer
option.

e Options should be similar in length and structure.

e The number of answer options should not be more than four.

e Distracters must be incorrect, but plausible. Try to include among the
distracters options that contain common errors.

e To make distracters more plausible, use words that is familiar to students.

e Ifa recognizable key word appears in the correct answer, it should appear in
some or all of the distracters as well. Don't let a verbal clue decrease the validity
of your exam.

e Avoid using extreme or vague words in the answers. Use rarely extreme words
like all, always and never or vague words or phrases like usually, typically and
may be in the answers.

e Avoid using All of the above or None of the above as an answer choice.

In designing MCQs the following class wise guidelines have to be followed.
MCO for grades 6 and 7
Altogether 10 MCQs will be set. Each MCQ will have % mark (or half mark) for a
correct answer. There should be 6 MCQs on vocabulary test (guessing meaning from
the context) and 4 MCQs on answering questions (scanning for specific information,
search reading, deducing the meaning of unfamiliar words). Thus the marks
distribution will be:
Vocabulary %X6 =3
Questions AX4 =2
Total =5
MCOQ for grade 8
As given in NCTB Sample Question.

S MCO for grades 9-10

‘Altogether 7 MCQs will be set. Each MCQ will have 1 mark for a correct answer.

312 English Grammar and Composition
There will be 2 MCQs on vocabulary test (guessing meaning from the context and
inferencing) and 5 MCQs on answering questions (skimming, reading for main ideas
and supporting details, reading to infer meaning). Thus the marks distribution will be:
Vocabulary 1X2 =2

Questions 1X5 =5

Total =7

2. True/False

True-false questions are typically used to measure the ability to identify whether
statements of fact are correct. The questions are usually a declarative statement that the
student must judge as true or false.

Follow the general guidelines below while writing True/False items for your students:

e Base the item on a single idea.

e Write items that test an important idea.

e Avoid lifting statements right from the text.

e Make the statements a brief as possible.

e Write clearly true or clearly false statements.

e Try to avoid such words as all, always, never, only, nothing, and alone.

e The use of words like more, less, important, unimportant, large, small, recent,
old, tall, great, and so on, can easily lead to ambiguity.

e State items positively. Negative statements may be difficult to interpret. This
is especially true of statements using the double negative. If a negative word,
such as "not" or "never," is used, be sure to underline or capitalize it.

e Beware of detectable answer patterns.

3. Matching

There is no need of a separate reading text for matching. The question itself will have

a context after the texts in part A and part B are properly matched. The numbering of
texts in column A can be i. ii. iii, iv ..... and the texts in column B can be a, b, c, d........
Students only need to match the numbering in the two columns, e.g i, ii, iii, iv etc. (in
column A) and a, b. c. d etc. (in column B). You can also use 3 columns with texts to
match.

4. Gap filling with or without clues

The text in the gap filling activity is separate and complete. The text for this item will
have a meaningful context too. There will be five gaps in the text. The gaps can be used
for article, preposition, or any other parts of speech without verb as there is separate test =
for it. A question setter will choose one particular item mentioned earlier to seta “

English Grammar and Composition 313
question and use a gap at the particular place. For example, if the question setter wants
to test the article then there will be a gap at the position of a, an, the or before a noun
that does not take any article. For a question of 3 marks, there will be six gaps in the
text; for 4, there will be 8 gaps; and for 5 marks there will be ten gaps.
Follow the guidelines while writing gap filling test items:
e Prepare a scoring key that contains all acceptable answers for each item.
e Prefer single word or short phrase answers.
e Beware of open questions that invite unexpected but reasonable answers.
e Make all the blanks of an equal length.
e Avoid grammatical clues such as "an."
e Place the blanks near the end of the statement. Try to present a complete or
nearly complete statement before calling for a response.
e Limit the number of blanks to one or two per sentence. Statements with too
many blanks waste time as students figure out what is being asked.
e Ifanumerical answer is called for, indicate the units (e.g. currency) in which it
is to be expressed.
5. Cloze test with/without clues
A cloze test is a fill-in-the-blank activity that assesses students' comprehension of
vocabulary and reading passages or knowledge of grammatical items. In cloze tests
there are recurrent gaps at every 4th, 5th, 6th or 7th word. If the first gap, for example,
is used at the 5th place, all through the text the gap will be at the Sth place. Unlike the
gap filling activity that tests a particular grammar item (e.g. preposition, article,
pronoun, or verb) it is a test for vocabulary (key words) in general. This is why gap
filling activity in the reading section is usually a cloze test. In contrast, gap filling
activity is a merely a grammar test item.
A cloze test with 5 marks will have ten gaps (.5 for each gap). Considering the level of
difficulty cloze tests without clues at grade 10 can have 5 gaps (1 mark for each gap).
In answering the question, an examinee does not need to reproduce the text in the
answer script. Writing the missing word with the corresponding question number is
enough. However, the whole text with suitable words in the gaps will neither earn any
extra credit or discredit.
6. Information Transfer
Depending on the level of difficulty and length of the text, information transfer and
True/False questions can be set from the same text. However, if the text is too small, do
not use the same text for both the tests as the content will be inadequate for setting
Forma-40, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10

314 English Grammar and Composition
questions. Make sure there is no overlapping or repetitions in the question you have set.
Alternatively you can use two different texts for these two test items.

The marks allocated for information transfer is 1X5 =5 or 0.5X10=5 (depending on the
level of difficulty)

7. Substitution table

It's a grammar test item. It tests whether students can make grammatically correct
sentences following any particular structure/s. It's different from matching item. In
matching there might be equal number of texts in each column in a table and students
need to make sentences using a text from each column. In designing the test item, the
question setter can write the texts in Column A in a way so that the sequential
arrangement of the text makes a context. In a substitution table, depending on marks,
there will be 4 or 5 texts in the left column, 1 or 2 grammar words that shows the form
in the middle column, and extensions at the right column. Each meaningful sentence
made using the texts and the lexical word will have credit.

8. Gap filling with right forms of verbs

Sentences will be written in context in the question paper. Some verbs could be omitted
or given in brackets without any form. If the verbs are totally omitted in the text, a list
of verbs will be supplied in a box separately. Students' job will be to use the verb at the
gaps in their correct forms according to the context and other grammatical
considerations. Alternatively base form of verbs can also be supplied in the body of the
text in parenthesis.

Students will write only the right answers with the question number. However, if
anyone uses the text with words at the gaps, it should be accepted as correct answer.
9. Changing sentences

A text will be designed with a certain context. Some of the sentences in the text will
have instructions in the parenthesis on how to change them. Depending on the marks in
the test item, students will be asked to change 5 or 10 sentences. Students will write
only the changed sentence as their answers. They can write the changed sentences in
any order but must use the correct number used for each sentence in the given text.
10. Rearranging

Rearranging measures students’ ability to organize some detached sentences into a Ss
coherent and cohesive text. Use 10 detached sentences for classes 6, 7, and 8 (See the “

English Grammar and Composition 315
sample questions for these grades.). For SSC, Ss will rearrange eight parts of a
story/passage (See the sample question for SSC.). Test your test item (with someone
else or you sit for a test) to check whether the sequence of the answer vary. If the
answer varies and each variety has a complete meaning, redesign the test. Use linking
words/sentence connectors to maintain cohesion and coherence in the text. Learners do
not need to reproduce the text in their answer scripts. If they arrange the corresponding
serial of the texts correctly (such as b. d. a, f or v, iii, vi. i... etc), they will get full
credit. Please remember that the test objective here is the organisation of
sentences, not the copying of texts from the question paper. However if any learner
comes with sentences written in a random text, there is no need to penalize him/her.
Students will get credits for the correct answers. For example, if the answer is like this:
aXbVevdX eV fv gX bX iv j.X the student will get 5
marks.
The test has no relation with the texts used in the previous test items.
11. Writing summary
Use a text not exceeding 150 to 200 words for classes 6 to 8 and not exceeding 300
words for classes 9-10 in the question paper. Learners will produce a summary using
one third words of the given text. For an example, if the original text has 150 words,
learners will produce the summary in 50 words. However, 5% plus minas is okay. This
answer should be written in random texts not in isolated sentences. There is no question
of counting number of sentences in summary. So DO Not mention in the question paper
how many lines or sentences learners will use to make a summary. The number of
words used here is important. Make sure that they are writing in their own words, not
copying some sentences from the text. Practice them to avoid examples or explanations
in writing a summary. A fresh text should be given to make summary. No text used in
the previous test items can be used here.
12. Writing a paragraph answering questions
Make sure while answering questions your students will be guided to write a well
structured paragraph. In other words, if the students answer the questions properly,
there will be a paragraph of a befitting topic sentence followed by arguments/ideas to
support the topic sentence and a conclusion to summarise what has been told in the
topic sentence and the body. There cannot be any new ideas in the conclusion.
However, if there are 5 questions to answer, it does not mean that students will write
only five sentences. They will use sentences as per their discretion but the paragraph as
so a whole answer the questions. If there are 10 marks for this item, learners should be
& able to make at least 10 sentences. The word limit for classes 6-7 is 150 words, for class

316 English Grammar and Composition
8, itis 170 words, and for 9-10 it is 200 words at least.10% plus minus can be accepted.
Keep an eye on the content rather than the mechanical calculation of sentences. Assess
the paragraph from different aspects such as grammar, ideas, organisation of
ideas, communication, punctuation, and spelling. Do not assess the paragraph from
the perspective of grammar accuracy only. Regarding the composition writing in Paper
2 (which is structurally an essay) the word limit will be 250 for classes 6-7, 300 for
class 8, and 350 for 9-10.
13. Completing a story
There will be the beginning of a story in the question paper. Students will continue the
story and complete it. The answer will vary here. Completing a story when given at
classes 6-8 should be more guided (See sample question for classes 6-7. ) where
question setter not only begins a story but also provides with some clues for the
extension of ideas. Students will complete the story following the clues. A good idea is
to mention the word limit when there is no clues for the students. Assess the paragraph
from different aspects such as grammar, ideas, communication, organisation etc.; do
not only assess the paragraph only from the perspective of grammar accuracy.
Moreover, use of cohesion (inter-connectedness of the sentences) and coherence
(transition from one idea to another idea) are important here. Word limit here will be
similar to paragraph writing.
14. Open-Ended Questions
Open ended or essay format questions are excellent for measuring higher level
cognitive learning and overall comprehension of a reading text/passage. They allow the
student to select content for their response, to organize their thoughts in a logical
manner and to present their ideas on a given subject matter. Overall, these types of test
questions allow teachers to test student's broader understanding of a reading item.
When writing good open-ended questions, keep the following guidelines in mind:
e Be sure that the test question clearly states the answer that you are seeking from
the student. For example, "Discuss the outcomes of environment pollution" is a
poor test question. But, worded as "Describe the potential impacts of the
environment pollution on the people of coastal regions in Bangladesh" or, what
are the causes and impacts of environmental pollution on the people of coastal
regions in Bangladesh? is a better test question as it clearly gives the student
something to compare and contrast within a focused area.
e If you are looking to test comprehension, a good opening line for the test
question is, 'Explain the following..." %
e If you are seeking to test the student's ability to analyze a concept, a good S
opening phrase for your test question is, ‘compare and contrast..."

English Grammar and Composition 317

e Don't give students the option to pick 2 or 3 questions from among 5. This can
add confusion for the students and complexity for the teacher when grading for
a classroom. This type of test format often compromises with validity and
reliability of the test.

e Here you are setting recalling questions, design the question in a way so that
examinees do not have opportunity to pick answers by matching the vocabulary
in the question and answer.

Question setters have to go by the following class-wise guidelines in setting questions.
Grades 6-7
There will be 5 open ended questions each bearing 2 marks for the correct answer.
There will be 2 questions for recalling answer, 2 questions to check students’
understanding, and 1 question for analyzing information.
Grade 8
There will be 5 open ended questions each bearing 2 marks for the correct answer.
There will be 2 questions for recalling answer, 2 questions to check students’
understanding, and 1 question for analyzing information.
Grade 9-10
There will be 5 open ended questions each bearing 2 marks for the correct answer.
There will be 1 question to recall answer, 3 questions to check students’ understanding,
1 question for analysing information or evaluating something.
A list of action verbs according to Bloom’s Taxonomy for lower order and higher
order thinking questions are supplied here to be used while designing the test
items.
Remembering/recalling: describe, define, list, locate, tell
Understanding: describe, classify, discuss, explain, identify, select, translate, predict
Analysing: solve, use, interpret, sketch, illustrate, classify, differentiate, organise,
relate, identify, categorise, compare, contrast, construct, distinguish, explain,
Evaluating: argue, defend, judge, select, support, value, critique, assess, justify
Creating: construct, develop, investigate, design, imagine, justify
(for more information please visit:

%  http.//cft.vanderbitt.edu/guides-sub-pages/blooms-taxonomy/)

S

N

318 English Grammar and Composition
15. Dialogue writing
A dialogue in real situation is an exchange of information. This has to be reflected in
the dialogue written by the test giver. A dialogue cannot be a mere combination of
fragmented sentences or snappy phrases or collocations like Hi/Hello/Yes/No/Very
good/Thank you/Welcome/See you/Bye etc. There must be some questions and answers
in full sentences. A dialogue has to contain at least 5 questions and their answers or 10
exchange of statements including some questions in full sentences other than greetings.
16. Writing letters/e-mails
If it is an informal letter, content is important. If it is a formal letter, both content and
form are important. Formal letter can be written either in British style (each paragraph
indented at the beginning for one space, date at the upper right hand corner, name at the
right hand corner at the bottom). It can also be written in American style (All
paragraphs in a line without indenting, date name everything at the left hand corner).
Picture of an envelope or stamp is not needed but address can be written. Yet, if any
student provides them - it will not earn any extra credit or penalty.
For e-mails, student must write the e-mail id, subject, and content as written in a
genuine email. Students should be taught in the class that there should be a
considerable margin at the answer script. However, there should not be any penalty for
any examinee if the answer script has no margin. Margin has nothing to do with
assessment of the answer.
Word limit should be mentioned in the question paper. Again the word limit is 150
words for classes 6-7, 170 words for class 8, and 200 for classes 9-10 with 10% plus
minus.
17. Describing graphs and charts
Graph should be authentic. Teachers may collect charts from various sources such as
newspapers, magazines, books or from the internet. Alternatively, teachers can use
authentic data and make simple charts by themselves. Describing a graph or chart
needs certain language abilities. The graph and chart presented in the textbook show
that. A marker of answer scripts should keep an eye whether those languages are used
or not. Answers will include the written presentation of data shown in the graph
followed by a concluding remark. A question setter should mention the word limit for
describing the graph or chart. Do not ask students to produce any graph on the answer
. Sheet. They will only describe it. . . .
2
BS

English Grammar and Composition 319
Acknowledgement
Communicative English grammar is comparatively a new idea in Bangladesh. In
writing this book we have collected ideas from different online and offline sources
and we are also grateful to suggestions offered by our esteemed colleagues and
other ELT practitioners in Bangladesh. In particular, we would like to acknowledge
that we have gathered ideas from the following sources —
Cobuild C (2011) Collins Cobuild English Grammar. Glasgow, HarperCollins
Publisher
Harmer J, Acevedo A, Lethaby C (2009) Just Grammar. London, Marshall
Cavendish Ltd.
Harrison M, (2013) Oxford Living Grammar. Oxford, Oxford University Press
Jones L (1998) Communicative Grammar Practice. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press
Leech G and Svartvik J (2002) A Communicative Grammar of English. New
York, Longman Publishing
Murphy R, (2004) English Grammar in Use. Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press
Swan M and Walter C (1997) How English Works. Oxford, Oxford University
Press
Werner PK, Marilynn S, (1997)A Communicative Grammar. New York,
McGraw-Hill
Brown, Kristine and Susan Hood. 1989. Writing Matters. CUP.
Greenberg, Karen L. 1994. The Advancing Writing Book. Hong Kong: Harper
collins College Publisher.
Imhoof, M and Henry Hudson. 1975. From Paragraph to Essay: Developing
Composition Writing. Essex: Longman.
Pemberton, Carol. 1997. Writing Paragraophs. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Rapidex. 1981. Self Letter Drafting Course. New Deli: Pustak Mahal.
Stephens, Mary. 1996. Practise Writing. Longman.
Z THE END
g

* PIS ACS U q WSDSE PATS AIC
— wa aerrrat fe BAT
Always speak the truth
sod FRI (CGT RR, 28 Sr AST) cH SPAT
Treenca*
For free distribution from academic year 2013 by the Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh

