_ Finance and Banking
i
Ph ante,
— , Ul Tee *.
F tj , ny “om a7]
fj : * 0000005 :
a, F a * jj
; ; * ra yr j / AF oo? :
ARE ) |" om 4 ee
ery? Pe
EAS HH Se ‘ « i) og
P= : Us a) NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH
SS  Meaga—o — " ed
Sy ne os ia ail “NZ

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a textbook for classes nine- ten from the academic year 2013
Finance and Banking
Classes Nine-Ten
Written by
Shibli Rubayat-Ul-Islam
Mohammad Salahuddin Chowdhury
Nazmun Nahar
Edited by
Dr. Mohammed Masud Rahman
Translated by
Jahid Bin Matin
Munshi Jalal Uddin
Takad Ahmed Chowdhury
Nazmun Nahar
NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka
[All rights reserved by the publisher]
First publication : December, 2012
Revised Edition : September, 2014
Reprint : November, 2017
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
For free distribution by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Printed by :

Preface
The aim of secondary education is to make the learners fit for entry into higher
education by flourishing their latent talents and prospects with a view to building the
nation with the spirit of the Language Movement and the Liberation War. To make the
learners skilled and competent citizens of the country based on the economic, social,
cultural and environmental settings is also an important issue of secondary education.
The textbooks of secondary level have been written and compiled according to the
revised curriculum 2012 in accordance with the aims and objectives of National
Education Policy-2010.Contents and presentations of the textbooks have been
bselected according to the moral and humanistic values of Bengali tradition and
culture and the spirit of Liberation War 1971 ensuring equal dignity for all
irrespective of caste and creed of different religions and sex.
The present government is committed to ensure the successful implementation of
Vision 2021. Honorable Prime Minister, Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina expressed her firm determination to make the country free
from illiteracy and instructed the concerned authority to give free textbooks to every
student of the country. National Curriculum and Textbook Board started to distribute
textbooks free of cost since 2010 according to her instruction.
Due to amazing development of science and technology the students of new era are facing a
changing world. The patterns of business, finance and banking activities have been changed and
the views of mass people have been also changed. According to direction of National Education
Policy-2010 Finance and Banking subject incorporated in new curriculum. As per the revised
curriculum this book has been introduced for class nine- ten
Considering the challenges and commitments of 21" century and following the revised
curriculum the textbook has been written. Recently the rational evaluation and tryout program
has been completed to make correction and revision of the textbook. I hope the outcomes of the
program will be reflected in this revised edition. We will continue our effort to make the next
edition of this book more beautiful, decent and free from any types of errors.
I thank sincerely all for their intellectual labor who were involved in the process of
revision, writing, editing, art and design of the textbook.
Prof. Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

CONTENTS
[om [Fer noerrwse |

Chapter One
Finance and Business Finance
With the gradual progress of society & civilization and the development of
science and technology, the scope of trade and commerce has also increased.
Hence, the product-market has to cope with diverse competitions. To make
profit in this competition, a businessman has to utilize his capital efficiently
through proper planning so that the cost of production or selling could be kept to
a minimum. This is how, a business firm can maximize its profit. For that
purpose, every business firm collects its necessary fund for investment from the
most desirable sources, and invests it in the most suitable project by analyzing
various information of the product-market. This creates inflows and outflows of
fund in the business. Finance regulates these flows of fund nicely. Different
principles of finance are used in this process of regulation. Financial
Management helps a businessman to earn enough profit from investing even a
small amount of capital. Now-a-days finance is no more used as a supporting
system but as the main driving force of business.
| SS = mah Sy eed
Picture: Industry
After reading this chapter we shall be able to:
e describe the definition of Finance
e analyze the classification of Finance
e explain the importance of Finance
e explain the principles of Finance
e describe the functions of Financial Manager
e describe the evolution of Finance
Forma-1, Finance and Banking, Class-9,10

2 Finance and Banking
1.1 Concept of Finance

Finance deals with fund management. Finance prepares plans and implements
necessary activities about what amount of fund should be collected from which
sources and where & how this fund is to be invested for highest profit in the
project. In case of a business firm, fund flows in the business from selling of
products. Different types of funds are needed to produce and buy goods for the
business, such as purchasing machinery, purchasing raw materials, paying
wages to the labours, etc. These are the utilization of fund. Funds need to be
collected in a planned way as per the requirement of fund to maintain an
uninterrupted production process. Finance means this process related to fund
collection and utilization.

of large expenditures of their family and write down the features of family finance.| |
If you visit a tailoring shop in your locality, you will see there one or two person
sewing with a machine. Again, someone may be cutting clothes or stitching the
buttons. So to continue the tailoring business properly, the shop owner has to
purchase sewing machines, threads, buttons, scissors etc. of necessary amount.
At the beginning of his business he bears these expenses from his own saving. If
the fund appears insufficient, he may take loan from his relatives to overcome
the shortage. When the business is in operation, at the end of every month he
needs to bear expenses for the payment of workers' wages, house rent, electricity
bill etc. and he pays all these with the money earned by sewing cloths. He also
has to plan to pay back the loan money from this monthly collection. An owner
of a tailoring shop always expects that he can earn some amount of profit even
after meeting all necessary expenditures from the income of the business, by
which he can save for the future or can utilize for business expansion even after
meeting regular expenses of his family. So if an owner of a tailoring shop
conducts business through a proper planning regarding the source of finance and
its utilization, only then he can earn profit through smooth operation of the
business. Otherwise it will be found that due to cash crisis sewing thread cannot
be bought timely and so the customers are going back. Again, it may be needed
to shut down the business due to lack of money to buy a new machine replacing
the old one. To conduct the business properly, business finance deals with when
and for what reason how much amount of fund is needed and from which
sources this fund should be collected for smooth operation of the business. S

Finance and Business Finance 3
There is implication of finance in family too. Generally, every family has one or
more than one sources of finance. Income may be obtained from different
sources in different families, such as, from service, business, agricultural
activities, self-employment etc. Besides these, regular expenditure of a family
occurs for daily shopping costs, house rent, school fees, different bills payment
etc. As expenditure should be matched with income, in this way, right time of
expenditure should also be maintained. If money is insufficient as per demand,
then as an example, it may happen that name of the student may be crossed out
from the register. In case of a family, pre-planned identification of the sources of
fund and its utilization is the financial process. Other than daily expenditure
of this type, sometimes occasional expenditure may be required in the family
which may exceed the income ability of a person. If it is not possible to collect
money from regular income sources for such expenditures like buying a new
television or refrigerator, then the shortage may be fulfilled through long term
loan. In that case, a loan repayment plan needs to be prepared. As a result, the
concept of finance helps to determine the sources of fund and make proper
management of it to conduct the family smoothly.
Financial process can be understood from the perspective of a school also.
School is a social organization whose main objective is not earning profit. There
is also a plan of income- expenditure and fund management. Educational
institutions generally collect fund from sources of their students’ tuition fees,
examination fees, admission fees, etc. The institution has to meet different
expenditures with this fund to run the academic activities properly. These can be
payment of teacher-staffs salary, house rent, electricity bill, different types of
renovation expenses, purchasing computer and furniture. So, ensuring fund
management for performing various working proceses of the institution nicely
by considering different sources of fund and different sectors of utilization is
financing in the perspective of the school.
Among above examples, tailoring shop is a profit making organization, but
family and school are non-profit organizations. Our present topic is involved
mainly in financing of profit-making or business organizations. How is the
financial process of a grocery shop? The shop owner earns profit by selling
products. But for the purpose of selling, on regular basis he needs to complete
the activities of purchasing products, paying rent, electricity bill, wages of the
~ workers, etc. as current expenditures. Moreover, sometimes he has to spend a
S large amount of money for purposes like expansion of business for the need of

4 Finance and Banking
the customers, purchasing a refrigerator, etc. These are his fixed expenditure.
Thus a grocer requires to invest both in fixed assets and current assets. If income
from selling is not sufficient for collecting fund for investment, he has to collect
fund from other sources like personal fund, friends-relatives, purchase on credit
etc. Again, he may collect large amount of money which he needs to invest in
fixed assets usually from commercial banks. In such financing, as there is the
opportunity of repaying in long schedule of time, the risk of loan repayment is
reduced a bit. In the case of a grocery shop, main activities of business finance
are fund management through proper utilization of money received from sales
proceeds in meeting current expenditures, some long term investments,
collection of money from less risky sources, timely repayment of loan
installments, etc.

Square Pharmaceuticals, Bata Company, Kohinoor Chemicals - these are large
size business organizations which are called companies. Financial process of
such a company is not so simple like grocery shop or tailoring shop rather it is
comparatively complex. In fund collection, a large company gets more benefit
than a small organization. For example, a company collects capital by selling
shares in the share market. Company's goodwill, rate of profit, customer services
or consumers' satisfaction help to increase the share price in share market.
Business finance deals with and provides guidance regarding when and how
much of a source among different sources should be used to collect fund and in
which sectors, how much of it and how it will be invested to increase the profit.
1.2 Classification of Finance

Financial process is as important for a business organization as it is for a non-
profit organization. Every organization is involved with a financial process.
Financial process takes different forms for different organizations. Now we will
discuss classification of this finance. Though our main concentration is business
finance, we will also get a brief idea of the financial processes of some other
organizations.

a) Family Finance

In family finance, the sources and amount of income of the family are identified
and how this income can be utilized for the overall welfare of the family
members is determined. Among innumerous necessary expenditures, the most
important expenditures are fulfilled on priority basis. If family income is not ,,
sufficient, loan can be taken from the relatives, familiar persons or friends. S

Finance and Business Finance 5
Regular expenditures are determined by considering the regular income. Bank
loans can be arranged for fixed assets like television, freeze, car, building
construction etc .. But, as the collected fund is limited, it needs proper utilization.
If the collected money is in excess, remaining amount can be saved for future
use.
b) Public Finance
Every government has its own financial management. In the case of a
government, how much on which areas will be the probable yearly expenditures
of the government and how that money can be arranged from which sources are
discussed in the public finance. Government has to spend a lot of money for
overall development of the country in various sectors such as roads, bridge,
government educational institutions, government hospital, law and order,
defence, social infrastructure etc. Government collects money to bear these
expenses from different sources like income tax, vat, gift tax, import custom,
export custom, saving certificates, prize bond, treasury bill etc. In public
finance, first the amount of expenditure is determined and then fund is collected
according to the needs. The main objective of public finance is social welfare.
Public finance is usually non-profitable. Expenditure may be greater than
income in public finance. There exists a number of business organizations under
government ownership, which may be less profitable also, for example:
Chemical Industries under BCIC. Again, large amount of money is required for
big projects like Bangabandhu Bridge, if total amount of money is to be
collected from government budget. On many occasions, financial crisis may
occur to the government due to public expenditure for social and state security.
For that reason, many times the government collects foreign loan from
organizations like ADB (Asian Development Bank), World Bank, IDB (Islamic
Development Bank), etc. But at the time of sanctioning the loan, such
organizations impose different types of conditions, which may not be consistent
with the need of the country's development and image protection. Considering
these conditions, government wants to collect fund from other sources.
Now-a-days, big projects are financed worldwide and also in our country
through public-private cooperation. This type of arrangement is called PPP
(Public Private Partnership).

=

&

6 Finance and Banking
Pic: Bangabandhu Bridge
c) International Finance
In international finance, export and import sectors are discussed and analyzed.
Bangladesh is mainly an import-oriented country. Every year huge amount of
foodstuff, raw materials, machinery, medicine, petroleum etc. are imported from
different countries. On the other hand, jute and jute products, readymade
garments, agricultural products etc. are being exported. Trade deficiency of large
amount occurs as the volume of import is greater than the volume of export.
Remittance sent by the foreign dwellers plays a vital role to compensate this
deficiency. International finance covers discussion about export and import
sectors and the way of management to compensate the trade deficiency.
topic “Steps necessary to raise foreign currency reserve” and give a homework
on it for the next class.
d) Finance of Non-Profit Organization
In our society there are some institutions or organizations which are involved in
the welfare of mankind, or providing services for the poor and distressed people.
To run this type of business, money or products or services similar to money is
required and it is necessary to utilize that money efficiently. In this connection,
the role that finance plays is identification of the sources of finance or wealth
similar to money and ensuring its proper utilization for the purpose of achieving
the service-oriented objectives. For example, it could be mentioned: an
orphanage is not a profit making institution, but it also has need of finance.
These types of institutions collect money through different grants. This collected
money is spent in various development activities for the orphans. So source
identification and proper utilization of fund to achieve its motto is the main
objective of finance of non-profit organization. 8

Finance and Business Finance 7
e) Business Finance
The most important type of finance is business finance. An organization formed
with the purpose of earning profit through the risk profit and loss is called a
business organization. So, business finance is the process used to collect fund
and invest it for business purposes. Business organizations are classified into
three types:
Sole Proprietorship Business, Partnership Business and Joint Capital Business
organizations. General features of these three types of organizations are fund
collection and fund management. For fund collection, own capital and loan are
used as sources. Business finance is the main theme of this lesson.
The most famous business organizations in Bangladesh are usually formed as
sole proprietorship business and partnership business. Varieties of small and
cottage industries, hotel & restaurant business, grocery shop, saloon, boutique
shop etc. are of these kinds of business. In sole proprietorship business, if profit
is earned, the owner enjoys it alone and if any loss occurs the owner's personal
properties also be used to repair the loss.
In partnership business, the risk is distributed among all partners, and so the
partners are to be prepared to use personal properties to bear the loss in business.
In these types of businesses - sole proprietorship or partnership - sources of
finance are owner's own capital, profit, loan from relatives, loan arranged on
interest from bank or village money lenders. So, earning profit from investing
one's own fund by proper utilization of money is the main objective of these
types of business organizations.
The financial process of a joint stock company is different. Government
approval is required to form such a company. Before giving approval, the
government evaluates and analyses the minimum amount of capital, directors’
identity, business objectives and various documents. After getting approval, a
company divides its expected big amount of total capital into small portions of
equal amount and sells these as shares in the share market. For example, | lac
shares of 1000 taka may be sold to the public when the business has a capital of
100 million taka. As each share costs only 1000 taka, small investors of remote
places of the country also can purchase shares. Shareholders are the owners of
the company and if the company is profitable, they usually get dividend on a
- regular basis. Shareholders can convert their shares into cash by selling those in
Ss the share market like Dhaka Stock Exchange.

8 Finance and Banking
Other than shares, a joint stock business can raise fund by taking loans from the
public through selling bonds and debentures to them. In that case, the company
has to pay interest on regular basis at some certain rate to the debenture holders.
because, they are not the owners of the company like the shareholders.
prepare a list of comparison among the financial process of non-profit
organizations, business organizations and government organizations.
f) Bank and Financial Institution
In any country, economic activities usually revolve centering the banks and
financial institutions. Sonali Bank, Janata Bank, Rupali Bank, Prime Bank,
Shahjalal Islami Bank - this type of government and privately owned banks are
profit-oriented organizations but their financial process is usually slightly
different from business organizations. These banks collect small amounts of
fund from the people, create deposit for different terms with this fund and provides
fixed rate of interest to the depositors. Again, banks provide loans to the
entrepreneurs in different businesses from this fund. Loans can also be taken for
personal purposes. Banks impose interest on certain rate against these loans. But
the rate at which a bank receives interest on granted loan is greater than the rate
of interest the bank pays to the depositors. This difference of these two rates of
interest is the profit of banks. In banking chapter, we will learn in details about
these institutions. Beside commercial banks, some financial organizations also
play an important role in country's economic activities. In Bangladesh context,
some examples of these types of organizations are Investment Corporation of
Bangladesh (ICB), Bangladesh House Building Finance Corporation,
Bangladesh Agricultural Bank etc. These financial institutions play their own
special roles in the development of different sectors of the economy of
Bangladesh.
1.3 Importance of Business Finance
In the present competitive open market economy, every government,
non-government and international business institution has to finance with great
importance in a prelanned way. Through the use of a well-thought and effective
financial management, the risks of the institutions are reduced and profits are
increased. The following things make financial management more meaningful:
ho}
Ss
NX

Finance and Business Finance 9
a) Capital Crisis of Business

Finance related ideas bear special importance in a situation of Bangladesh. As
Bangladesh isa developing country, financial crisis is a regular incident for the
business organizations. Due to this crisis, to run business smoothly has become
very challenging. It could be said as an example, a business organization needs
to purchase raw materials, but if it cannot purchase raw materials timely due to
the financial crisis then the production process of the organization may be
hampered. Finance related ideas help a business entrepreneur to collect
necessary amount of fund at the right time and utilize it properly in a planned
way.

b) Backward Banking System

Besides, as our financial organizations are not well-organized like that of the
advance countries, loan cannot be arranged within expected time after
application. Sometimes, loan cannot be arranged as per required amount due to
insufficiency of property as to be pledged as security for sanctioning the loan.
So, to overcome this problem, business people have to collect fund at right time
in a very well-planned way and also need profitable utilization of the fund with
a right investment decision. Proper financial plan and management help him to
predict this type of problem and give idea about the process of overcoming such
situation.

c) Less Educated Entrepreneur

The majority of the entrepreneurs in Bangladesh are less educated and are not
able to conduct financial activities through a long term plan. So, many profitable
business organizations cannot operate smoothly due to the financial crisis arisen
from improper financial planning and at the end it faces loss instead of profit.
But the only reason of this loss is financial ill-management. If a businessman has
sufficient knowledge about financial management, he can easily collect
necessary amount of fund at right time from a less expensive source and can earn
enough profit by running his business through investing it in a suitable project.
d) Production-Oriented Investment and National Income

A successful investment plays a direct role to increase national income. By
applying financial knowledge, a business person can choose the most profitable
project from among the alternatives by doing a cost-benefit analysis of the
projects under consideration. This type of profitable investment is as much
meaningful for the business as it is important also for the economic development
of the whole country.

Forma-2, Finance and Banking, Class-9,10

10 Finance and Banking
1.4 Principle of Business Finance

Business finance management means fund collection as per requirement,
investment of this fund in short and long terms and the management of fund
distribution. This management process follows some principles which are
furnished below:

a) Liquidity vs. Profitability Principle

A grocer may keep all the cash money (liquid property) earned from daily sales
for the purpose of buying raw materials and other related expenses, or he may
keep with him some portion of this cash for buying raw materials and deposit the
remaining mount in a bank account from which it is possible to get some amount
of interest/ profit after a certain period. In this situation, the grocer has to decide
on how much of earned cash should be retained with him to meet the current
needs. If the grocer keeps large amount of cash with him to meet the daily
expenses, income from bank will decrease. Again, if large amount of cash is
deposited in bank, the business may fall in financial crisis which may hamper the
daily activities. So, business people have to perform financial management in
such a way that can create balance between liquidity and investment. It means,
as in one side business people need cash reserve to bear the daily expenses, thus
in other side cash should be invested for making profit too. There is an inverse
relationship between cash and liquidity. Huge cash decreases profitability, and
again excess investment for the purpose of high profit causes cash crisis. To
maintain a balance between liquidity and profitability is one of the principle of
finance.

b) Competence Principle

Acquiring current asset by short term fund and fixed asset by long term fund is a
principle of finance. Current asset is that money which is required to run the
daily expenses of a business, like raw materials purchase, payment of labour
wages, etc. On the other hand, machinery purchase, building construction for the
business etc. are fixed capital. As the amount of current capital is small, it also
yields less; for this reason this type of capital should be collected from the short
term source of finance. Types of sources commercial banks, different financial
institutions, investment banks, debenture holders like provide long term loans.
On the other hand, current capital should be managed from regular sales
proceeds. High rate of interest has to be given to the loan~providing institutions
for collecting loan from the long term sources. So, if loan is collected from long
term sources to bear the current expenses, then it appears that repayment of &
interest from the earned income becomes impossible. s

Finance and Business Finance 1
c) Diversification and Risk Distribution
In the case of fund investment, if business products »» Las iis ie Ey
or services are as much as possible diversified, the ’ i —_—
risk is distributed and reduced. Every business aime 7, Jd
organization tries to earn profit centering an! te aes MAE Ce
uncertain future. So business has to face a lot of (5 sai se er]
risks, These risks may be created for many reasons, * Picture : Diversification of goods
such as changes of economic, political or social
scenario, arrival of new products in the market, natural calamity, sudden accident
etc. It is not possible for the managers to control these uncertain situations or
take preparations for them. But through following the principle of risk
distribution, profit is possible to be earned in this uncertain market. If a business
person does business only for a single product, profit earning becomes very
risky. On the other hand, if the products of the business are different and
diversified, the risk is distributed. It means, in any situation, if selling of a single
product deteriorates, the decreased amount of profit can be compensated by the
profit earned from the other products; and as a result expected profit can be
achieved in any situation. Ifa grocer sells both the Halal soap and the traditional
soap, then customers of both kinds of soaps will arrive in his shop. If the grocer
keeps only general or the traditional soaps, the customers of Halal soap will go
to another shop to buy Halal soap and the total sales of the grocer will decrease.
Sales of some products rise or fall due to the differences of weather or season
also. For example, demand of winter wears increases only in winter season. So,
the sale of winter wears increases in that season. If a dress seller sells both
summer and winter wears in his shop, then his profit earning will not be
hampered for rise and fall of demand of the products in different seasons. If in a
book stall only poetry book is sold and if in another shop poetry book, story
book, religious book and different instructive book are sold, then it appears
that maximum customers will prefer the second stall. Because they can purchase
different types of necessary books from a single shop at a time. This principle
of risk distribution through diversification can be applied in fund collection.
In the case of fund collection, priority is given on fund collection from different
sources.

=

R

12 Finance and Banking
1.5 Functions of Financial Manager
Financial manager deals with the two types of decisions:

1. Income or Financing Decision

2. Expenditure or Investment Decision
Income or Financing Decision
Income decision mainly means the process of fund collection. The scope of this
decision covers selection of the alternative sources of fund and taking financial
plans by analyzing the advantages and disadvantages of these sources.
Generally, to bear the current expenses, fund is collected from short term
sources; and to bear the fixed expenses, fund is collected from long term sources.
For the purpose of fund collection, it is collected through own capital and arrang-
ing loan from different sources. Besides, large companies may gather capital
through _ selling shares. Shareholders are the real owners of a company. The
portion of capital which an organization collects through loan increases the
liability of the organization again ownership right is established on the basis of
the amount of capital collected through the owners’ fund. Thus, an institution
becomes successful to create a balance between the liability of loan and the
rights of the owners through a right finance decision.
Expenditure or Investment Decision
Machine purchasing decision is an investment decision for a tailoring shop. In
the case of a grocery shop, decision for furniture purchasing or refrigerator
purchasing is also an investment decision. For a production organization,
production machines purchase or factory construction is also this type of
decision. Through this decision a plan of expected inflow and outflow of fund
has to be calculated. For example, a production organization decides to buy
machines only when the selling of the machine-made products are greater than
before if thus profitability and inflow of fund are increased and if the total inflow
of fund is greater than the purchase price of the machine.
That means if it seems that the machines can be utilized for the 10 years, then for
the purpose of investment decision, comparison has to be made with the 10 years
inflow of fund from sale proceeds for adding the new machines and the purchase
price of these machines. So, it is possible to find out the 10 years cash flow from
selling only by considering the product price in 10 years and the volume of sales.
Production and other expenses are deducted from the sales earnings to measure
the profit from the cash flow. s

Finance and Business Finance 13
The investment decision is very tough for an organization because to measure the
amount of selling in future and determining selling price is a very difficult task.
Other Decisions

Above two decisions are the most important for the financial managers. Besides,
financial managers have to take some other more decisions, such as:

a) Purchase of how much amount of raw materials is suitable and from
which sources this fund can be collected — this type of decision is
called current investment decision.

b) How much amount of cash reserve should be kept for daily expenses is
another important decision too.

c) Dues payment for the sources of fund is another decision.

If fund is collected through bank loan and other loans like bond, debenture etc.,
then payment of certain amount of interest at the right time is an important
responsibility for the financial manager. In the same way, if fund is collected
through selling of shares, then earning profit at the expected rate and distributing
dividend are other important things to be considered by the financial manager.
Open Discussion: Finance and investment — which is the most important
decision of the two?
1.6 Evolution of Finance
After the Industrial Revolution of 17th century, production technique becomes
more complex and the production process attains its excellence through
specialized and divided processes. To sustain in the market competition, finance
related concept and its use become essential. With the expansion of Accounting
in 18th century, Finance was involved mainly in the evaluation and analysis of
the financial statements. With the development of the classical trend of micro
economics, finance was also involved in the own and specialized economics of
the business at the end of 19th century. The trends of this financial evolution give
us the meaningful idea about the nature and scope of finance. Traditionally,
financial managers' main responsibilities were accounts maintenance and
making a future plan of action by analyzing it. Besides, report preparation to
reflect actual condition of the business and liquid fund management to build
business capacity of payment of the dues in right time are also added with the
evolutionary process of finance. But with the expansion of civilization, the
x expansion of organizations and technological development have changed the
8 responsibilities of financial managers. The evolution of finance that happened

14 Finance and Banking
in the last century in USA, the main exercising field of finance, is later known as
the trend of Evolution of Finance throughout the whole world. According to that,
the stages of financial evolution can be presented in the following way:

a) Pre-1930 Decade: This time a trend of unification began among the
companies of the USA. Financial managers had to identify a framework about
which company should be unified with which one, by examining the financial
statements of the companies. They took the responsibility of huge amount
of financing and preparing financial statements for this unification.

activities of managers of the day and those of previous time.

b) 1930's: Tendency of unification did not get much success in USA. Many of
the companies unified in the past decade turned into bankrupt in the next decade.
Moreover, high depression started in USA. Many profitable companies also fell
in a great loss. At that situation, how these loosing companies can be reorganized
to protect them from bankruptcy was a special responsibility of the financial
managers. From that time, fund collection through share selling started.

c) 1940's: Necessity of liquidity was the main concentration at this time. Finance
did that responsibility by ensuring well-planned cash flow with making a budget
of cash flow.

e) 1950s: In this decade, finance was involved in evaluating the most suitable
investment project by using different mathematical analyses. Main activity of
finance then turned to profit maximization by increasing sales and decreasing
expenditures through suitable long term investments based on long acting
forecasting. This trend is considered as the traditional trend of finance.

f) 1960's: Modem finance started its journey from this time. Finance started
giving priority in capital market. Shareholders are the owners of a company, so
maximization of the shareholders’ property or the market price of shares became
the main objective of finance of this time. To achieve this objective, different
activities relating to financial analysis started. Concept of risk in finance makes
us understand that risk increases with the increase of profit. So profit increase
may not be desirable all the time.

g) 1970's: Era of computerized activities started in this decade. This not only
changed the production techniques but also brought changes in business finance.
Finance is now Mathematics-based. Most of the financial decisions are mainly
based on complex mathematical calculations, and the tendency of making these 2
calculations very effectively in computer got special popularity. §

Finance and Business Finance 15
For example, the concept of risk is now measured and managed more correctly.
Traditional trends of capital structure are also more complex and mathematical.
Among the scholars who deserve mentioning for enriching business finance with
different theoretical analysis were Harry Markoiz, Murton Miller, Modigliani.
After that, in 1990's these scholars got Nobel Prize as the reward of their
contribution in the development of finance through mathematical analyses.
h) 1980's: For expansion of business and sustaining in the competitive market
system, finance evolves in a new outlook by changing its previous roles.
Efficient distribution of capital among alternative projects of the company and
calculation & analysis of income of these projects were the main activity of
finance.
i) 1990's and Beginning of Modern Finance: World Trade Organization
revealed itself in this decade. Barriers of export and import started to decrease
worldwide. This time finance achieved internationality. In one hand, investment
decisions of finance considers where in the world production and selling of
which product could achieve profit; on the other hand, the scope of finance also
includes in its consideration which capital market of the world is of what type
and from which sources fund collection will be profitable. As a result, finance is
an applied field of solution in the financial management of a business
organization which has developed in combination with accountancy, economics
and some other financial subjects.
Exercise

Multiple Choice Questions:
1. What is the relationship between cash and profit?

a) Vertical b) Opposite

c) Downward d) Proportional
2. Business finance management means —

i) Supply of sufficient money

ii) Capital utilization for few months

iii) Financial allocation related decision

Which one is correct?

% a) iandii b) i and iii
Ss c) iiand iii d) i, ii and iii

16 Finance and Banking
Short Questions:
1. What is paid to an investor on regular basis against the shares?
2. What is the main objective of public finance?
3. In open market management how does a business firm have to finance with
great importance?
Creative Questions:
1.
Green Bank, 15% Interest ‘
Rate, Loan of 8,00,000 Payment of
taka, For 5 years. Electricity Bill
1,00,000 taka
Friend Shafiqul Islam Maeno AN Payment of
100000 taka Enterprise Mr. Sohan, 10 Wages 4,00,000
lac taka taka
Maternal Cousin Farzana ; Rent Payment
1,00,000 taka New Machine Purchase 2,00,000 taka.
3,00,000 taka
In Financial Statement 2012 it is found that the firm is facing loss.
a. If import is higher than the export, what deficiency is created?
b. Why does the government has to spend a lot for the country?
c. What can be termed the overall activities of the Managing Director of
A. K. Enterprise? Describe.
d. By following which principle do you think Mr. Sohan would have faced no loss?
ho}
=

Finance and Business Finance 17
2.
Firm A Firm B
Product - Mini Pack Shampoo Bottled Shampoo, Mini Pack
Shampoo , Herbal Shampoo
He who enjoys Profit/Loss - | Only the Owner Distributed among all
Owners
a. After just which step production techniques become critical?
b. What type of knowledge should a business person hold to be capable
of managing necessary amount of finance in a planned way at a low cost?
c. How can Firm A do finance? Explain.
d. Between the two business institutions mentioned above, which one you
think is less risky? Analyze.
Forma-3, Finance and Banking, Class-9,10

Chapter Two
Sources of Finance
Finance means fund collection, its management and distribution. In this chapter,
we will learn about the concept of the sources of finance for doing the fund
collection activity efficiently. Different sources of finance have different
features. For these different features, fund should be collected from different
sources suitable for different situations of the business. For example, to purchase
a fixed asset fund should be collected through share selling. Again, to meet the
daily needs such as, raw materials purchase, credit purchasing can be used or
short term bank loan can be utilized.
=
= ss

After reading this chapter we shall be able to:

e identify the sources of finance.

e analyse the classification of sources of finance.

e have a comparative discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of

different term finances.

e identify the sources of short term finance.

e identify the sources of mid-term finance. 20

e identify the sources of long term finance. 8

Sources of Finance 19
2.0 Introduction
To get the fund required for the purpose of starting any business or to conduct
the daily activities of business, selection of the sources of finance is one of the
important decisions in financial management. Because different sources have
different costs of capital and the sources of different terms have different
advantages and disadvantages. An institution collects fund by analyzing
different sources to select that mixture of sources which will provide maximum
benefit and minimum cost. Main objective of investment is profit earning. It is
to be mentionedthat when the total income of a business firm is higher than the
total expenditure, it is generally called total profit. We can get net profit by
subracting the cost of capital and tax from total profit. So, the cost of capital
should be reduced to maximize the profit of the business.
2.1 Concept of the different sources of finance
Business finance means supplying of fund required for running a business. Mr.
Rahman is the owner of a tailoring shop. He purchased some machines at the
beginning of the business. Generally, a business person tries to collect fund from
his own savings for the purpose of machines purchase related fixed investment.
Because he can use this money for any duration. But if he sees after calculations
that his own savings is not sufficient to purchase the machines, then he can
collect fund through loan at a certain rate of interest from different commercial
banks like Jananta Bank, Rupali Bank or other loan providing financial
institutions. He usually collects this type of loan for a fixed term. Fund can also
be collected from bank and other non-institutional sources against collateral of
fixed property of business like building, factory and current property like raw
materials, salable products etc. Besides, Mr. Rahman may meet the needs of
finance by reinvesting the profit earned by him without withdrawing this it from
the business. If Mr. Rahman feels cash crisis to meet the current needs like
maintenance of machineries, payment of house rent, payment of labour wages,
payment of electricity bill etc. During the time when the business is in operation,
then he can receive advance from the buyers against future selling. Moreover,
purchase on credit is another source of finance. Sometimes heavy machinery, big
equipment, building, land, etc. can be rented from different organizations for a
fixed period instead of purchasing and thus the business person can remain
protected from the risk of huge investment at a time. Big business organizations
like Kohinoor Chemicals, Beximco Pharmaceuticals, Square Textiles, Singer
S Bangladesh, arrange fund by selling shares and debentures. Fund collected from
“these types of sources can be used for long terms.

20 Finance and Banking
Thus, due to the differences of forms, nature and objectives of business, an
organization collects fund from different sources. In every organization there are
two separate sources of finance. One is the owners and the other is the creditors.
Fund provided by the owners are called internal sources of finance and that
provided by the creditors are called external sources of finance. Most of the
organizations usually utilize both these two sources.
In table no 2.1, classifications of these two sources of finance have been shown:
2.2 Internal Sources of Finance
Fund which the owner of a business invests through his saved profit or unutilized
profit is called the internal sources of finance. Internal sources of finance can be
divided into two types: a) Ownership-based sources, b) Profit-based sources.
Now we will know about the different kinds of these two sources of finance.
Sources of Finance
Internal Sources External Sources
Ownership- Profit- Short Term Mid Term Long
based Internal oriented Institutional * Commercial Term
Sources Internal « Discounting of Bait rae “Loan
* Owner’s capital Sources Accounts Payable ° Sanath « Debentures
. | inancial * i
* Share es * Accounts Receivable} | — gonroes Leasing
Savings Fund ° a Term Bank * Non-Government
a oan Institution
* Dividend . :
Equitable Fund Small Credit
. Non-Institutional | | * Capital Market
Regul lated . Institutions
savings * Commercial Paper
+ International
* Buyer’s Advance Fund
* Mortgaging Stored
Goods
« Rural money lenders
Picture 2.1: Classification of the sources of finance
2.2.1 Ownership Based Classifications of Internal Sources
Nature of internal fund is different for different kinds of business organizations.
We know, based on ownership organizations may be of Sole Proprietorship,
Partnership or Joint Stock Company. In sole proprietorship business, sources of &

Sources of Finance 21
internal fund are owner's own savings or it may be any kind of factors of
production measurable in money, such as: land, labor, capital and organization
which are used in production. If the organization is a partnership business, fund
invested by the partners is considered as the owner's capital. On the contrary, if
the organization is a company, fund collected through shares selling is
considered as internal source of finance. Joint stock companies are of two types:
Public Ltd. Company and Private Ltd. Company. Number of initiators in private
Itd. company is 2 to 50 and in public ltd. company it is minimum 7 and the
maximum number may be any number limited by the shares. Both public and
private Itd. companies collect capital through share selling. But a private ltd.
company sells shares among the specified owners instead of selling them in the
share market. An important source of capital collection for a public ltd. company
is share selling. We will know in details about it later in Chapter VII.
2.2.2 Profit-oriented Classification of Internal Sources of Finance
A business institution earns money through producing goods and providing
services. The money which remains left after deducting the production cost,
selling expenses, etc. from this earnings is the profit of the business. The
remaining portion of profit after deducting the interest of loan and the tax
payable to the government can be used in various ways as a source of fund and
these are discussed below. As in the case of loan, interest payment is compulsory
but in the case of internal financing almost nothing is to be done as compulsory;
so, the risk of repayment related inability is decreased. Now, we will be
introduced with some profit oriented sources of finance.
a) Undistributed Profit and Savings Fund
The portion of profit which is invested in the business instead of distributing
among the shareholders is called undistributed profit. If this undistributed
profit is kept in separate fund for the purpose of business expansion in future,
it is called savings fund. Besides, this type of fund may also be created to
overcome financial disasters in future.
b) Dividend Equitable Fund
Shareholders of a company usually get dividend from the company on a
regular basis. Goodwill of the company implies with giving this dividend. If
in any year business earns less amount of profit, payment of dividend is not
possible. But inability of dividend payment may deteriorate the business
< image in the market; so, in the year when the business earns huge profit, the
N

22 Finance and Banking
company keeps aside small portion from the net profit as dividend
equitable fund which can be used to pay the dividend also in the year when
business earns insufficient profit. Thus, this fund gives the business ability
to pay dividend on regular basis.

2.3 External Sources of Fund
External fund means external sources from which fund can be collected such as,
fund collected by taking a loan from bank. It is a popular source of finance. Bank
loan has some features. First: Bank loan has a fixed term, within this term loan
is to be utilized and the principal amount with interest has to be paid back to the
bank. Second: Rate of interest remains the same, for the long period of its term
no change is made. Third: Repayment of interest and installment of loan
regularly and repaying the principal amount within the term is compulsory for
the business. These dues have to be repaid even though the business is not
profitable. Besides, fund can also be collected through selling debentures or
bonds to the bank. Selling of preference shares is another source of external
financing.

External sources of financing are very popular. Two reasons of these

are identifiable:

a) If business is financed externally through loan, tax is imposed on the profit left

after deducting the interest of loan. Thus less amount of tax can be paid.

b) In the case of small business, many times internal financing becomes comparatively

less in amount; as a result, external sources act as the main sources of finance.

But one problem of external sources is the compulsory payment of interest. It
was previously said that whether profit is earned or not, business is bound to pay
the imposed interest as per schedule. This problem doesn't create if internal
sources are used. On the basis of terms, external sources can be divided into
three types: a) Short term, b) Mid-term and c) Long term. Now we will grow
ideas of these three types of sources.

2.3.1 Short Term Sources of External Finance

Short term means less than one year. Most of the finances of an organization are

usually collected from short term sources which are repaid within a year. In the

case of short term financing, an organization enjoys some benefits,
S

Sources of Finance 23

For example:

First: Cost of capital from the short term sources may be comparatively both the

highest and the lowest. For example, loan collected from the commercial bank is

required to pay high rate of interest in short term. Again, different interest free

sources like purchase on credit or wages kept due, a business organization can

create fund for short term, which has no cost of capital. (We will learn in details

about the cost of capital in the following chapters.)

Second: The process of short term capital exchanges is the fastest and simple

process. On the other hand, the exchange of mid-term and long term financing

requires to expend huge time and to follow long process.

Third: The business institutions whose products demand changes very swiftly

within one year cannot make long term plan of production and financing. For

example, due to the rapid change of demand for the fashion house's products,

these types of business make plan for short term production, and thus require

small amount of money at a time. Short term sources of financing are suitable for

these types of businesses.

Now we will discuss the short term sources of finance. The sources of finance of

this term can be divided into two types. We will discuss below first the

institutional sources of short term finance and then non-institutional sources of

short term finance will be discussed.

1. Institutional Sources of Short Term Financing

a) Discounting Bills Receivable
When products are purchased on credit, the buying firm promises to the
selling firm through signing a document to pay specified amount of money
after expiry of the certain period (usually 3 months). This type of document is
called the Bill of Exchange. This bill is receivable for the selling firm. So,
selling firm can collect cash by exchanging or discounting this bill in a
commercial bank. Let us assume, on January, a buyer purchases goods of 500
taka on credit and agreed through signing the Bill of Exchange that he would
be bound to pay 500 taka to the selling firm on March 30. In this condition, if
the seller needs money before March 30, he can sell this bill to a bank before
the expiry of the period but he has to receive less than 500 taka, for example,
with a discount rate of 3%, after discounting he will receive 485 taka.

b) Bills Payable

90 In above example, Bill of Exchange is a bill receivable from the perspective
g of the seller, which is a bill payable to the buyers and is one of the sources of

24 Finance and Banking
short term finance. When a business institution purchases raw materials,
production materials, etc. on credit, then finance inflows for a short time in
the business. Because if business couldn't get the opportunity of credit
purchasing then finance would be required to buy on cash payment; hence if
loan was collected from the bank, interest would have to be paid.

c) Short Term Bank Loan

In the case of short term finance, unsecured bank loan is one of the popular
sources of finance. This kind of loan may be of different types. For example,
in the case of short term bank loan, usually interest with principle amount has
to be repaid at a time after a specified time period. Many times, bank tries to
collect full portion or part of the sanctioned loan before the specified time
period and for this purpose bank gives discount on the total amount
receivable as an incentive of earlier payment. For example, if a creditor
repays 6000 taka before the expiry of the credit term of 6 months, then he can
give 2% less than the total amount, that means, the creditor can repay 5880
taka.

Besides, if the creditor agrees to repay on demand instead of agreeing on a
fixed term, this type of loan is called "Demand Loan". The institutions which
have alternative sources of finance can use this source at a low cost of
capital.

d) Bank Overdraft

Bank Overdraft is another type of short term bank loan. Every institution
usually realizes its receivables and repays its payables through current
account. This type of bank account mainly gives to its account holders the
opportunity of withdrawing more than the amount of savings in this account;
however, the bank restricts the maximum amount of overdraft. Generally,
finance collection from this type of source is a well-known system for those
institutions where sales decrease for some time of a year. For example, it
could be mentioned that an ice cream factory spends money throughout the
year for production, warehousing, management etc. but maximum amount of
ice cream is sold in Summer season; so for the purpose of financing in other
time of the year this type of source can be used. Generally, in the case of other
types of loan, interest has to be paid till the full repayment of loan, but interest
for such types of loan has to be paid only when this loan is being used.
However, the rate of interest of this type of loan is higher than the other types .,
of loan and it is repayable on demand. s

Sources of Finance 25
e) Small Credit
This type of loan is generally provided to meet the demand of current asset
for agriculture based and small & cottage industry, such as, management of
a small industry, purchasing of agriculture based materials, management of a
firm etc. Grameen Bank, Youth Development Bank, Co-operative Banks
are used to provide such kind of bank. This kind of loan is given step by step
on the achievement of goal.
2. Non-Institutional Source of Short Term Loan
a) Commercial Papers
A business organization sells Commercial Paper through promising to pay
back the principal amount with interest after expiry of the certain period. At
that time the company's goodwill acts as a security to the purchaser. Usually,
those persons who have some excess money left as unutilized for the time
being purchase commercial papers as an alternative of investment in shares.
Generally, well known person, commercial bank, insurance company, pension
fund etc. can arrange finance for a short time by selling commercial papers.
b) Advance from Purchaser
In many cases, trustful and permanent customers pay as advance to the
producing or selling firm the full amount or part of their total purchase, and as
a result, this acts as a source of finance to the seller for the time being.
c) Inventory Financing
For the purpose of short term financing, warehouse asset can be used. If any
business firm uses its inventory as security of loan received from a well known
person or organization, it is called the inventory financing.
d) Village Moneylenders
Since long days ago, rich people of the villages have been providing short term
loans to the poor people. In this case, if the period of loan repayment is
expired, the debtor has to pay high rate of interest. If the person fails to pay
back the loan with interest within specified period, the moneylenders took the
possession of his (debtor's) tangible and intangible property. Village
moneylenders count to impose interest on this loan on daily basis, weekly basis
and monthly basis.
2.4 Mid Term Financing
This type of loan extends for 1 to 5 years. A business firm uses this fund to meet
the demand of long term needs of the current capital. Cost of capital or interest
Forma-4, Finance and Banking, Class-9,10

26 Finance and Banking
rate of this fund is higher than that of the short term sources of finance and less
than that of the long term sources of finance. Sources of this type of loan
according to their different features are discussed below:
a) Commercial Bank Loan
Loans which the commercial banks provide for mid-terms are usually given
against security. Current capital or even fixed asset can be used as security for
obtaining this type of loan. Huge amount of loan payment (at a time) may be
a risky job for a commercial bank. So, when a commercial bank pays huge
amount of loan, it creates syndication of a number of commercial banks
together to bear in group the high risk of loan payment. Before sanctioning
the loan, a commercial bank finalizes its interest rate by analyzing the interest
rate fixed by Bangladesh Bank and the demand of the loan.
b) Specialized Financial Institution
Generally, some financial institutions are established under the government
ownership which are engaged in the development of the country's specialized
sectors. These institutions provides term loan on favorable conditions to the
relevant sectors. Industrial Bank, Agriculture Bank, Bangladesh Small and
Cottage Industry etc. are examples of such institutions.
c) Non-Government Institutions
There are different kinds of NGOs working in Bangladesh which provide
mid-term loan to the business institutions. For example, Midas, BRAC,
Grameen Bank etc. are doing business as an NGO by getting legal entity.
Besides providing fund, these institutions also provide consultancy, training,
support in efficiency building activities etc. to the business organizations.
d) Capital Market Institutions
Different types of capital institutions such as insurance company, investment
bank, finance mediatory institutions (underwriters) also provide mid-term loans.
2.5 Long Term Financing
Long term financing extends from 5 years to the maximum of any duration.
Long term financing has some distinctive features. We will now discuss these
features. First feature of long term finance is the amount is bigger than the mid
or short term funds, so this fund is usually used to acquire fixed asset like land,
building, equipment etc. Another feature is related with the repayment schedule. x
If long term fund is collected through loan, it has to repay as per contracted 5

Sources of Finance 27
payment schedule. Again if long term fund is collected through selling shares,
then this fund is considered as owner's capital, so this liability need not be repaid
till the business dissolution. In sole proprietorship and partnership businesses,
the owner's capital too can usually be used for indefinite long period. The
tax-related feature is that share dividend is taxable but interest of debenture is
non-taxable. That is why the cost incurred from share selling is higher than the
finance through long term loan. Now we will discuss about the sources of long
term fund.
a) Loan
Generally, any organization takes long term loans against security to bear the
expenses of expensive equipments, machineries, buildings, land purchase, etc.
Before sanctioning long term loans, banks analyze different information like
income of the company, goodwill, amount of fixed asset, previous events of
taking loan and loan repayment trends etc. Long term loan is collected for
fixed investments, such as, expansion of scope of the business, factory
construction, building construction, purchasing heavy equipments, etc. Before
taking these investment decisions, the concerned business organization makes
an estimate which is known as capital budgeting. Through this process future
profit or loss is measured by adopting different procedures. If the financing
organization is satisfied by this estimate of profit and loss, only then loan is
sanctioned.
b) Debenture
In the case of debenture, fund is collected through selling the large amount of
loan after dividing into small fractions. It is an alternative to share. But
debenture holders are bound to pay fixed rate of interest which is kept
mentioned in debenture. Loan is taken for any long term starting from 5 years.
Whether profit is earned or not, the business is bound to repay the interest of
the lenders. Main advantage of financing through selling debenture is the long
term existence of fixed rate of interest; and as interest rate is predetermined,
financial managers can make an effective plan of financing.
c) Leasing
Leasing is an amazing method of long term financing. If an organization needs
expensive machine, equipments, transport etc., then it has to purchase those
things directly or instead of purchasing directly the organization can use those
« things through a lease contract from a leasing company. But in that case,
S company does not get the ownership of the machine.

28 Finance and Banking
Leasing company is the owner of the machine. To enter into a leasing contract,
the organization has to pay rent (like interest) to the leasing company at a fixed
rate and thus it can get the opportunity of using the leased properties. Let us
assume that a business firm takes a photocopy machine as lease from a leasing
company for 3 years by pledging to pay a fixed amount of rent and returns it to
the leasing company after the expiry of the period. That means on a leasing
contract, ownership of the property is retained to the leasing company. As an
advantage of leasing, the organization needs not to take long term loan or to use
savings fund. For this reason, leasing is a source of long term financing. Newly
established companies or the small companies whose capital for investment is
not sufficient also can use expensive company provides repair and maintenance
services for the lease properties.

2.6 International Monetary Fund (IMF):

It is an International Economic Organization. It is initiated as the result of
proposal of Bretton Woods Conference of USA in 1945. At present the number
of members of the Organization is 189 (New member Republic of Nauru). It
helps to reconstruct the economic of different countries. Its headquarter inis
Washington DC.

2.7 Considerable Factors for Selecting the Sources

Organizations collect funds from different sources to meet the need for money.
For selecting the sources, we need to analyze advantages and disadvantages of
different sources and take into considerations the cost of fund collection, nature
of the organization, type and purpose of need of the fund, etc. Making a right
mix of the sources of fund is an important decision of the finance management.
Things that should be taken into consideration for selecting right source of fund
are mainly:

a) Type of Business

In the case of sole proprietorship and partnership businesses, fund is collected
usually through own savings, profit of business, or loans taken from relatives. In
the case of large scale purchase, leasing is also a good source of finance. In the
case of public limited companies, instead of these most funds are collected
through issuing shares and debentures. In picture 2.1 a structure of the sources
of finance mix based on different formations and purposes of the business has
been furnished. In the first line of the picture, we see the source is fit for sole
proprietorship and partnership business. Hereafter, it is found that undistributed ,,
profit, overdraft, short term loan and leasing are acceptable for all kinds of S$

Sources of Finance 29
organizations. But long term loan and share issuing are applicable only for
companies.
Fi . | Partnership | Private Limited | Public Limited

Undistributed <¢ i<¢ i? it?

Pe ae a a 2

nn ae a ae

a i; a
a_i ee
a oe ae
(<< if«

Share Issue Pts ph
Picture 2.1: Selecting Sources of Finance based on the Types of Business Organizations
b) Insufficiency of Security Property
Usually in the case of a new business organization, getting loan against fixed
asset as security is not possible. Because at the beginning situation, the business
has no fixed asset which could be used as security, Besides, the selling of share
and debenture is also a bit uncertain for the new companies. In such a situation,
if long term fund is needed, it is more logical to collect that through leasing.
c) Types of the Needs of Finance
If a company wants to buy expensive equipments, machineries, land, buildings,
etc., then use of long term sources like issuing share and debenture, taking lease,
taking loan against security, etc. are effective. If there is shortage of fund to bear
the expenditure of raw material purchase, paying wages, paying house rent, etc.,

sx then use of short term sources like credit purchase, receivable bill security, bank
®& overdraft can be accepted.

30 Finance and Banking
d) Cost of Sources of Fund
Fund can be collected from many sources. But an organization takes loan from
that source where the expenses are the least. For selecting a suitable source, the
organization measures and analyses comparative advantages and disadvantages
between the earned income from the use of the fund and the cost of fund
collection. Suppose that a company wants to buy a factory to run its activities.
So, it issues shares for fund collection. But for collecting fund through shares the
company has to pay dividend to the shareholders, which is a cost of this source.
Besides, the company can mortgage its property for buying the new factory. If
through such mortgage the company takes loan for long term, it has to pay
installments with interest to the lending organization until the loan is fully
realized. As a result, this source is also expensive. The company can accept that
source of the two where the cost is least for it. Or, it can collect fund by making
a profitable mix of the two sources. Dividend of share is taxable, but interest of
debenture is non taxable. Therefore, to reduce the load of tax, taking loan on
interest from bank or other sources is better than collecting fund from internal
sources. In many cases, more advantages are got and cost is also reduced by
using a mix sources instead of using a single source.
e) Risk of Sources of Fund
If a company takes loan against security, it has to keep properties as security to
the lending organization. If it is not possible for the company to repay the loan
within the specified period, it is bound to repay the money by selling property
kept as security. As a result, in selecting the suitable source, related risks of the
concerned source have to be considered.

2

S

Sources of Finance 31
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions:
1. Which is the source of mid-term finance?
a. Micro Credit b. Specialized Financial Institution
c. Collect Advances from Purchasers d. Discounting the Bills Receivable
2. Factors that are considered to solve the financial problems of
business organizations are -
i) Cost of Capital Supply
ii) Importance and Objectives of capital
iii) Different types of benefits
Which one of the following is correct?
a) iandii b) i and iii
c) ii and iii d) i, ii and iii
Read the following Stimulant and answer the questions 3 and 4
Mr. Bazlur, a businessman of garment industry, has rented some necessary
machines and equipments for 7 years. Within a very short time he became very
famous in the business field.
3. What sources Mr. Bazlur has taken support from for fund collection?
a. Advances from purchasers b. Leasing
c. Debenture d. Commercial Paper
4. What of the following Mr. Bazlur has given importance for in
fund collection?
a. Utilizing savings fund
b. Need of long term loan collection
c. Undistributed dividend loan
d. Paying compulsory interest.
Short Questions:
1. Which is the most speedy and simple process of money transaction?
S 2. Explain what kind of finance it is which is collected for 1 to 5 years.

32 Finance and Banking

Creative Questions:

1. For a long time, Dinonath Chakrabati had been involved in business of
jamdani Saree and to save fund, he sometimes use to collect money from
various sources for a short time. But presently he has dicided to start a
Handloom factory by expanding the busi-ness. He is also working to arrange
an old factory in Narayanganj with 100 machines for 10 years.

a. How many classes may the sources of finance be divided into?
b. Explain the role of savings fund in business expansion?
c. By using what kind of fund Dinonath Chakrabati is presently trying to
solve financial problems?
d. Do you think for business expansion Dinonath Chakrabati has to search
other sources also as financial support? Give logics that support your answer.

2. After promoted to Class IX, Shafiq couldn't continue his studies. Later,
without getting any job he was motivated to do a business by taking training
on leather industry. To solve his financial problem, he approaches to the
government financial institutions and local non-government sources.

a. What is the most speedy and simple process of money transaction?
b. Which finance is considered as fund collected for 1 to 5 years term? Explain.
c. What kind of organization is that which supported Mr. Shafiq? Describe.
d. What role private organizations can play to make youth society like Shafiq
selfdependent? Discuss.
ho}
=

Chapter Three
Time Value of Money
The concept of Time Value of Money is the root of most financial decisions.
Today's Tk 100.00 and Tk 100.00 after 10 years will not carry the same value. This
concept of time value is also necessary in our daily life. If we know by what rate
he is calculating the interest of the loan taken from the money lender, we will be
able to evaluate among different sources and we can compare different sources
before taking any financial decision. This way we can finance from most
suitable sources. Loan taken from the bank, requires paying installment as per
payment schedule. How this payment schedule is measured and how this kind of
mathematical problem is solved will be covered in this chapter. To solve these
mathematical problems, scientific calculator will be needed.
a _
i or | | oe
Heed
bl
Picture: Calculator
After reading this chapter we shall be able to:
e explain the concept of time value of money.
e identify the relationship between present value and future value.
e exercise the method of calculating EAR (Effective Annual Rate)
e analyze the method of calculating the loan installment.
e identify the method of calculating the Future Value of Saving Scheme.
Forma-5, Finance and Banking, Class-9,10

34 Finance and Banking
3.1 Concept of Time Value:

From the perpective of finance, value of money changes with the changes of
time. That means Tk. 100.00 of that time and Tk 100.00 after 5 years do not have
same value. Tk. 100.00 of present time is more valuable. It is the concept of time
value. Main reason of time value is interest rate. Let's assume, you have
Tk 100.00 due to your friend. He told that he would make payment after 1 year
instead of paying now. Time Value of money says, Tk 100.00 of this time is not
same as Tk 100.00 after one year. Suppose, interest rate is 10%, so if you deposit
Tk 100.00 in Sonali Bank then bank will give you Tk 110.00 after one year. Thus
today's Tk 100.00 and Tk1 10.00 after one year bear same value.

3.2 Importance of Time Value of Money:

In business, inflow and outflow are related with every decision. For the purpose
of taking right decision, present value and future Value of inflow and outflow are
needed to be calculated on term basis. So, considering the importance of the
"Time Value of Money” it can be said that -

(a) Opportunity Cost: If money is invested in any project then opportunity of
investment in other project has to be missed. In finance, it is called "Opportunity
Cost." This opportunity cost can be calculated by the application of equations of
"Time Value of Money" . As an example: In your locality land value becomes
double in 10 years. On the contrary, let assume, interest rate is 8% in sonali bank
Saving Account. If land is purchased then money cannot be deposited in the
Bank. So, in that case, opportunity cost of land purchase is 8%. By using
equation-I of that chapter we can take a decision whether we should purchase
land or should deposit in bank. Concerning this matter, most easy and almost
perfect method is known as "Rule -72". If money doubles, then 72 are divided by
the term or duration. By this which interest rate is found, if this rate is divided by
72 we will get duration. As land value becomes double then interest rate is 72/10
or 7.2%. So,depositing money Sonali Bank instead of purchasing the land is
logical

(b) Project Evaluation:

To evaluate the long term project, comparison has to make between the present
cost of project and expected income or inflow of money from investment. From
this chapter we have known that present value of money and future value of
money is not same. So without returning expected income of the project into a
present value, we cannot take any long term decision. Later we will explore ~
details about this decision in Capital Budgeting chapter. &

Time Value of Money 35
(c) Lending decision:
Before taking loan from Bank or Financial Institution installment ability should
by measured at first. On the basis of the loan repayment schedule, amount of
installment differs. For example, Loan Installment of 5 years term loan and 8
years term loan will not be same. Again term may be yearly, monthly etc. In this
situation installment amount will be different too. We can find out term of
different installment of different amount of loan and by this we can take decision
about how long of the term of the loan, which way of installment repayment,
receiving of how much loan will be suitable for business. Due to the lack of this
planning, most of the company is declared bankrupt because before taking any
loan, one has to verify the ability to repay the loan. It should be remember that,
loan repayment is obligation for any business and failure of this causes
bankruptcy.
3.3 Equations of Time Value of Money:
In the above example we have known that if interest rate is 10% then Tk 100.00
of this time is as same as Tk 110.00 in the next year and Tk 121.00 after 2 years.
This Tk 100.00 is called present value and Tk 110.00 and Tk 121.00 are called
future value.
3.3.1 Future Value and Annual Compounding
If present value is known, future value can be found out by using the equation-1
below: Equation-1: Future Value (FV) = Present Value (1+ Interest Rate) duration
Here FV is Future Value.
1 year after Future Value of Today’s TK. 100 = 100 (140.10)! = 100 X 1.10=TK. 110
2 year after Future Value of Today’s TK. 100 = 100 (1+0.10) = 100 X 1.21 = TK. 121
The procedure which has been used in above example to measure future value is
called compounding method. Here, it may be mentioned that in the Tk 110.00 future
value after 1 year are the principal amount of Tk 100.00 and Tk 10 as interest at
10% rate. In the same manner, if the interest in the 2nd year is 10, future value
should be Tk 120.00 but the future value for 2nd year is Tk 121.00. This is because
at the beginning of 2nd year, the principal amount is Tk 110.00 and this makes
the interest at 10% rate in 2nd year to Tk 11.00. Thus the first year's principal
eo amount with interest is considered as a second year's principal amount and charging
S
N

36 Finance and Banking
interest on this amount is the compounding method. In compounding method,
future values is measured by charging interest rate on every year's principal
amount with interest. Therefore, the interest rate which is being charged on
principal amount with interest is called compound interest. But in case of simple
interest rate, yearly interest is calculated by charging interest rate only on
principal amount.
3.3.2 Present Value and Yearly Discounting
If future value is known, then according to Equation: 2, present value can be
calculated. The element by which equation: | was multiplied, here the same
element is used to divide by. It is called discounting method.
Equation No.2: Present Value = Future Value_
(1+i) duration
Example: Present Value of Tk.100 after lyear. = 100 -_100_- T9091
(1+10)' (1+ 10)!
In above example discounting method has been applied to calculate the present
value in which, oppositely, principal amount with interest has been divided by
the interest rate. So, if your friend returns you Tk.100.00 after one year, it has
present value of Tk.90.91. Generally due to the interest rate differences occur
between present value and future value.
By the use of compounding and discounting method in different examples,
present value and future value of single amount cash flow are being calculated:
Example-1
What will be the future value at the end of the 5 years of Tk100.00 paying 10%
rate of interest?
According to Equation -1: Putting Value in Equation,
Here, Present Value (PV) =Tk100.00 FV = 100 (1+.10)°
Interest Rate (i) =Tk10% = 100 X (1.10)°
Duration (n) = Syears = 100 X 1.610
Future Value (FV) = What? = TK. 161
FV = Pv (1+i)"
Concept: If interest rate is Tk10%, today’s Tk100.00 has equal value of Tk161.00
after 5 years. x
N

Time Value of Money 37
Example-2:
If interest rate is 10% then what is the present value of Tk100.00 to be received
after 5 years.
Let’s use equation: 2 to find out the present value of Tk100.00
Here, Future Value (FV) = Tk100.00 Putting value in equation,
Interest rate (i) = 10% pv= 100
Duration (n) = 5 years (1.10)
FV = TK. 62.09
Now, Present Value (PV) = Ca"
Concept: If Tk 100.00 will be received after 5 years, then present value is
Tk.62.00 (approximately). So, if your friend pay tk.100 after 5 years, in lieu of paying
now , then according to present value your loss will be (100-62) =Tk38.00
If interest rate is 20% then present value of Tk100.00 to be received after 5 years =
= a20F =Tk. 40.187
Here it should be noted that if interest rate increases from 10% to 20%, then
forTk100.00 to be received after 5 years, the present value would not be the half
of Tk62.00. That means, increase and decrease of interest rate do not have
proportionate relationship with the time value of money.
3.3.3 Future Value calculation by the use of compounding more than
once in a year:
In above example, one time compounding in a year has been assumed but some-
times more than one time compounding may occur. For example, if money
deposited in the bank, it compounds monthly. In that means 12 times in a year.
In that case, equation has to be changed in two places. If it compounds many
times, then firstly interest rate has to be divided by 12 and secondly total term
will have to be multiplied by 12 too.
Example-3: If you deposit Tk 100.00 in a bank at the rate of 10% compounding
and you know, it will be compounded 12 times, then after one year how much
money will you get?
=
&

38 Finance and Banking
i (nx m)
Equation-3: FV=PV (1+ |
Here, Present Value (PV) =Tk100 By Putting Value in Equation,
. —100 0.10 (1x 12)
Interest Rate (i) 10% FV- 100(1+ “r)
Total number of compounding (m) = 12 _
Number of year (n) = 1 year = TE T1GA6
Future Value (FV) =?
Example: 4
If you deposit Tk 50,000.00 in a bank at 13.5% monthly compounding, then what
amount will you get after 10 years.?
7 (nxm)
FV=PV (1+ nm)
Here, Present Value (PV) = Tk 50,000.00
Annual Rate of Interest Compounded Monthly (i) = 13.5%
Number of compounding in a year (m) = 12
Number of years (n)= 10 years
Future Value with monthly compounding (FV) =?
- \(nxm)
Putting value in equation, FY =PV (1+ a)
0.135\70* 4
= 50000 (1+ 5)
= 50000 X (1.011)!
= 50000 X 3.828
= TK. 1,91,423.02
Concept: So, today’s Tk 50,000.00 and to be received Tk191423.02 after 5 years
of the same policy has equal value.
3.3.4 Calculation of Present Value by discounting more than once in a
year:
If we pay attention from different view point in above example, we can get the
knowledge of present value that, present value of Tk. 191423.00 to be received
after 5 years is Tk. 50,000.00. If we know the future value then we can easily
find out the present value. This type of calculation is called the discounting 8

Time Value of Money 39
method. In case of compounding more than once in a year, we will find out the
present value from the future value through discounting. This situation can be
explained through an example: Example -5: With the expectation of
Tk 50,000.00 to be received after 5 years, you want to save some money in a bank.
One of the banks has proposed to give 10% interest and another bank has proposed
to give 9.5% monthly compounding rate. In this condition, in which bank will
you deposit money? To take this decision we have to calculate the present value
of both proposals.
Bank-A (Annual Rate of Interest compounded annually - 10%)
Equation-4:
Annual Rate of Interest, Putting Value in Equation,
Here, Future Value (FV) = Tk50, 000.00 or FV
Compounded Annually (i) = 10% (+d)
Number of years (n) =5 years ‘y« 50,000
Present Value (PV) =? ~ ay?
= Tk. 31,046.07
Bank-B (Annual Rate of Interest Compounded Monthly = 9.5%)
Here, Future Value = Tk 50, 000.00
Number of Compounding Annually (m) = 12
Number of years (n) =5 years
Present Value of Monthly Compounding =?
PV =
. . . FV 50,000 50,000 50,000
Putting Value in Equation, PV =~ \mxn 7 9 9953k12 ~ (1.007) = 76050.
(1 + =) (i+ TT )
= Tk. 31,152.64
Concept: So, Tk 50,000.00 to be received after 5 years, Tk 31046.07 has
to be deposited in Bank- A and Tk 31152.40 has to be deposited in Bank —B. So
Bank — A is a profitable proposal.
3.4 Effective Annual Rate of Interest
If loan taken from the Money Lender at 1 % weekly compounding rate, yearly
o Or nominal interest rate will be 52% in 52 weeks, but if interest rate compounded
S 52 times in a year, EAR or Effective Interest Rate shows different rate.

40 Finance and Banking
At 1% weekly compounding EAR is being calculated through the application of
following equation:
Equation: 5 EAR= (1+ in EAR = (EAR= Effective Annual Rate)
Here, Annual Interest Rate Compounded Weekly (r)=1% Putting Value in
Nominal Interest Rate (i) =52% Equation, i
Annual Number of Compounding = 52 EAR= (i+ 3) “I
Effective Annual Rate =? = (1.01) -1
= 1.67768-1
= 67.768%
Concept: That means, Annual 67.61% interest rate and Weekly 1% interest rate are the
same.
Exercise

Multiple Choice Questions:
1. What is the main reason of measuring the time value of money?

a. interest rate b. currency policy

c. liquidity d. additional profit
2. Which of the following is given on principal with interest?

a. simple interest b. compound interest

c. total interest d. net interest
3. Discounting process means

i) process of measuring the amount of discount

ii) techniques to measure the present value of money

iii) process of dividing principal with interest by the interest rate
Which one is correct?

a) i&ii b) i & iii

C) ii & iti d) i, ii & iii
4. Which factor of the following has vast importance in Time Value of Money?

a. Identify the interest rate b. Investment decision taken co
d. decrease installment of loan c. measure financial condition Ss

Time Value of Money 41
5. Withdrawing from the provident fund Mr. Harun wants to invest some
money in Digital Bank at 12% interest rate for 5 years. Bank says, after 5
years bank will pay Tk 5,00,000.00. How much money Mr. Harun wants
to deposit in Digital Bank?
a. Tk 2,00,730.00
b.Tk 2,83,720.00
c. Tk 3,13,520.00
d. Tk 4,40,000.00
Read the following stimulant and answer questions 6, 7 and 8.
Three friends shuvo, Shainik and Munna started a computer and mobile
servicing center together in their business area. They felt the need to buy a
computer for their service center. When they applied for loan in the local banks,
bank A agreed to allocate Tk 50,000 on 20% and bank B the same amount on
10% compound interest refundable in 2 years.
6. Which method is used to calculate present value?
a. compound method
b. discounting method
c. determining simple interest
d. determining EAR
7. How much will they have to pay if borrowed from bank A ?
a. Tk. 50,000
b. Tk. 60,000
c. Tk. 62,000
d. Tk. 72,0000
8. How much had to pay if borrowed from bank B?
a. Tk. 10,555.20 (approximately)
b. Tk. 11,019.55 (approximately)
c. Tk. 11,030.20 (approximately)
d. Tk. 13,019.50 (approximately)
Forma-6, Finance and Banking, Class-9,10

42 Finance and Banking

Short Questions:

1. What is Time Value of Money?

2. What is compound rate?

3. What do you mean by the interest rate?

4. What is Effective Rate?

Creative Questions:

1. Mr. Alim is going to deposit tk.6 lac in "6 years double benefit policy". But
he became confused by his friend's advice, who said to keep money at 13%
interest rate in "Term Saving Scheme" for the same duration.

a. What differences occur between the present and future time due to interest
rate?

b. Explain Compounding Method.

c. Calculate the future value of Mr. Alim’s savings in Compounding Method.
d.Evaluate the logic of Mr. Alim’s investment decision.

2. Mr. Farhad is thinking to keep Tk 10 lac at 10% interest rate for 10 years in
Padma bank. But his wife Salma suggested to purchase land in municipality,
where in 8years land value will be double and thus it ensures extra earning of
Tk 2 lac. Mr. F arhad has become confused.

a) In discounting method which value of money is divided?
b) Explain the factors which differentiate between present value and future
value.
c) According to the condition of Padma Bank, calculate the future value of Mr.
Farhad’s money.
d) Which sector should Mr. Farhad select for investment? Give your opinion.
Lo)
=

Chapter Four
Risk and Uncertainty
Risk and uncertainty create obstacles in fulfilling goals for business
organizations, investors and others; and we generally observe a deviation
between the expected results and realized results of firms and investors. From
this deviation risk arises, This risk plays an important role in making decisions by
firms and investors. That is why it becomes necessary to recognize and measure
tisks before taking any business decision, In this chapter we will learn about
different aspects of risks and uncertainty.
eee Te ea
After reading this chapter we shall be able to:
» able to explain the concept of risk and uncertainty.
® identify the source of different types of risk and uncertainty.
® analyze the impact of risk and uncertainty on financial decisions.
® explain the financial decision making process by using standard deviation
and variance.
BH
5

44 Finance and Banking
5.1 Introduction
Rohan is a student of class nine. He expects to score GPA 5 in his S.S.C
examinations. Mr. Rashed is farmer. He expects to get a good harvest from his
lands. Sumana is a last year student of BBA program of Dhaka University. He
expects to join a good job after completing his BBA degree. Here obtaining a GPA
5 by Rohan, getting good harvest by Mr. Rashed and joining a good job by
Sumana, everything is uncertain, because every event here is related with the
future. Rohan may or may not achieve GPA 5; Mr. Rashed may or may not get
good crops from his farm, and Sumana may or may not get a good job offer.
Thus people often face different kinds of uncertainties in their personal life as
well in their businesses. For example, whether a firm can maintain its high sales
volume in future, whether it will be able to earn the rate of return as expected,
whether it will be able to purchase raw materials at the expected price, each of
these and most other issues have a great deal of uncertainty. In the same way, an
investor faces uncertainty in getting expected return by buying a share of stock,
or a company faces uncertainty in earning expected cash-flow by making
investment in long term projects.
Because of these uncertainties the realized return of any firm gets higher or
lower than expected return. The possibility of actual results to be different from
the expected results is known as risk. For example, the company was expecting
to earn a return of 20% next year but could earn only 15%. Here the deviation of
5% is the source of risk. Few more examples are shown below to explain risk:
Assume that a company expected that it would be able to sell goods worth Tk.
5.0 million, Tk. 6.5 million and Tk. 7.5 million in the next three years. But at
the end of these three years the company found that its actual sales in those years
were Tk. 4.5 million, Tk. 6.6 million, and Tk.7.1 million. An investor purchased
the shares of a company with the expectation of earning dividends of Tk. 15 per
share only to find at the end of the year that he has ended up receiving a dividend
of only Tk. 10 per share. Thus investors and firms find variations between the
expected results and actual results from almost all of their decisions and the
probabilities of those variations create risk. For example, when the investor
expects to receive 15 percent dividend but receives 20 percent dividend instead,
the extra 5 percent dividend is considered as the source of risk. This is a risk
because the investor had no idea beforehand why the realized return was higher
than the anticipated return. e
Ss
N

Risk and Uncertainty 45
Another example of risk is like this. We have received from the first of the two
investments 10 percent return in last three years each. Our rates of return from
the second investment were 5%, 10%, and 15% in the last three years
respectively. Though the average return from both the investments was equal,
that is 10% but the first investment is considered as risk-free while the second
investment is risky. The reason is that one of the concepts of risk is the ups and
downs or volatility of rate of return. The higher the volatility, the higher the risk
is; and where there is no volatility, there is no risk.
5.2 Differences between Risk and Uncertainty
Though risk arises from uncertainty, there are some differences between these
two concepts. Firstly, not all uncertainties are risks. It has been said before that
only the Possibilities of occurring unfavorable events are risks. If there is no
possibility of occurring unfavorable events then it is not considered as risks. In
other words, the part of uncertainty that can be measured is called risk. Some
uncertainties are not measurable. For example the Chief Executive Officer of a
company may die and it is an uncertainty, but this uncertainty cannot be
measured. As a result, this uncertainty is not called a risk. Secondly, as risk can
be measured, it can be controlled by applying different techniques. But
uncertainties cannot be controlled or avoided. For example, the office building
of a firm can be destroyed due to earthquake, but as earthquakes are beyond the
controls of the firm, it cannot avoid the uncertainty. On the other hand, the
possibility that sales of the firm will decline in the next year is a risk because, this
risk can be measured and the firm can take several steps to reduce this risk such
as, it can sell its products in advance.
5.3 Sources of Risks
A certain amount of risk is associated with every decision of a firm. Because of
these risks, firms face the uncertainty of not achieving their desired outcomes.
This is why firms need to manage these risks properly. To manage the risks
properly, it is necessary to understand the sources and types of risks the firm is
facing. In this regard, the perspective of the business organizations or firms is
different from that of investors. The sources of risk from different perspectives
are discussed below:

=

&

46 Finance and Banking

From the Perspective of Business Firms:

A) Business Risk: To run a business organization successfully a business
needs to incur different operational costs such as, cost for raw-materials,
wages and salary, office rent, insurance etc. Risks may arise from the
inability to meet these costs. The ability of the firm to meet its operating
costs depends on the combination between its stability of sales return and
operational cost, that is, the proportion between fixed and variable costs. If
the revenue earnings are volatile, that is, in some phases the sales return is
high but in other phases it gets low, the firm will face uncertainty and
difficulty in meeting its operating costs. Moreover, if the fixed operational
cost such as, rent or insurance expenses are high, the firm also encounters
business risks. If the firm collects its fund from only internal sources, and
not from any external sources, the risks related with earning is known as
business risk. The sources of this risk are change in price of the products,
change in the sales volume, change in purchase price of factors of
production, and tendency to have excessive fixed costs etc.

B) Financial Risk: This risk is aroused from financing from external sources.
The firm which has high amount of capital collected through loans is more
exposed to this financial risk. It happens because it is compulsory to pay
interest for the debt capital. On the contrary, financing from internal source
does not obligate the firm to distribute any dividend among the
shareholders. As a result, if a firm using debt capital fails to earn any profit,
the creditors may take legal action against the firm, and consequently, it may
be forced to close its business. Use of debt financing creates the obligation
to pay interest in addition to the principal amount. For example, If a
company sells bonds worth Tk. 5 million at a rate of 15% interest and
maturity period of 5 years, then it is has to pay Tk. 750,000 of interest per
year and Tk. 5 million at the at end of five years. Generally the company
repays the debt capital from the cash flow generated from investments made
by using the debt capi -tal. If for any reason, the company cannot earn enouh
cash flow from its investments, it may become unable to repay its debt
obligations. If it cannot make debt repayment for a long period of time, the
creditors may take legal action against the debtor company which may force
the company to be bankrupt. Hence, the risk that is created from the inability
to repay debt obligations is known as financial risk.

eo

Risk and Uncertainty 47
From the Perspective of Investors:
A) Interest Rate Risk: The investors who buy bond, debentures etc. have to
face interest rate risk. The reason is that the value of their investments moves
upward or downward with the change in market interest rate. If interest rate
increases, market value of these investments that is bonds and debentures goes
down, and if the interest rate decreases, their value goes up. The possibility of
decreasing the value of investments as a result of change in market interest rate
is known as interest rate risk.
B) Liquidity Risk: After investing money in stocks, bonds and debentures,
shareholders may require to encash their investments. It is expected that
shareholders will be able to sell their investments at a reasonable price to
convert those investments into cash. Liquidity risk is introduced when they fail
to sell their assets easily and at a reasonable price. Liquidity risk depends on size
and structure of the market at which investments such as stocks, bonds and
debentures are traded. This risk is higher for sole proprietorship and partnership
firms. Because these firms cannot sell their fixed and current assets easily and at
a good price in case of urgent need for cash. On the contrary, when an investor
purchases the share of a company, the concerns for liquidity risk is generally
low. The reason is that he or she can sell that stock any time in the secondary
market or share market if required. For capital market, if any investor buys bond
or debenture of a company and takes part in banking activities or involves in
foreing business, in that case, they have to face liquidity risk . Because we have
only limited number of buyers of bond or debentures compared to the number of
buyers of stocks in or capital market. In that case liquidating of those
investments becomes time consuming and costly.
5.4 Implications of Risks
The fact that risk has important roles in the decision making process of
business organizations shows the significance of risks.
Firstly, as already stated, risk has impacts on the success of any company, that
is, in fulfilling the overall goal of the company. Risk has been defined as the
probability of experiencing any unexpected outcome or events. Therefore, if the
company anticipates and analyzes different future conditions and take necessary
measures in its decision making process, it can avoid unexpected losses. For
example, a company has set up its production plant at the bank of a river
se considering only the convenience of transporting its rawmaterials. But if the
% plant is unfortunately destroyed by high floodwater and river bank erosion after

48 Finance and Banking
a couple of years, the company will face a huge amount of loss and it will fail to
achieve any success. But if the company considered any possibility of such a
disaster beforehand, it would have avoided setting up the plant just by the river
and could possibly be turned into a successful company.

Secondly, earning profit by a business organization depends on the demand of
its products in the market. Therefore, before starting a business, a firm should
analyze the demand of its products and make a realistic estimate of its sales. In
other words it would plan ahead and implement the plan wisely. The actual
demand can be higher or lower than the estimated demand. If the actual sales are
lower than the expected sales then the firm cannot earn enough profit. For
example, a firm produces a large volume of umbrella predicting excessive
rainfall in a season. But if the firm finds that rainfall is not as much as it was
predicted, there are chances that a portion of the umbrellas will remain unsold.
As a result, the firm will fail to earn sufficient profit. But if the firm could add
some more products in its production line then demand of those products could
be unaffected by the volume of rainfall and the firm could earn its targeted
profit.

5.5 Risk-free Return and Risky Return:

Not all returns are risky; there are some returns which are considered risk-free.
For such a return, the actual return is always the same as expected return. If you
keep a time deposit in a bank, you may not find any significant difference
between the expected return and the realized return. This is a kind of risk-free
return. Generally returns from treasury bills and treasury bonds issued by the
government are considered risk free. As these are issued by the government,
these investments are considered risk-free. As the earnings from these securities
are fixed, they are deemed to be free from any risk.

The probable deviation of actual earning from the expected earning is the risk.
Generally one part of the return is risk free and the other part is risky. The returns
which carry risk are known as risky returns. For example, when an investor
invests in purchasing common stock of a company, there is no certainty that the
actual dividends will be as much as the expected dividends. The earning of the
company in future years in combination with some other relevant issues will
determine the amount of dividend to be distributed by the company in those
years. That is why returns of common stock investors are considered as risky
returns. Moreover, return from common stock is recognized as the most risky
return as common stock does not offer investors any fixed earnmgs. S

Risk and Uncertainty 49
5.6 Measurement of Risk and Uncertainty
Measurement of risk is essential for successful operation of any business
organization. As risk is formed by the deviation of actual risk from the expected
risk, the higher the deviation, the higher the risk. Similarly, the lower this
deviation, the lower the risk. Thus it is natural that risk can be measured by
measuring the deviation of actual return from expected return.
There are different methods of calculating risk. Different methods are applied
according to the requirement and condition. In this stage we will apply standard
deviation as the measurement of risk.
Standard Deviation: We can use standard deviation to measure the risk of both
historical return and expected future return. This is a statistical method. The
formula of standard deviation is given below:
Standard deviation = , | ¥ (income rate - avarge rate)?
n-1
Here, X( Rate of Return — Average Rate of Return)?= sum of squares of the
deviations from historical rate of return to average historical rate of return
n= number of years
Example: In the following table, rates of return of a project from 2007 to 2011
are given. We will calculate the average return and the risk of the project.
Year Rate of Return | Deviation from the Square of
(%) Average (Return — deviation
Average
2007 (20 — 13) =7 (7X71)=49
2008 (5 - 13) =8 (8X8)=64
2009 (-5 - 13)=18 (18X18)=324
2010 (15 - 13)=2 (2X2)=4
2011 (30 - 13)=17 (17X17)=289
Average 65/5 = 13% | Average squared deviation 182.5
Rate of = 730/(n-1)
Return
Forma-7, Finance and Banking, Class-9,10

50 Finance and Banking
Standard deviation = V182.5%
= 13.5%

If we divide the total of five years' rate of return by 5, we will get the average
rate of return for last five years. The value is shown in the table as 13%. Then we
have to calculate the standard deviation for measuring risk. At first we will find
out the deviations of average return or 13% from each year's rate of return. In the
next column we compute the square of the deviations. Then the total of the
squared deviations are computed as 730. We will divide it by (n-1) or (5-1) or 4
to get variance. The divisor will be always one less than the number of years for
which returns are given. Finally the standard deviation will be calculated by
finding the square root of the variance. In this example it is 13.5%. As a result,
considering the income from 2007 to 2011, our average rate of return is 13% and
risk is 13.5%. We can take decisions for the future by considering this return and
tisk measurement. For example: if we have an alternative project which offers
us 13% return with 15% standard deviation or risk, then we will be better-off by
accepting the first project. Because for the same level of return, lower risk is
more acceptable than higher risk. Again, if there is an alternative to a project
where we will have same risk but lower return, the original project will be more
acceptable than the alternative one. The reason is that for the same level of risk,
higher rate of return is more desirable.
Decision-making Principles: Generally higher value of standard deviation
indicates higher risk and lower value indicates lower risk. Lower risk in the
same level of return or higher return in the same level of risk is more
acceptable.

Activity: The rates of return for an investor in last ten years are 10%, 20%, -5%,
15%, 35%, 10%, 25%,30%, 12%, and 0% respectively. Determine the standard
deviation of rate of return for the investor.

2
R

Risk and Uncertainty 51
Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. What is the consequence of inability to pay office expenses, insurance etc.?
A. financial loss B. shortage of capital
C. business risk D. uncertainty of profit
2. In which of the areas of business organizations risk plays a significant role?
A. in taking decisions B. in making plan
C. in management D. in collecting capital
3. Risk is measured by-
i. applying various techniques ii. developing a good plan
iii. decreasing the cost of doing business
Which one of the following is correct?
A.iandii — B. ii and iii C. i and ii D. i, ii and iii
Short questions
1. What is called the possibility of happening anything beyond anticipation?
2. What kind of method is standard deviation?
Creative questions
After completing a training programme from a fashion designing institute, Raina
Hog established an organization named 'Ahban Crayat'. It is located in Dhaka
city and Comilla city. Her friend Romana started doing business of various
products from Monipuri Handmade Garments in Sylhet area. Business
performances of these two friends are shown below:
14 14
12 12
g 10 g 10
2 8 2 8
S i)
2 6 2 6
CI s
4 m%
4 4
2 2
0 0
2 2 8 8. 2 2 8 68°"
2}
s Bar Chart: Raina Hoq Bar Chart: Romana

52 Finance and Banking
A. What can be determined from the deviation of past rate of returns?
B. Explain the reasons of achieving a lower than expected rate of return in
a business.
C. Describe the reasons for Romana’s less success in her business.
D. Make a comparative analysis between the business scenario of Raina and
Romana.
Creative questions
Name of the investor — Mr shafiqur Rahman
Name of the organizations where he has invested: a) Jhorna Company Limite
b) Azad Company Limited
Jhomma Company Azad Company
i 25% i 25%
3 3
2 15% z 15%
5% \ NY 5%
A) Which losses can be avoided by taking steps in advance after analyzing
the probable future conditions and events?
B) Which risk is faced by the bondholders? Explain.
C) Analyze the conditions of investments of Mr Shafiqur Rahman in
Azad Company.
D) Which steps will be appropriate to stabilize the income of Jhorna
Company? Analyze. S
N

Chapter five
Capital Budgeting
Success and existence of any business organization depends on the long term
investment decision. To run the business most of the time an entrepreneur has to
take different investment decisions regarding fixed assets like purchase of land,
building, furniture, equipments etc., and replacement of these fixed assets,
modernization of production process, development of new products. Whether
these long term decision will be profitable or not for the company. It requires
following different methods and principles for the proper evaluation of different
alternative investment decision. Throughout this chapter we will be able to know
about different financial methods, principles those are used in evaluation process
for taking long term investment decision.
After reading this chapter we shall be able to:
e discuss the concept of capital budgeting.
e assess the importance and objectives of capital budgeting.
e implement different methods of capital budgeting.
e identify the different limitations of capital budgeting.
io}
8g

54 Finance and Banking
5.1 Capital Budgeting:

Three friends Rahim, Karim and Shankar run their individual business. Rahim
has been thinking to purchase a fridge for his grocery shop for last few days. Six
months back, Karim started his tailoring business with a sewing machine.
Guessing the increasing demand he thought to purchase a new machine. On the
other side, to start a saloon Shankar is thinking to purchase some essential
furniture and hair cutting machine. Here, fridge purchase for grocery shop,
sewing machine purchase for tailoring shop and wheel chair, hair cutting
machine purchase for saloon are all long term investment decisions. Whether
these long term investment decisions will be profitable or not require an
evaluation process of finance. Capital budgeting is such kind of evaluation
process. In this respect, income and expenditure of every investment decision or
project have to be estimated. After completing the estimation, net cash flow
or net profit of this investment decision or project is being measured. Here
income means, earned money from selling and expenditure means, raw material
expenses, selling expenses and depreciation expenses and other expenses. If
income is deducted from the expenditure the remaining is the total profit; if tax
is deducted from the total profit the remaining is the net profit. Again if
depreciation is added with this net profit then we will get cash inflow.
Comparing this inflow with the outflow or initial investment if inflow appears
higher than outflow then this investment decision considered as profitable and
can be accepted.

So, it can be said that capital budgeting is a process related with long term
investment decision. This decision process starts from the purchase of fixed
asset and include modernization, replacement of these asset. Fixed asset,
business expansion, new product development are also within the scope of this
decision.

5.2 Application of capital budgeting:

Capital Budgeting is applied in all aspect of long term investment decision.
Capital budgeting typically involves substantial expenditures thus this decision
depends on planned financing. Now we will discuss about some popular
application of capital budgeting decision.

Fixed Asset Purchase: To start a new business, every business firm has to
purchase fixed assets like land, building, equipment, furniture etc. At the time of
starting a business a grocer has to take different purchase decision like, fridge
purchase, orders to make some furniture (shelf), renovation expenses etc. Again %&
in such a way, an owner of a restaurant requires to purchase chair, table, fridge, 8

Capital Budgeting 55
and security money for holding the possession of a room for restaurant. In any
type of business which incurs fixed cost requires to apply capital budgeting
process before purchase any fixed asset. In running business sometimes fixed
asset may become obsolete. That time replacement is required for the fixed
asset. Business people take this decision by the application of capital budgeting
decision.
Business expansion with the intention to increase the production capacity:
In case of a running institution, production capacity may be required to increase
after starting its business. By the installation of high capacity machine this
purpose can be fulfilled. So, decision of purchasing a high capacity machine can
be taken after proper evaluation by the application of capital budgeting
technique. For example, though in a tailoring shop there is a sewing machine but
considering the high demand in Eid festival, shop owner can take decision of
purchasing a new machine. To take this decision, owner calculates the cost of
purchasing a new machine and by this investment how much income will
increase is another most important measuring factor in purchase decision. All
these calculations can be done by the capital budgeting technique.
Product diversification: New product may need to be marketed along with the
existing products in the market to extend the business of the Company. For
example, with the production of Mango Juice some company may take decision
to produce Apple juice. In case of marketing a new product, decision maker at
first has to collect information regarding the life of new product; calculate the
cost of production, market demand, administrative cost and expected income. To
find out all these, application of the capital budgeting decision is used.
Replacement and modernization: Replacement and modernization of
production process are needed as per th requirement of business. For example, if
a saloon owner thinks if he can afford to purchase some new or modem
technology based machine to increase the efficiency in his hair cutting job, then
he needs to make a comparison between the incremental cash outlay of this
decision and the incremental cash inflow by this decision. If incremental cash
inflow is higher than the incremental cash outlay, replacement decision will be
profitable. It is another application of capital budgeting.
5.3 Importance of capital budgeting:
Capital budgeting is the key to success. Business is directly benefited by the
practical and proper capital budgeting decision. If capital budgeting technique

so cannot be applied properly, huge loss will incur in business.

S

N

56 Finance and Banking
Here importance of capital budgeting is given below:
1. Profit Oriented: Main objective of business is profit earning. Capital
budgeting contributes in profit earning. Generally, a company invests in income
oriented fixed asset with the expectation of earning profit. So profit depends on
the Capital Budgeting Decision. By purchasing a fridge, grocer's sales will
increase. Thus profitability of this shop will start to increase. But if people of this
locality are not habituated in cold drinks or in ice-cream then sell may not
increase as per expectation.
2. Voluminous size of investment: Generally, a great sum of fund is involved in
making different capital decisions for purchase, addition, modernization and
replacement of fixed assets. This is why usually mistakes in decisions cannot be
amended if there is any; even if amendment is possible, huge compensation has to
be incurred. For example, considering that a business will get electricity and gas
supply in due time, a company decides to establish a factory near Dhaka.
However, after establishing the factory, they find out that government has taken
decision to stop providing new connections for electricity and gas supply. In this
scenario, the factory won't be able to start production but the company may have
taken a large sum of loan and it has to repay interest for it at a regular basis. So,
such type of mistakes can tum the business into a failure. If it were about a small
sum of money, funding could be done from somewhere else; but there is no such
scope since it's a huge investment. If decision is taken to sell the project for
repaying bank loan, suitable price cannot be received because the project has
already been unprofitable. So the business has to incur a great loss.
3. Risk oriented: Most of the factors used in the evaluation process of capital
budgeting decision are based on future which is always uncertain. For example:
whether installation will be profitable or not depend on the expected market
demand, amount of selling and quantity of production etc. Calculation of cash
inflow and cash outflow may not occur as per expectation. Thus, capital
budgeting will be proven as wrong decision. It can be explained in another way
let's assume that a umbrella producer expands his business py purchasing some
new capacity machine by apprehending the huge rainfall. If rainfall doesn't occur
as per producer's expectation then business has to face losses. In long term
financing risk calculation is also very important consideration. Capital
budgeting techniques play important role in risk managemet.

=

8

Capital Budgeting 57
5.4 Process of Capital Budgeting:

Steps required for Capital Budgeting in long term investment decision:

(a) Expected cash flow

(b) Discount rate measurement

(c) Capital Budgeting technique selection and application

(a) Expected Cash Flow: Long term decision includes machinery purchase,
business expansion, technological up gradation of production process and other
decisions associated with huge amount of cash outflow. Cash flow estimation is
the first step of capital budgeting decision. To estimate the cash inflow, every
business has to identify the expected sells amount, expected current expenses,
cost of capital and other expenses. In business cash inflow occurs from selling
and outflow occurs from current expenses, cost of capital and from other
expenses. It was previously said that for calculation of total sells amount, owner
has to estimate the expected selling price, expected sells amount at that price and
expected market demand. Every year business earns income by selling the
products. We can find out net cash inflow from this sales revenue. If any
mistakes occur in estimation, it influences the business decisions. In the same
way, cash outflow occur from different expenses. Estimation requires finding
out the current cost and fixed cost

(b ). Discount rate: By the use of discount rate estimated cash flow will have to
be converted into a present value . You have known in Time Value chapter
though the amount of cash flow in the future consecutive years are equal, in
present value consideration they are not same. Present value of the future cash
flow differs with the project expected life and discount rate. That means the later
the cash flow the lesser the present value if other things remain equal. As cash
flow of any project is earned for many years, so to select a suitable project or
investment opportunity business needs to apply the capital budgeting techniques
to discount the future cash flows. Through this discounting process present value
of the future cash flows can be calculated. If present value of cash inflow is
higher than the present value of cash outflow, then this investment decision can
be taken. Generally in capital budgeting decision cost of capital can be
considered as discount rate. You will be informed about the cost of capital in
next chapter.

(c) Application of capital budgeting technique: After the estimation of cash
flow and discount rate, capital budgeting technique is selected. Different
techniques of capital budgeting are being used in project selection.
Forma-8, Finance and Banking, Class-9,10

58 Finance and Banking
But all techniques are not accepted equally. Every technique has some advantage
and disadvantage. Project is selected by considering the nature, risk and other
issues of the project.
5.5 Techniques of Capital Budgeting:
Different techniques are used in guiding the capital budgeting decision.
Selection of profitable project in accordance with the objective is the main target
of these techniques. Example: Sewing machine of tailoring shop, fridge of a
grocer and hair cutting machine in saloon are all long term investment decision.
Techniques of the capital budgeting are as follows:

1. ARR (Accounting Rate of Return) Method.

2. Pay Back Period Method

3. NPV (Net Present Value) Method

4. IRR (Internal Rate of Return ) Method
1. ARR Method:
Easy technique of capital budgeting is ARR method. Information collected from
the financial report of the Institution this rate is calculated. In this technique net
profit is being considered in lieu of expected cash flow. You have learned, if all
cost including tax is deducted from the sells revenue then net profit comes out.
If average net profit is divided by the average investment then average rate of
profit comes out.

__average net profit

It means average rate of profit = “average investment X 100
In this technique, if expected total profit is divided by the total year then average
profit comes out and if investment is divided by the 2 then average investment
comes out.
Decision Rule:

e The more the ARR, the better. If project is financed by taking loan from
the bank then bank demands interest. Loan will not be granted if ARR is
lower. For some companies minimum ARR remain fixed by the
company's administrative decision. If calculated ARR for a specific
project is lower than the minimum acceptable ARR, this project will be
rejected. On other side if calculated ARR is higher than the minimum
acceptable ARR, this project will be accepted. ~

S
N

Capital Budgeting 59
e Incase of multiple projects, projects are arranged in an order by following
the above principle. Among these, necessary numbers of projects are
selected by considering the financial capability.
Equation used in ARR calculation is very simple to understand. Moreover, this
is popular with many people as necessary information can be retrieved from
financial statement. But this method has some complicacy. Firstly: In ARR
method net profit is used rather than cash flow. So, some people thought that this
method is not a complete technique. Secondly: This method doesn't consider the
time value of money. But, present value of cash flow comes from different years
of project life, are not same. As value of today's Tk 1.00 is not as same as the
value of Tk 1.00 in future time. But, ARR method doesn't consider this.
Now, through an example, we will describe ARR Method.
Example: Let assume, your father is thinking to invest intwo projects A & B.
Elaborate explanation of these two projects are given below:
Project - A: Project life is 3 years and Tk. 1 core is needed as initial capital. If
this project is implemented then in 3 years expected sells will be Tk. 8 lac,
Tk. 199 lac, Tk. 80 lac respectively and expected current cost of selling will be
40%. So, at the rate of 40% current cost of selling will be Tk3.2 lac, Tk. 79 lac and
Tk. 32 lac respectively. This current cost of selling includes the cost for raw material,
labor wages, electricity bill etc. Fixed cost will not be changed with the change
of production quantity like, cost of building, land machineries etc. So, expected
fixed cost is Tk. 5 lac per year. For the coming 3 years after calculating current
cost. Then depreciation cost comes.
After that, dividing the cost of machineries by the life of the machines
depreciation cost will be calculated. In every project investment has to be made
for machinery. As sells will continue for 3 years so, life of the project can be
counted as 3 years. Depreciation cost will be Tk. 33.3 lac. If current cost of
selling, fixed cost and depreciation cost is deducted from the sells revenue then
project's taxable income will comes out. Assume tax rate is 30%. This
information shows that in the first year in lieu of profit loss incur Tk. 33.5 lac.
But in 2nd year and 3rd year profit will be respectively Tk. 81.1 and 9. 7lac. Here
it is mentionable that, if profit earned as tax is calculated at the rate of 30% such
a way ,tax will be deducted also from the loss of 1st year with the intension of
lowering the amount of loss and also of lowering the per year tax. In project - A
= for the consecutive 3 years expected net loss for 1st year is Tk 23.5 lac, in second
‘year net profit is Tk 56.80 lac and in 3rd year net profit is Tk 6.8 lac.

60 Finance and Banking
Project-A
Amount (Lac)
Initial Capital
Sales 8.00 199.00 80.00
Current cost (on sells 40%) 3.20 79.60 32.00
Fixed cost 5.00 5.00 5.00
Depreciation 33.30 33.30 33.30
Profit/Loss (33.50) 81.10 9.70
Tax fixati
Tax sent aon | 24.30 2.90
sary for the
case of loss.
Net income (33.50) 56.80 6.80
As per above information ARR of the project can be calculated in following ways:
Here, Average profit =-33.50+56.846.8 Tk 13 lac
Average Investment= 10Gr0 = Tk 50 lac
So, average Rate of Return (ARR)= 33 x100 = 26%
Project-B: Similar to project - A project - B also has 3 years life and initial
investment is assumed Tk 1 crore. In 3 years from this project sell is expected to
be Tk 151 lac, Tk 110 lac, Tk 49 lac respectively. Forecasted current cost will be
30% of total sells amount. Fixed cost is estimated Tk 20 lac and depreciation is
Tk 33.3 lac per year. Like project - A forecasted tax rate is 30%.
oo
ES

Capital Budgeting 61
Year 1 (Tk. Lac) | Year 2 (Tk. Lac) | Year 3 (Tk. Lac)
Sales 151.00 110.00 49.00
Current cost 45.30 33.00 14.70
Fixed Cost 20.00 20.00 20.00
Depreciation 33.30 33.30 33.30
Taxable income 52.40 23.70 (19.00)
Tax 15.70 7.10 _
Net Profit 36.70 16.60 (19.00)
Here,
Average profit = 36.7+ 16.6- 13.3/3 = Tk 13 lac.
Average Investment =100+0/2 = Tk 50 lac
SO, Average Rate of Return (ARR) = 13/50 = 26%
Here it is mentionable that ARR is same for both the project. If ARR would be
higher than the other project then which project shows higher ARR company
would choose that project. But in this case both projects will be equally
profitable for the company, so it can choose any of the projects.
2 Pay- Back Method:
Pay-Back Method gives the answer about after how much time th invested
capital will come back. This method is very popular and easy method of project
evaluation or long term investment decision. The pay back period is the amount
of time required for the firm to recover its initial investment in project, as
calculated from cash inflows. If inflow from business investments and projects
are equal, pay back time can be calculated by dividing invested amount of money
by yearly cash inflow.
Pay Back Time = investment/yearly cash flow
Let assume, owner of a tailor shop requires Tk.15000 for purchasing the machine.
In consecutive 4 years he will ensure yearly inflow of Tk.5000 by utilizing this
machine. In that case Pay- Back Time will be:
= Tk.15000/Tk.5000
he)
5 = 3 years

62 Finance and Banking
Inflow coming from the business may not be equal in each year of project life
(mixed stream of cash flow). That case Pay back period is calculated by using
cumulative cash flow in each year. That means, each year's cash inflow is
continually added with the inflow of the next year until the recovery of
investment.
In example - 3 (Application of ARR method) net profits were
consecutively-23.5, 56.8 and 6.8 (tk.). In Pay back and in other method of capital
budgeting cash flow is being used in exchange of net profit .Generally cash flow
is found by adding the depreciation with the net profit. So, if calculated net profit
of project- A is added with the depreciation of that project, then cash flow can be
calculated.
ee

Net profit (23.5) 56.8 6.8

Ad depreciation 33.3 33.3 33.3

Cash flow 10 90 40
From the structure above it is identifiable that in 2 years invested amount is
recovered. So pay back period will be 2 years. Again, in ARR method cash flow
of project -B can be calculated by adding the depreciation cost with the estimated
net profit.
ee
ee
rs a ee
In above structure, it is mentionable that in 1st year Tk.70 of total investment is
recovered. In 2nd year cash inflow will be Tk.50 but only Tk.30 of total
investment is remain left to recover. So to recover Tk.30 pay back time will be =
1 year+ 30/50 years

= (1+.6) years ~
= 1.6 years. s

Capital Budgeting 63
Decision Rules:

In Pay back Time Method, the lower the recovery time or payback time, the more
it is an attractive project for investment. Oppositely, larger pay back time
indicates more riskiness of the project.

Again, if many alternative projects are available for the company then those
projects are arranged in ascending or descending order. After that most attractive
projects are selected depending on the financial capability of the company and
remaining are rejected.

In a company, officers in management specify their expected pay back time as a
measure-ment scale. It is specified by the management by considering the
different factors like nature of project, risk of the project etc.

Limitations of Pay back Method:

Pay back method is the easiest and most popular method of capital budegeting.
Though this method is very simple to use but cannot fullfil all requirements of
the investors. Here some limitations of this method are discussed below:

1. Pay back is not actually a rate of profit. It is the time to recover the
investment. After crossing this Pay back Time company will not gain any
profit but it ensures the recovery of loss.

2. Ifthere are two or more projects, of which the pay back period is lowest is
accepted. Pay back period method is not applicable if there is single
project.

3. Cash flow entering the business after the Pay back Period is not
considered in project evaluation. In project-A Pay back Period was 2
years. In this condition if large amount of inflow comes in 3rd year, it will
not be considered and still Payback Period will be 2 years.

4. This method doesn't consider the time value of money. In Time Value
chapter we have learnt that tk.5 of next year is more valuable than Tk. 5
after 5 years. Here, each year's inflow is considered equally valuable.

Activity: Let's assume, your father thinks to invest Tk.50,000 in a project.
From which in 6 years your father is expecting Tk.10,000, Tk.15,000,
Tk. 20,000, Tk.10,000, Tk. 20,000 and Tk.30,000 respectively. Calculate its
Pay back Period.

io)

S

64 Finance and Banking
But, among all capital budgeting method Net Present Value (NPV) and Internal
Rate of Return (IRR) are more acceptable than the other methods. As these
methods consider time value, so these can provide more accurate information in
project evaluation. In higher class you will be able to know about these two
methods.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions:
1. Which is the evaluation method of investment below?
a. capital budgeting
b. time value of money
c. selecting discount rate
d. Future value policy of investment
2. Which is the equation of calculating the payback time?
a cash flow
* investment
b. investment
cash flow
c. investment ___
yearly cash inflow
d. yearly inflow
outflow
3. What is called the difference between cash inflow and cash outflow?
a. initial investment
b. cash out flow
c. total current cost
d. total depreciation
4. Which Technique of capital budgeting is important?
a. project selection
b. identify the objective of institution
c. calculate profitability of project
d. identify the rate of return s
Ss
NX

Capital Budgeting 65
5. Dr. Shamima has founded and directed a hospital by investing her own
capital. Which decision will she take through capital budgeting?
a. medicine procurement
b. X-ray machine purchase
c. medicine price fixation
d. color change of hospital building
Read the following stimulant and answer the questions 6 & 7.
Chief managing director of Shemanto Company Miss. Borna has divided total
profit by 4 before calculating the profitability of investment of 4 years without
adding depreciation. But total investment has been divided by 2.
6. Which method was followed by Mrs. Borna?
a. average rate of return
b. pay back time
c. net present value
d. internal rate of return
7. Limitation of the method mentioned in the stimulant
i) time value of money is avoided
ii) value of all cash flow is equal
iii) divide profit and investment by the different number.
Which one is correct?
a)i & ii
b) i & iii
C) ii & iii
d) i &ii &iii
Short questions:
1. What do you mean by the long term investment?
2. What is Capital Budgeting?
3. Define cash inflow.
4. Define cash outflow.
5. What is ARR?
6. What is pay back time?
Forma-9, Finance and Banking, Class-9,10

66 Finance and Banking
Creative Ouestions:
1. Shatadal Company used to take its investment decision by applying most
acceptable method of Capital Budgeting. Recently, finding out the pay back time
of two equal investment project Diba & Nishi, they found in 3rd year cumulative
cash flow of 0&10 respectively. In 4th year both the projects have identical cash
flow 20.
a) Who has to take the liability of the failure of Capital Budgeting?
b) Explain the components which act as differentiator of the cash flow and
net profit?
c) Calculate the pay back time of project Nishi.
d) For the purpose of long term investment which project should be
followed by the Shatadal Company?
2. By considering the purchasing power of the consumer, taste etc. Shampoo
producing company "Smapy Ltd." wants to accept a project which can produce
mini pack shampoo, mid sized shampoo, small sized shampoo and side by side
the big size shampoo. By estimating the income and expenditure, this 5 years
project requires initial investment of Tk 5 crore and selling amount of Tk 70 lac,
Tk 1.4 crore, Tk 2 crore, Tk 2.5 crore and Tk 1.6 crore. Other current cost is 40%
of sells amount and 30% of taxable income
a. Which is being used as discounting rate in capital budgeting?
b. Why capital budgeting is expectation based?
c. Calculate ARR of this project as per instruction given in stimulant.
d. Evaluate the importance of capital budgeting in project selection of
the Sampy Company.
Lo)
=

Chapter Six
Cost of Capital
Every business enterprise bas its own cost of capital. Cost of capital means the
cost of funds gathered from different sources. Usually, the expected income of
the financers is considered as the cost of capital of the organization. A business
enterprise collects its necessary fund from different sources. The costs of capital
of different sources are not equal. So, the cost of capital of each of the sources
needs to be calculated separately. In this chapter, we shall be able to know about
cost of capital, importance of calculating cost of capital, calculating cost of
capital of different sources of fund and other related things.
BE sniifes commen Brgcan cone Ms werent 1100375
' PACIFKG GENERAL INSURANCE CO, LTD. .
rl itso Bhaben (ieitoat). BB Aenoe, Dhaka (000, Banoiadosh pate:/ ©] 2] 0] 8] 2] 0] 4] 2}
DIVIDEND WARRANT-2011 Fo Tereippectanr
FOUdBOIONO.: 12015700000
Pay to__Mr ABC
The sum of Taka TWO THOUSAND TWO) HUNDRED™FIATY fONLY Taka **2,250.008*
Payableat : A Bank Limited
; Any Branch .
Nesom 201-130-2618 Aare — marr agpsory
"2100375" 08527388 iF 2041500002549" Ly
Picture : Dividend warrant
After reading this chapter we shall be able to:
e explain the concept of cost of capital.
e explain the significance of calculating the cost of capital.
e calculate the cost of capital.
e evaluate different sources on the basis of cost of capital.
has)
=

68 Finance and Banking
6.1 Introduction

After the investment decisions of the three friends mentioned in the previous
chapter, such as, Rahim's buying a fridge, Karim's buying a sewing machine and
Sankar's buying a wheel chair and a hair cutting machine they have to finance
for these investments. You have learnt that there are many sources of financing
like own capital of the owner, loan from friends, bank loan, loan from other
financing organizations, etc. Financer of each of these sources has some
expected income. Here, the amount which is the expected income of the financer
is regarded as the cost of capital of the fund collecting organization. For
example, if Rahim takes loan from bank at the interest rate of 15%, his cost of
capital will be 15%. Likewise, if Karim collects money for buying a sewing
machine from his own, the opportunity cost of that money will be his cost of
capital. That is, if it seems that he could earn 15% of the investment by investing
that money elsewhere, his cost of capital will be 15%.

Big organizations collect necessary fund for their investment from one or more
than one sources. Here, the average rate of the costs of capital of all the sources
will be considered as the cost of capital applicable for that business farm.
Suppose that a company needs 10 lac taka for investment. The company decides
to collect of this 10 lac taka, 5 lac taka by selling shares and 5 lac taka by taking
bank loan. The owners of the shares expect 18% income from their investment
and the bank agreed to give loan to the farm at 12% rate of interest. As a result,
cost of capital of the share selling source of the farm will be 18% and that of
bank loan source will be 12%. The rate of the cost of capital that we get by
making an average of the costs of capital of the two sources will be the average
cost of capital of that farm, that is, (18% x .50 + 12% x .50) = 15% . It is
mentionable here that as the cost of capital of the farm is 15%, the farm has to
earn minimum 15% income before taking the cost of fund in to account,
otherwise the farm will not be able to meet the expected income of the
shareholders and that of the bank. Therefore, it could be said that the amount of
money that is to earn as minimum to meet the expected income of the owners of
the fund collected from different soureces is called cost of fund.

6.2 Significance of Calculating Cost of Capital

Cost of capital plays an important role in taking different decisions in the
financial management of a company. Cost of capital is applied to all steps
starting from choosing the right source of financing according to the need of
the company to the assessment of the investment opportunity or evaluation of
the project. The significance of cost of capital is furnished below: 8

Cost of Capital 69
First: Investment decision-related. Suppose that a company sets up a factory
taking 50 lac taka loan from Sonali Bank at the interest rate of 18%. After
commencing the factory, it is found that the business is being able to earn at the
rate of 10%, which is less than the 18% rate of interest of the money indebted to
Sonali Bank. As a result, the company will not be able to repay the money of
Sonali Bank. In such situation, the business will be unfruitful. Therefore, it is an
unavoidable duty to know the cost of fund and then take such investment
decision so that it is possible to earn more income than the cost of fund.
Therefore, it could be said that right calculation of cost of fund is the
precondition of right investment decision.
Second: Capital structure-related. Every organization has a desirable loan
policy. Desirable loan policy means what portion of the capital a company will
collect from borrowing or loan. In a business firm, the equity portion of the
owners is called total capital. A company may choose to collect total capital at
any ratio, such as, 50% own capital or equity and 50% loan or, 60% own capital
or equity and 40% loan or, 40% own capital and 60% loan, etc. The company has
to assess the cost of the capital structure of every such ratio and then it has to
accept that alternative of capital structure where the cost of capital is minimum.
Therefore, cost of capital bears significance also in selecting the capital structure
of the business.
6.3 Calculating Cost of Capital
To implement a long term investment decision, a company usually collects
necessary fund from a long term source of funding. Long term loan capital,
priority share capital, general share capital and reserved income are major
sources of these long term funds. A public limited company usually collects
necessary fund for implementing long term investment opportunity or projects
from among these four sources. There are differences in expected income and
type of risk of the financer or investor from each of such sources. For example,
expected incomes of loan capital financer and general shareholders are not
equal. As the expected income of the investors or financers is considered as the
cost of capital of a company, costs of capital of different sources of the company
are different. These differences of the cost of capital indicate differences of the
investors' or financers' expected income rate and type of risk. Usually, as much
risky the financers think their investment to be,so much higher is their expected
« income. Now, a brief idea of costs of capital of different sources is furnished
S below:

70 Finance and Banking
a) Cost of Loan Capital
Every company usually collects loan for business from one or more than one
sources. For example, the main source of loan capital of small business
enterprises like grocery, hair cutting saloon, medicine shop etc. is the loan taken
from bank or other financing organization. Besides, big business organizations
or companies collect money by selling bond or debenture along with loan from
banks or other financing organizations. If financing is done by taking loan from
bank or a financing organization, calculation of cost of loan capital is very easy.
Here, rate of interest fixed by the bank is the cost of capital of the organization.
Suppose that Sonali Bank agreed to give a grocer a loan of 10 lac taka at 15%
interest. Here, the grocer's cost ofloan capital will be 15%. However, this rate is
considered as the pre-tax cost of capital of the enterprise. It is to mention that
taxable profit of a business enterprise is determined by deducting the amount of
interest of loan capital that the enterprise refunds from pre-tax profit. As a result,
the company has to give less tax. In this way, loan taken from bank or financial
organization brings advantage to the business enterprise. Considering this
opportunity, pre-tax loan capital has to be adjusted. Pre-tax profit is adjusted by
using the following formula:
Tax-adjusted cost of loan capital = Pre-tax cost of loan capital x (1-Tax rate)
If the 15% pre-tax cost of loan capital of the grocer is adjusted by 30% tax
rate the tax-adjusted cost of loan capital will be as below:
Tax-adjusted cost of loan capital = 15% (1-°30)
= 15%x°70
= 10'50%
b) Cost of Priority Share
Calculating the cost of priority shares is different from calculating the cost of
loan capital. Because there are some differences between loan capital and
priority shares. Loan capital providers usually get interest for certain terms. On
the other hand, priority shareholders get dividend at certain rate for any
indefinite time. However, the company is not always bound to give dividend to
the owners of priority shares. But, although the company is not bound to give
dividend, when it makes sufficient profit it usually gives dividend to the priority
shareholders. Therefore, it could be said that cost of priority shares depends on
the expected income of the shareholders.
2
S

Cost of Capital 71
If the ratio of the dividend of priority shares and the money obtained from selling
of shares is calculated, we find the cost of priority shares. With the formula it can
be calculated in the following way:

Cost of priority share = ™*P°""4 Bieidendlofahareholders /Money got from sale of shares X 100
Example: A company is considering to sell 10% priority shares of face value
1000 taka. The company expects to get 820 taka from selling of each share. Using
the given information, cost of those shares can be determined in the following way:

Cost of priority share = '°"/ga9 { ote: 10% of 1000 }
= 12.20% Sale value per share

Activity 1: A company issued 8% priority shares. If the face value of each share

is 100 taka and money got from selling of each share is 90 taka, determine the

cost of priority shares.

c) Cost of General Share Capital

You have known that a company collects capital by selling general shares in the

market. On the other hand, the company may finance from the accumulated

profit of its business. From all other sources, general share capital is different.

First, the company is not always bound to give dividend on equity capital like

other sources. Second, even it gives dividend, the amount or rate of dividend is

not always equal. For these reasons, determining the cost of general share capital

is different from determining the costs of other sources.

The shareholders of a company usually buy shares with the hope of doing profit

from dividend and increase of share price. As a result, cost of share capital

means the rate of expected income from the dividend of the investors or

shareholders and the profit gained from the increase of share price.

Some problem is found in determining the cost of general capital. First,

determining future expected dividend is a complex task, as the rate of dividend

does not remain fixed like that of priority shares. Second, guessing the future

income of a company and rate of dividend increase is another complex task.

For these complexities, there is no single way of determining the cost of general

share capital. Based on different guesses, different ways of calculating cost of
co capital are invented. Two easy ways of calculating cost of general share capital
§ are discussed below:

72 Finance and Banking
Zero Dividend Increase Method
It is an easy way of calculating cost of capital. In this method, it is supposed that
the company will announce the same dividend in future years as that it has given
in the current year. That means, there will be no change in the expected dividend
of the shareholders. For example, if a company gives 10 taka dividend per share,
it is supposed that the company will give 10 taka dividend to the shareholders in
future years also. In this method, if the dividend per share is divided by market
price of the share, we get cost of general shares. It is shown in formula in the
following:
Cost of general share capital = mits | /Share price
Here, Dividend, = Expected dividend at the end of the year
Share pricey = Present market price of shares
Example: The present market price of share of a company is 110 taka. The
company has announced 10 taka dividend per share this year. The cost of general
share capital of the company can be calculated in the following way:
Cost of general share capital = 110
= 0.0909 %
=9.09 %

Dividend Increase in Fixed Rate Method
In reality such companies are very rarely found where there happen no changes
in giving dividend in future years. Usually, companies give dividend in different
years in different rates. Dividends increase in fixed rate is such a method. Here,
it is supposed that a company does not give equal amount of dividend every year.
However, this method has some inferred conditions.
It is supposed in the conditions that the company's dividend will increase every
year and the rate of this increase will remain the same every year. For example,
if any company announces 10 taka dividend in the current year and the inferred
dividend increase rate is 10%, then -

After 1 year, the expected dividend will be 10 (1 + 0.10) = 11 taka

After 2 years, the expected dividend will be 11 (1 + 0.10) = 12.1 taka

After 3 years, the expected dividend will be 12.1 (1 + 0.10) = 13.31 taka

In this way, every year expected dividend is increased by 10%.
Cost of general share capital can be calculated by applying dividend increase in ,,
fixed rate method, with the use of formula, in the following way: s

Cost of Capital 73
Cost of general share capital = Dividend /Share price, + Rate of increase
Here, Dividend; = Dividend, (1 + Rate of increase)
Dividend) = Dividend of this year
Share pricey = Present market price of shares
Rate of increase = Rate of increase of dividend
Example: A company wants to determine the cost of general share capital. The
present market price of share of the company is 150 taka. The company gave 15
taka dividend per share in the year just ended. By analyzing previous records, it
is found that the company's dividend increases by 5% every year. The cost of
general share capital could be determined in the following way:
Cost of general share capital = pPinidend, /Share price, + Rate of increase} x 100
= {1501 +.05)7, «+ 05} x 100
= 15.5%
Activity 2: A company decides to give dividend at the rate of 12 taka at the end
of the current year and it expects that this dividend will increase at 10% in the
future years. If the present market price of share of the company is 125 taka,
determine the cost of capital.
d) Cost of Reserved Income
One of the sources of financing a company is its own reserved income. The
company does not distribute the whole amount of money that it makes profit as
dividend to the shareholders, but retains a portion of it in its own fund.
For example, if a company makes a profit of 50 lac taka in some year and out of
this money it keeps 25 lac taka in business, this 25 lac taka will be considered as
reserved income of the business. Thus, in the later time, financing is made from
this reserved income in implementing different investment opportunities or
projects. When financing is made from reserved income, it may seem to many
people that there is no cost of reserved income. But this concept is wrong.
Because although this reserved income apparently has no cost, yet it has an
opportunity cost.
Forma-10, Finance and Banking, Class-9,10

74 Finance and Banking
Before understanding the opportunity cost of reserved income, general concept
of the opportunity cost has to be understood. Suppose that your father has a
deposit of 10 lac taka in a bank. One day your brother told your father - father,
please give me the 10 lac taka which is kept idle in the bank because I shall run
a business. These words of your brother is not correct. Because the money is not
kept idle; the bank will give interest at a certain rate on this 10 lac taka. As a
result, if your father gives the money to your brother, he will not get the money
which he could earn as interest. Thus, the amount of money that is ceased to get
as interest is an opportunity cost to give it to your brother's business.
Similarly, if the income of a company is retained without distribution among the
shareholders, it has an opportunity cost from the perspective of shareholders. If
the company, not retaining as reserved income, distributed the profit among the
shareholders, the shareholders could earn extra income by investing it
elsewhere. Thus, if the company does not distribute its earned profit or income,
the shareholders are deceived of getting income from investing it elsewhere.
Here, being deceived of getting income from investing it elsewhere is termed as
opportunity cost of the reserved income. For example, if a company distributes
the whole amount of its earned profit among the shareholders and the
shareholders earn at the rate of 15% by investing it elsewhere, then 15% will be
the opportunity cost of company's reserved income.
6.4 Average Cost of Capital
Through the above methods we learned that costs of different sources of capital
are different. For example, the cost of loan capital is of one type, on the other
hand the cost of share capital is of another type. Then naturally question will be
raised that when a business enterprise uses some loan capital and at the same
time some share capital, what the cost of capital of the enterprise will then be.
The answer is: average of the all. The thing is described with the following
example:
Example: A company has 2000 million general share capital, 2000 million loan
capital and 1000 million priority share capital. The rate of interest of loan capital
is 10% and rate of dividend in priority shares is 8%. The market price of general
shares and priority shares are 255 taka and 110 taka respectively. The company
has given dividend 13 taka per share to the shareholders this year and the
dividend has increased at 4% from the rate the company gave earlier. If tax rate
is 40%, what is the average cost of capital of the company? FS
N

Cost of Capital 75
Solution:
Cost of loan capital = 10% x (1 — Tax rate) = 10% x .6 = 6%
Cost of priority shares = (Dividend per share + Market price of share)
=8+110=7.27%
Cost of general shares = Ba + a) ee + 04 = 9.30%
Now, we are to find out what portion of the total capital of the company is each
source of capital. From the given information, it is understood that in the total
capital, portion of general shares is (2000/5000) or 40%, portion of loan capital
is (2000/5000) or 40% and portion of priority shares is ( 1000/5000) or 20%. The
average cost of capital of the company will be calculated by multiplying the cost
of each source by the relevant percentage of these three and then doing total of
these multiplications.
That is, average cost of capital = (9.3 x .4) + (6x .4) + (7.27 x 2) = 7.57%
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. What the expected income of the investors is called in business?
A) Cost of Capital B) Rate of Profit
C) Interest of Investment D) Source of Financing
2. Which one of the following is one of the sources of long term financing?
A) Commercial Bank B) Gained Dividend
C) Business Loan D) Reserved Fund
3. What is the indirect advantage of cost of loan capital?
A) Increase of Profit B) Decrease of Interest
C) Reduction of Tax D) Increase of Fund
4. Importance is given in selecting capital mix —
i) Highest scope of loan
ii) Desirable loan policy
S iii) Least cost of capital

76 Finance and Banking
5. Nannu Mia starts pharmacy business with 2 lac taka loan at 12% _ interest.
If tax rate is 12%, what is his cost of tax-adjusted loan capital?
a) 10.56% b) 12%
c) 13.44% d) 24%
6. Shobnom Ltd. collects capital by selling 9% priority shares of 5000 taka
each at 10% reduction price. What is the cost of capital of Shobnom Ltd.?
a) 9% b) 10%
c) 11.11% d) 19%
Read the following stimulant and answer question numbers 7 and 8:
Total capital of Mr. Tutul's business is 10 million taka of which 60% is his own
finance and the rest is loan at 15%. Getting an investment opportunity of 20%
profit, he changes the capital structure. As a result, an opposite relation is creat-
ed between loan and own finance.
7. What is the loan capital of Tutul’s business at present?
a) 20 lac b) 40 lac
c) 60 lac d) 75 lac
8. In changing the capital structure, Mr. Tutul has considered —
i) Opportunity cost of financing
ii) Average cost of capital
iii) Least cost of capital
Which of the following is true?
a) i and ii b) i and iii
c) ii and iii d) i, ii and iii
Questions of Short Answers
1. What is cost of capital?
2. What is meant by expected loan policy?
3. What is meant by capital mix?
4. Write out the formula of cost of tax-adjusted loan capital.
5. Explain the opportunity cost of reserved income. S
N

Cost of Capital 77
Creative Questions
Paid capital of Priyonti Textiles Ltd. is 100 million taka, of which general share
capital of per share 10 taka is 50 million taka, 6% priority share capital is 30
million taka and the rest is loan capital at 8% interest. In 2012, the company
decides to give 1 taka dividend per share and to increase it every year at 10%.
Besides, it takes initiative to repay the loan by a large portion of profit.
a) What is the rate of interest called in business in the case of loan capital?
b) Explain — ‘As much the investment is risky, so much higher is the
expected income’.
c) Determine the average cost of capital in Priyonti Textiles Ltd.
d) Evaluate whether it will be profitable for the company to repay the loan
with the profit.
S
&

Chapter Seven
Share, Bond and Debenture
Share, Bond and Debenture issued by companies are taken as different tools of
investment for the investors. Each of these tools of investment used as sources
of investment has its individual features, advantages and disadvantages.
Expected income and risks of the investors from these tools of investment are
different. So, an investor should know about different sides of each of these tools
of investment before taking his decision for investment. In this chapter we shall
be able to know about these tools of investment from the perspectives of the
investors.
DHAKA STOCK EXCHANGE LTD >
bs
L =
i a = 1 a a
| -" ; iS : a emacs Tm a mt
= pe: - ea) "=

After reading this chapter we shall be able to:

e describe the concepts of share, bond and debenture.

e classify different types of shares.

e identify the comparative differences among different types of shares.

e describe the differences between bond and debenture.

©
e explain dividend policy. s

Share, Bond and Debenture 79
7.1 Introduction
In the previous chapters you have known about general share, priority share,
bond and debenture as sources of financing in business firms. These tools of
financing issued by companies are considered as sectors of investment for the
investors. An investor can invest his money in different sectors. Assume, your
father has 10 lac taka. He can, according to his wish, put it in a bank as fixed
deposit or he can invest it in one or more tools of investment - general share,
priority share, bond and debenture issued by companies. As sectors of
investment, each of these has its own special features. Expected income and
risks of the investors from each of these tools of investment are different. Special
features and advantages-disadvantages of each of these as sectors of investment
and their comparative evaluation have been discussed in the following
paragraphs.
7.2 Classification of Shares
Selling of shares is an important source of collection of fund and capital of a
public limited company. Shares are the small part of huge capital. Buying shares
can encourage the small investors. Thus small investors become the owner of the
company. To attract the investors, the company issues different types of shares.
Different kinds of share are described below.
7.2.1 General Share
The voluminous total capital of the company is divided into small units and
those are sold as shares. After gathering minimum capital with the approval of
the government, applications are invited from the public through giving an
advertisement in the newspapers containing a paper of statement with
information about the company. When applications submitted are great in a
number, shares are distributed by lottery. As a result, small investors also can
participate in investment by buying shares. They are indeed the owners of the
company. If the company earns profit, it is distributed among them as dividend.
The invested money of the shareholders is not refundable. However, if the liquid
money is needed, the shareholders can sell these shares in the secondary market
(such as: Dhaka Stock Exchange) and if the price is increased there, they get
profit. Usually, in the cases of profitable companies, shareholders get dividend
on regular basis. However, the rate of giving dividends is not pre-fixed. Giving
dividends is also not mandatory for the company. If no profit occurs, dividend is
cs not usually given. And even if the company makes profit, total amount of profit
% is not distributed as dividend. If the company wishes, it can give dividends at

80 Finance and Banking
any rate; besides it can give no dividend also. But in that case, if the company
cannot give dividend to the shareholders, the price of the shares is decreased in
the secondary market, which is not good for the company.

Buying shares is a risky investment for the investors. Share issuing companies
are not always bound to give dividends to the shareholders. If the company
cannot make sufficient profit in a year, no dividend is given to the shareholders
that year. Besides, when the company is closed, claims of the general
shareholders are met after meeting the dues of the creditors and priority
shareholders from the money got by selling the assets of the company. As a
result, if there is no money left after paying all dues, general shareholders may
have the risk of getting no money back for their investment.

For these reasons, investment in general shares is considered a comparctively
risky investment. However, as it is a risky investments so there is the also
possibility of making more profit from such shares. If an investor decides to
invest with clear knowledge and good calculations, general shares may become
a good source of investment for him. As a tool of investment, general shares
have some special features. Those are described below:

a) General shares provide ownership of the company to the share investors. As
a result, as an owner he has the legal rights on its profits earned and its
assets.

b) General shares give full authority to its owners to control the
company.Shareholders control the company by applying their voting right
in taking important decisions.

c) General shares are easily transferable. The investor according to his wish
can handover the shares at his ownership at any time.

As a tool of investment general shares have some advantages
and disadvantages:
Advantages

a) More Income: General shares can be a source of good income if an investor
invests his money with clear knowledge and good calculations. The income
earned by the investor from other tools of investment like priority shares,
bonds and debentures is fixed. But income from general shares is not fixed.
As a result, when the company earns more, the income of the investors also
increases. =

8

Share, Bond and Debenture 81
b) Limited Liability: The owners of the general shares jointly bear the
risks of the company. The total risks of an investor are at no
circumstances bigger than his invested money. For example, suppose an
investor has bought 100 shares of a company and the face value of each

share was 10 taka, so his total liabilities may be at best 10 x 100 = 10,000

c) taka.

Liquidity: General shares are well considered by the investors as liquid

money.The investor according to his wish can collect money at any time

by selling the shares at his possession. However, the liquidity of shares

of all companies is not equal. Usually, the liquidity of shares of big and

good companies is higher than that of other companies.
Disadvantages

a) Risk: Investment in general shares is comparatively risky. There are many
speculative investors in the share market. As a result, there is risk of
incurring loss if the investment is not guided by knowledge and good
calculations.

b) Rights in Profit and Property Distribution: In distribution of profits,
the company has to pay first all the liabilities payable to the owners of
priority shares, bonds and debentures; and the general shareholders have
rights on the remaining profits. In this way, when the company is closed,
after paying all the liabilities of the company with the money got by
selling its assets the shareholders will distribute among themselves the
rest of the money That is, in both the cases the rights of the owners of
priority shares, bonds and debentures get priority over the rights of the
general shareholders.

7.2.2 Priority Share

Investment in priority shares is considered a good tool of investment for those
investors who expect income at a certain rate from their investment in shares.
However, in our country priority shares are not found so much. Like that of
general shares priority shares also have some own features and characteristics:

a) Ownership: Priority shareholders are not considered as full owners of the

company. They are considered in between the owners of general shares and
the owners of bonds and debentures.
Forma-11 , Finance and Banking, Class-9,10

82 Finance and Banking
b) Transformability: For many priority shares, alternative options are there
to transform them into general shares. So, if the investor wishes, he can
change his status to an owner of general shares.
From the perspective of the investors, priority shares have some advantages and
disadvantages. The advantages and disadvantages of priority shares are
discussed below:

Advantages

a) Income at Certain Rate: The owners of priority shares get dividend at
some certain rate. As a result, the shareholders have less uncertainty of
income.

b) Priority on Profit Income: While giving dividends, owners of the priority
shares get priority over the owners of the general shares.

c) Claims on the Properties: At the time of liquidation or closure of the
company, claims of the owners of priority shares are first considered before
meeting the claims of the owners of general shares. But of course, their
claims are met after fulfilling the claims of the owners of debentures.

Disadvantages

a) Control: The priority shareholders do not have any voting right. So they

have no control over the company.

b) Limited Income: Priority shareholders’ rate of income is fixed. Hence, priority

shareholders do not get any share of extra profits made by the company.
Activity: Make a comparative evaluation between general shares and priority
shares from the perspectives of an investor.

7.2.3 Deferred Share
Defferred Shares are those shares for which owners receive dividends after
dividends have been distributed to all other classes of shareholders. In case of
company closure the demands of these shareholders are fulfilled at the end.
Generally company founders or promoters buy these types of shares. For this
reason, it is also called promoter share.

7.2.4 Right share

When old shareholders get priority in shares in the case of selling shares after the

forma—tion of company, these shares are called right shares. It means when in

later time the company sells shares to collect fund, and the old shareholders &
N

Share, Bond and Debenture 83
preserve the rights of buying those shares at that time, those sellable shares are
called right shares.

7.2.5 Bonus share

When company's undivided earnings are not given out in the form of dividends,
but are converted into free shares, these are called bonus share. Bonus shares are
shares given to the old shareholders in a proportionate rate.

7.3 Bond

Bond is another tool of investment for the investors. You have known earlier that
bond is a document or agreement through which a company gathers loan capital
from the investors. In our country most of the companies gather loan capital
through taking loans from banks or other financing organizations. As a result,
bond is not yet so much familiar in our country.

Bond has some particular features and characteristics of its own from the
perspectives of investors. Those are discussed below:

a) Mortgase: A company usually keeps its property or documents as
mortgase against bonds. As a result, if the company is not able to meet the
claims of the investors, they can realize their money by selling these
properties.

b) Date of Maturity: A bond issued by a company has a certain date of
maturity.On that date of maturity the investor gets back the written value
as mentioned in the bond.

c) Creditor: Bond owners are considered as the creditors of a company. So
they have no voting right.

d) Transformability: Many a time, a company may sell transferable bonds
to the investors. In such cases, if the bond owners wish, they can
transform the bonds at their possession to a certain number of general
shares as mentioned in the conditions of the debenture.

Advantages
a) Rate of Interest: As the rate of interest is fixed, the income of the
investors in bonds is fixed. As a result, they have less uncertainty of
b) income.However, sometimes the rate of interest may also change.
Less Risk: As immovable or other properties are kept as mortgage against
2} . . .
= bonds, the risk of investors in bonds decreases.
N

84 Finance and Banking
c) Rights on Profit and Properties: Bond owners are given interest on their
investment at the very first from the income of the company. On the other
hand, at the time of liquidation or closure of the company, claims of the
bond owners are first met before meeting the claims of others. That is, the
claims of bond owners get priority over the claims of the general and
priority shareholders.
Disadvantages
a) Less Income Rate: As there is less risk in bonds compared to general shares
and priority shares, the rate of income of the bond owners is less.
b) Control: As like that of priority shares, the bond owners do not have
voting right, they cannot involve themselves in the control of the company.
7.4 Debenture
Debenture is a bond without mortgase. So, most of the characteristics of bonds
prevail in debentures. Like bond and priority shares, debentures are also not
found so much in our country.
Compared to bond, its special feature is there is no mortgase against debenture.
As there is no mortgage against debentures, investors do not buy debentures of
all companies. Investors usually invest their money in debentures issued by big
renowned compames.
Advantages and Disadvantages of Debenture
As a tool of investment, some advantages and disadvantages of debentures are as
follow:
Advantages
a) Regular Income: Like that of bonds, an investor gets a regular income at
some fixed rate from debentures.
b) Fixed Term: Debenture is popular to many investors for its fixed term.
Disadvantages
a) No Security or Mortgage: Since there is no mortgage against a debenture,
it is risky.
b) Control: Like that of bonds, an owner of debenture does not have any
voting right. Hence, owners of debenture have no control in the
operation of the company. 0
Ss
N

Share, Bond and Debenture 85
c) Rights in Profit and Property: An owner of debenture enjoys an equal
status of general creditors. So, before paying interest to the owners of
debenture, interest of the bond owners is paid from the income of the
company. In this way, at the time of liquidation or closure of the company,
claims of the debenture owners are met after meeting the claims of the
bond owners.
7.5 Share Market of Bangladesh
As a capital gathering market, share market plays an important role in the
economy of any country. For this reason, general people or an investor expects
that share market is run smoothly. With the passage of time, the share market of
Bangladesh is gradually developing through different changes. Investment in
share market is a risky investment. Therefore, one should not invest there
without correct ideas about investment in share market. Here, there is risk of
getting loss with the possibility of making profit. Before investing in the share
market, an investor should analyze different information such as earnings per
share (EPS), type of business, management of the company, net asset value
(NAV), etc. by collecting the annual financial statement of the company. An
investment decision should be taken after gathering much knowledge about the
industry sector and economic condition of the country in addition to the
information of the companies. If necessary, advice may be taken from the market
experts. But at no condition, an investor should take investment decision on the
basis of rumour.
For well performance of activities of buying and selling of shares of
share-issuing companies and investors, an well-established organization is
needed. Such an organization is called stock exchange. Stock exchange helps
companies to gather fund from general people or organizations and arranges a
fixed place for the investors for buying and selling of shares. There are two stock
exchanges in Bangladesh:
1) Dhaka Stock Exchange Limited
2) Chittagong Stock Exchange Limited
In the two stock exchanges as mentioned above, general shares, mutual funds,
debentures, bonds, etc. of different companies are bought and sold. For the
convenience of the investors for taking investment decisions, the shares of the
companies scheduled in the stock market have been classified in different types
S as A, B, G, N, Z, etc.
N

86 Finance and Banking
Usually indexes are used to understand the trend or overall condition of the
share market. For example, in Dhaka Stock Exchange the following three
indexes are used, namely:

a) Dhaka Stock Exchange Broad Index (DSE Broad Index)

b) DSE Shariah Index

c) DSE 30 Index
In this way, in Chittagong Stock Exchange three indexes are used, namely:

a) CSE All Shares Price Index

b) CSE Selective Categories Index and

c) CSE 30 Index
Indexes of share market rise and fall everyday and every time. These rise and fall
provide information about the trends and directions of the market. The rises and
falls of these indexes depend on the rises and falls of share prices of the
companies scheduled in the share market. If the prices of most of the shares
increase, the indexes increase; again if the prices of most of the shares decrease,
the indexes decrease.
7.6 System of Investment in Shares
Investors can invest in share markets in two ways:

a) Through Primary Market

b) Through Secondary Market.
a) Primary Market: Primary market means that market where a company
announces the initial public offering (IPO) for selling its shares. When a
company sells its shares in the market for the first time, that offer for selling is
called IPO. If an investor buys shares by participating in the IPO offered by any
company, it is considered that he has bought primary shares.
b) Secondary Market: After selling shares for the first time by a company to
the investors, the investors can buy and sell shares among themselves. The
market where investors buy and sell shares among themselves is called a
secondary market.
7.7 Dividend and Dividend Policy
The gains or profit of a company is the income deserved by the shareholders. So,
the gains or profit is distributed among the shareholders. Usually, a company .,
does not distribute the full amount of gains or profit among the shareholders. s

Share, Bond and Debenture 87
It retains a portion of the gains or profit for financing in the affairs of business in
future, and distributes the rest amount among the shareholders. The portion of
gains or profit which is distributed among the shareholders is called dividend. A
company can give dividend usually in two ways:

a) Cash Dividend

b) Stock Dividend or Bonus Share

a) Cash Dividend: The dividend which is paid in cash money is called cash
dividend. For example: suppose, that a company announces 10% cash dividend.
An investor holds 500 shares of that company of each share priced 10 taka. That
investor will get 10% x 5000 or 500 taka as cash dividend.

b) Stock Dividend: Many a time, a company gives stock dividend instead of
cash dividend or stock dividend side by side with cash dividend. The company
usually gives stock dividend in proportion with shares issued at present. As a
result, the number of shares of the company increases. Suppose, that a company
has at present 10 million shares of face value 10 taka. The company announces
50% or 2:1 portion of stock dividend. As a result, if an investor has 500 shares
at present, after getting the dividend the number of his shares will be 750. In this
way, total shares issued by the company will be 15 million.

Dividend Policy

A company has to take dividend-related various decisions every year, for
example, what portion of profit will be given as dividend, whether cash dividend
or stock dividend will be given, etc. For taking these decisions, every company
has particular policy which may give directions to give dividend. These policies
are called dividend policies. Usually, three types of dividend policies are found,
such as:

a) Fixed Money Dividend Policy: According to this policy, every year equal
amount of money is given as dividend. For example, if a company gives 10
taka dividend per share every year, it will be called fixed dividend policy.
Whatever more amount of money a company may earn, it gives same
amount of dividend as was given in previous years. However, in this system
the amount of dividend usually does not decrease.

Dividend Payment Ratio Policy: According to this policy, a company

b) decides what portion of its profit it will give as dividend. As per the

FS decision, every year the company gives dividend proportionately.
N

88 Finance and Banking
For example, suppose, a company decides to give at 50% proportional rate.
As aresult, if in one year the company earns 20 million taka, then it will give
the shareholders 20 million x 50% or 10 million taka as dividend.
Fixed Dividend along with Additional Dividend Policy: This is an ideal
c) dividend policy for those companies which have no fixed or regular income.
According to this policy, a company gives an additional dividend every year
in addition to a minimum fixed dividend. As this dividend policy is much
flexible than other dividend policies, many companies adopts this policy.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. A source of investment of capital —
i. Share
ii. Bond
iii. Debenture
Which of the following is true?
a. i and ii
b. i and iii
c. ii and ili
d. i, ii and iii
2. Which one is a disadvantage of priority shareholders?
a. Priority on profit
b. Limited liability
c. Limited income
d. Income in a fixed rate
3. In how many types the shares of companies scheduled in the stock
exchange are classified?
a. 2 b.3 c.4 d. 5 20
Ss
NX

Share, Bond and Debenture 89
Read the following stimulant and answer question numbers 4
and 5:
Mr. Habib bought shares of 'Bandhab' company being attracted on seeing its first
ever offer for selling the shares. After few years, as he falls in financial crisis, he
is willing to go to market to sell them.
4. Where did Mr. Habib collect ‘Bandha’ company’s share from?
a. Head office of the company b. Securities and Exchange Commission
c. Primary Market d. Secondary Market
Questions of Short Answers
1. In what policy dividend is given a less amount than the income?
2. For what kind of activity of the business, a portion of the profit is reserved
for use in future?
3. Which is used to understand the overall condition of a share market?
4. As what sort of market a share market plays its role in the economy
of a country?
Creative Questions
1 After retirement from government service, Shahinur gets a few lac taka in
hand.He is willing to invest this money in companies. He wants to be such an
investor so that he will not have to get any interest and can participate in
taking important decisions of the company. So he has collected information of
the activities of 'Surjadoy' and 'Soikat' companies, and now he is doing
analysis of the information.
a. Whom do the owners of debenture enjoy equal status of?
b. By paying which kind of dividend the number of shares of a
company increases? Explain.
c. Which information of ‘Surjadoy’ and ‘Soikat’ companies is Shahinur
analyzing? Explain.
d. What type of investor you think would be wise for Shahinur to be? Analyze.
Forma-12, Finance and Banking, Class-9,10

Chapter Eight
Currency, Bank & Banking
By reading this chapter, students will learn about the history of currency, its
evolution and present condition. Moreover, they will also know about the uses
and necessity of currency and the relation between currency and banking.
After reading this chapter students will also be able to improve their idea about
creation of bank, banking system and bankers as a result of multiple uses of
currency. In the addition to a brief discussion on the present banking system of
Bangladesh and its history, of banking business and evaluation has also been
discussed in this chapter
{Sh «fs kt Sa
tas fae s LOR 8 4 . ci
i ss Rae - a ; eases . : ae \ z WES trey
phaaise . > fae a. aa ee Ss “|
oo ipienerang Roa "hd She es
®
After reading this chapter we shall be able to:
e explain currency and its the history of currency.
e toidentify relationship between Bank, Banking and Banker. ~
e describe the history of bank business and its evolution. s

Currency, Bank & Banking 91
8.1 Currency and Its History:
The necessities of man, his activities and social bonding had increased since the
creation of man and the dawn of civilization. At the beginning, the necessities of
men were very limited and they met those necessities by exchanging additional
commodities after meeting his demand. This "exchange of commodities" is
known as Barter System. In course of time, with the increase of human
knowledge and intelligence the human activities specially the ‘Barter System!
expanded much and along with them human necessities started to increase. The
horse carriage, boats and in later times the ships made an important contribution
behind it. After the removal of communication problems, the efforts of
collecting the necessary commodities were increasing from different
geographical positions. From village to village, from village to town and from
country to country, the necessity of the medium of exchange in case of
exchanging commodities were felt intensely. Besides the medium of exchange,
the piling of deposits and the measure of value of commodities had played a
great role for the creation of currency.
The history of currency is very amazing. It is seen from the pages of history that
coins of different types and shapes were used in different countries in different
times. In different ages the uses of kowri, the teeth of shark, the teeth of elephant
(ivory), stone, pearl, burnt clay, bronze, silver and gold were used as coins (as
the medium of exchange).
> Ga Esy i > £
a eT oe
Pictures: Coins of different times made of bronze, pearls and the teeth of elephant.
The uses of metal coins did not last for a long time because of some difficulties
in their uses, carrying, transportation and other necessities. The use of metal
coins increased with the increase of world population. So the supply of metal
became short; moreover because of the uses of gold and silver jewelries and
other objects, use of the paper money was introduced in the nineteenth century.
o Though at present metal coins are being used with the paper money, yet the uses
S of metal coins are gradually becoming limited.

92 Finance and Banking
Use of paper money has greatly increased because of availability of papers, easy
carriability and compatibility to different types of security measures.
8.2 What is Currency?
On the basis of function, by the term 'currency' we mean a medium of exchange
which is acceptable to all and which works as a scale in measuring values and
medium of savings. From this definition, we can understand that currency has
the following functions:
e It works as the medium of exchange. Currency can be used for any kind
of transaction. For example: You spend money to buy a book. Here the
currency works as the medium of exchange; this is the main function of
currency.
e It works as the means of savings. It means that when you want to save for
future, you can make this savings through money. If there is no existence
of money, your savings would very difficult.
e It works as the measure of values. It means, it is a function of currency to
determine the price of economic goods or service. Because of existence
of money, we can easily determine the daily wages of a labour; we can
determine the price of book as Tk.100 and the price of 1 kg rice as TK.25.
In these ways the economic activities become easier for us.
8.3 Relationship between Currency and Bank:
The social bonding and economic activities increased with the development of
civilization; as a result transaction among man and activities of exchange also
increased. Just after the introduction of currency, the necessity of banking
system was needed. Hence, currency is called the mother of banking system.
From the very start of evolution of banking system to till now, the bank has been
using the currency as the main element of its business.
oo
Ss
N

Currency, Bank & Banking 93
4 4 4
Mia
a a 2
t + t
Figure 8.1: The diagram shows how a bank invests money collected from the
investors and depositors
A bank forms its deposit by collecting surplus money from people as savings.
For depositing money, the depositor is offered a fixed rate of interest or profit.
The bank earns profit by lending these deposits as loan charging higher rate of
interest to the borrowers. As the bank cannot run without currency, so on the
uses of currency is limited without the bank.
8.4 Bank, Banking & Banker:
Bank:
It is difficult to give a definite account of the origin of the term ‘Bank’. The
literary meaning of the ‘Bank’ is the storage of particular things, treasury,
andeven this term is used to mean a long table. According to some economists,
the term ‘Bank’ is originated from the ancient Latin words Banco, Banak,
Banque, Bancus etc. According to the followers of this opinion the Latin
meaning of the term ‘Bank’ is bench or long table used for sitting on, for which
support is found in the pages of history.
In the economic history of Middle Age, it is found that some people of the
Lombardy Street in Italy used to run the business of depositing, lending and
borrowing money using a long tool or bench. So, more supports are found on the
co Latin origin of the term 'Bank’.
~J
N

94 Finance and Banking

To give the definition of bank we can say that bank is a financial institution

which collects the deposits from people against interest and makes investment

for earning profit and is bound to return the money to the depositors at the

moment they ask or after a fixed time.

Activity : Students will act out in group to show bank and banking and the role}
of bankers.

Banking:

According to Oxford Dictionary, "Bank is a safe organization for depositing,

withdrawing money and giving loan". Therefore, the term ‘Bank’ gives the

elaborate concept about the banking activities. It means all the legal activities of

a bank are known as banking.

The main activities of banks, also known as banking, are mentioned

bellow:

e Deposit collection from the people: People, whose income is greater than
their expenses, are the potential depositors. Bank collects deposit from
them.

e Loan sanction: Banks sanction loans when the capital provided by the
owners/ intrepreneurs is less than the capital necessary for any business
firm. Banks sanction loan to overcome this deficiency.

e Discounting and approving Bills of Exchange: Another activity of bank
is discounting the receivables and approving the bills payable.

e Finance in foreign trade and in Letter of credit: Exporters and
importers are required to convert home currency into foreign currency and
foreign currency into home currency. This important activity is performed
by a bank. Again through the letter of credit, a bank ensures the exporter to
repay the amount of bill on behalf of the importer. It is also a function of
the bank to certify the bill of exchange in favour of importers.

e Money transfer: It is really difficult to transfer money from one city to
another, especially between two countries due to the presence of different
currencies. Banks carry out this task in an easy way against a minimum
cost.

e Protection of valuables and documents: Theft or dacoity might happen
when someone keeps valuable items such as gold jewellery with hm/her.

S

Currency, Bank & Banking 95
e Asset management and financial advice: It is also the responsibility of
banks to provide different advice regarding business upon requests from
clients and manage clients assets such as to collect rent on behalf of the
client.
Banker:
People directly involved in the banking business are called bankers. The two
words 'Bank' and 'Banker' are essentially interrelated. Since running a bank or
banking activities is not possible on one's own, banking business is run by
people with education and training on banking.
8.5 History and Evolution of Banking:
From the first light of civilization, man used to exchange their excess goods to
fulfill daily necessities. The custom of exchanging commodities existed for a
long time. At present Barter system exists in a small scale. After introduction of
money, banking activities began to start from the necessity of business,
transaction and protection of money. In 5000 B.C banking system took place for
the first time. then Babylonian Civilization, Roman Civilization, Chinese
Civilization, Greek Civilization continued to contribute to the development of
banking till 400 B.C. In India "The Hindustan Bank" was established in 1,700
A.D as a modern bank. After that in 1935 "Reserve Bank of India" was
established as the guardian of all Indian banks. After the partition of Bengal,
during Pakistan regime in 1948 the central bank of Pakistan the "State Bank of
Pakistan" was established, and this bank lead the expansion of banking business
and commercial institutions of East & West Pakistan.
In the very beginning of our independence (which was earned through liberation
war) on 26 March, 1972 (Effected from 16 December, 1971) the 'Bangladesh
Bank; the central bank of Bangladesh was established by president's ordinance.
After the liberation war, 1090 branches of 12 banks were in Bangladesh. Just
after our independence, banking business faced a huge crisis because all the
owners of the banks were non- Bengali and all the head offices of the banks
except 'Eastern Banking Corporation’ & 'Eastern Mercantile Bank’ were in West
Pakistan.
Bangladesh Bank started its role of guardianship as central bank in currency
circulation, credit control & banking business and nationalized all banks for
& which the 6 banks were created. Those are Sonali Bank, Agrani Bank, Janata
= Bank, Rupali Bank, Pubali Bank and Uttra Bank.

96 Finance and Banking
In the next time gradually all the banks were denationalized except Sonali and
Agrani Bank. In the 70's it was realized that the nationalized banks cannot play
its expected role. Denationalization started in the 80's. After the decade of eighty
in the 90's permission was given to establish few new banks in the private sector.
At present 4 government, 4 specialized, more than 30 private banks are
running business in Bangladesh.
Exercise

Multiple Choice Questions:
1. With the evolution of civilization why human beings needed to exchange

products with one another?

A) to meet the demand B) to strengthen social bondage

C) to transport products D) to develop communication system
2. What is the reason behind introduction of paper money?

i) an alternative use of metal

ii) long existence of metal coin

iii) scarcity of metal
Which one of the following answers is correct?
A) iand ii B) i and iii
C) _ iiand iii D) i, ii and iii
Short Answer Questions:
1. Where did the word ‘Bank’ originate from?
2. What is Letter of credit (LC)?
3. For whom the function of money transfer is important?
Creative Questions:
During a light conversation with her grandmother, Seema came to know that in
the past, people would exchange their products with each other according to
their needs, but it was not possible to exchange all kinds of products.
1. People on those days would exchange products to —

i) strengthen their social bondage

ii) meet their demand

iti) exchange additional product e

Ss
N

Currency, Bank & Banking 97
Which of the following statements is correct?

A) i and ii B) i and iii

C) ii and iii D) i, ii and iii

2. Through which problems of barter trade is removed?

A) invention of ship

B) introduction of metal coins

C) improvement of geographical connectivity

D) increase of people’s everyday demand

Forma-13, Finance and Banking, Class-9,10

Chapter Nine
Banking Business and Types
Students will have an idea about formation of banks, their scopes, objectives and
management system from this chapter. A brief concept on different types of
banking system has been disseminated here by classifying them. Besides, an
idea of governmental and non-governmental banking management has also been
given in a limited scope. This chapter will also be useful to have a primary
concept of banking.
req Sonali Bank Limited = . :
a mm y a >
a] h, ie i Fi oe =
b= E r _ Th _ =
Picture: Transaction at a bank
After reading this chapter we shall be able to:
e describe the objectives of banks.
e identify the principles of banks.
e analyze the classifications of bank.
e recognize the differences between governmental and non-governmental
8

Banking Business and Types 99
9.0 Introduction
Size, structure, objectives and formation of banking system have changed a lot
with the progress of time. Banking has passed through different phases of
change namely traditional banking, modern banking and electronic banking.
Besides, in a competitive market, innovative banking products and services are
being provided to adapt with the needs of the era and clients.
9.1 Objectives of Bank:
Objectives of banking differ from one another due to the difference of groups
involved with banking. We will now discuss the objectives of banks from
the different viewpoints.
(A) Objectives of banks from the owner’s and managing authority’s perspective
(B) Objectives of banks from government’s and state’s perspective
(C) Objectives of banks from the client’s perspective
(A) Objectives from the owner’s and managing authority’s perspective:

1. Investment of fund and earning profit: Making proper investment of the
money collected from savings is one of the main objectives of a bank. To
achieve this objective, share holders have to earn anticipated rate of profit.
Every investment has opportunity cost, and at least this amount of profit
should be earned. Otherwise the bank's objective remains unachieved.

2. Achieving goodwill: If goodwill can be achieved through banking
efficiency, image of the owners is protected.

3. Participation in development: By investing in different sectors, banks
actively participate in the development of production and national income
of the country. In this way, owners become successful in their investment.
Providing service to the client is another objective of banks.

4. Social contribution: Spending a portion of profit in social development
and social activities through the different social activities is one of the
objectives of bank.

(B) Objectives from government and state’s perspective

1. Cirulation of notes and currency : The central bank issues notes and
currencies. Bangladesh Bank issues currencies as the central bank of
Bangladesh. Bank cheqes can be used as a medium of exchange and an

20 alternative to currency, which helps the government's job of currency
8 circulation.

100 Finance and Banking
2. Capital Formation: A bank collects scattered savings of the society
through deposit collection and provides loans to large industries.
Motivating people for savings and forming capital is one of the main
objectives of the banks.

3. Investment and Industrialization: Before sanctioning any loan, a bank
analyzes the prospect of business of the project. The government keeps on
presenting priority sectors to the people and the nation. Banks participate
with the government in achieving this objective through sanctioning loan
on priority basis.

4. Controlling Money Market: Both the government and the central bank
always control money market in order to control inflation. However, the
central bank alone cannot do this alone. Commercial banks extend their
support to the government and the central bank.

5. Employment Generation: Eradication of unemployment problem is one
of the objectives of banking sector. The projects in which banks finance
can create employment. For example, by making investment in a labour
intensive project instead of capital intensive project, a bank can create
employment and thus can help the government.

(C) Objectives from the client’s perspective:

1. Deposit: Banks create deposit by collecting small savings of their clients.No
interest is offered in current account but lots of services are offered. In a
Saving Account, a client receives 5% to 7% interest and deposits can be
withdrawn at any time. In a Fixed Deposit Account, interest rate is 12% to
13% but if deposit is withdrawn before the expiry of the term, this account
will not be profitable. Duration of Fixed Deposit Account is any period
starting from one month. Providing support to the depositor to form any
amount of deposit is one of the basic responsibilities of banks.

2. Security: Giving security to the client's valuables is another objective of
bank.In our society keeping these valuables at our home is not secured.

3. Advisor and Consultant: Before sanctioning the loan, a bank evaluates the
business prospect of the project. Profitability of the business is as important
for the loan applicant as it is for the banks. Professional efficiency of the
bank strengthens the client's concept of the profitability of the business. A
bank sometimes acts as an advisor when any expansion or modernization is
tequired for the business. Various other financial advice is provided by
banks as well. ES

Banking Business and Types 101
4. Representative and Trustee: In exchange of receiving value, a bank
acts as a representative/trustee to its clients. Banks take part in different
business contract on behalf of clients, sign the bill of exchange and
collect house rent.

5. Money Transfer: Banks transfer money from one place to another
within and outside the country according to clients' requirements.

6. Development and easy of standard of living: Banks introduce various
new and innovative products and services to improve people's standard
of living. Using credit cards buyers can purchase products without cash
for a specified time period. Cash can be received 24 hours a day by using
ATM machine. Now-a-days 24 hours banking activities are going on in
every big city all over the country. This service has been made even
easier through mobile banking and internet banking.

9.2 Structure of a Bank:

According to the regulation of the central bank, a private bank can be established

with minimum 2 and maximum 13 directors. But to set up a bank own by a

public limited company, the minimum number of members is 7 and maximum is

unlimited. Establishment of a commercial bank is not possible in Bangladesh
without approval of Bangladesh Bank. If any bank conducts business in

Bangladesh without approval of Bangladesh Bank by the names of cooperative

bank or any other name, it is considered illegal.

9.3: Principles of Banking Business

Banking is a risky business. Risk cannot be avoided without establishing a

dependable and efficient management system. Every bank should follow some

fundamental principles to avoid the risk which arises in using others’ money in
banking, which are stated below:

1. Principle of Security: An important principle in banking is ensuring the
security of client's money and the money that has been given as loan. Before
sanctioning loan, a bank should evaluate the financial solvency and honesty
and then keep security against the loan.

2. Principle of Profitability: Earning sufficient amount of profit is another
principle of banks. A bank provides lower rate of interest to the depositor but
charges a higher rate of interest to the borrowers. The difference between

%0 these two rates is the main portion of the profit percentage of banking.
Ss
N

102 Finance and Banking
3. Liquidity Principle: When a depositor wants to withdraw money from
bank account, the bank is bound to pay the amount in cash. Again, if the
bank keeps a maximum portion of deposited money as liquid, it will lose
its investment capacity and cannot earn profit. So, proper banking
business means maintaining a reasonable amount of liquid asset so that
the bank can satisfy both its depositor and the borrower. It is one of the

most important principles of bank.

4, Financial Solvency: Financial solvency is urgently required to run the
business properly: Due to the lack of financial solvency, a bank may
become bankrupt.. Principle of financial solvency is a very important
principle in banking.

5. Principle of Efficiency: Success of business mostly depends on the
efficiency of board, officers and staffs involved in the management. In
this competitive world efficiency is a very important principle.

6. Principle of Providing Services: Providing different kinds of services to
clients is an important responsibility. Development of bank is possible
through these kinds of services for the clients.

7. Principle of Publicity: Expansion of business is possible by adopting
attractive, understandable and suitable advertisement and publicity.
Through publicity, a bank can exhibit different ways of banking services.

8. Principle of Secrecy: An important way of earning trust of the clients is
keeping all information of the clients secret. So it is an important principle
banks to keep privacy.

9. Principle of Goodwill: Creation of Goodwill through efficiency, secrecy,
services is also an important principle.

10. Principle of Investment : The principle that is followed as the rerms of
investment (size of investment, duration,interest rate etc.) is called the
investment principle. Successes of banks mostly depend on appropriate
principle of investment.

11. Principle of Development : Besides making profits, another important
principle of banks is to help and support in the development of economy
of the country.

12. Principle of Objective : Before giving any loan, a bank analyzes the
productivity and profitability of proposed projects. In this situation, it is a
noteworthy principle of a bank to refuse loans in the cases of &
unproductive and uncertain projects. “

Banking Business and Types 103

13. Principle of Economy: High profit with low cost is an important principle
of a bank. Profit maximization is achieved through cost minimization.

14. Principle of Trust : A precondition of effective banking business is
clients’ trust on bank. To earn this trust, banks follow different principles
of honesty and trust. Depending on this trust, people keep their money
and valuable assets (locker service) in the bank.

15. Principle of Cautiousness : It is essential for a bank to use the pronciple
of cau-tiousness in the case of investment so that uncertainty and risk can
be avoided.

16. Principle of Specialization: In case of foreign trade, loan sanction, note
issue etc banks follow the principle of specialization. This increases
functional, efficiency and quality.

9.4 Classification of Bank:
On the basis of structure, formation, ownership, registration, region and control,
banking business can be classified as per the chart number 9.2:
A) Structural Classification:
1. Unit Banking: If banking activities are operated only in a specified location,
it is called Unit Banking. Unit banking has no branch. In Bangladesh, there is no
tradition of unit banking.
2. Branch Banking: If a bank functions by opening one or more branches
within or outside the country under a head office, it is called branch banking.
The branches have no separate entity and they function under directives and
control of the head office. For example: Sonali Bank Limited, Janata Bank
Limited etc.
3. Chain Banking: When each branch developed through joint ownership
operates on the basis of individuality following centralized instructions, it is
called Chain Banking. The main objective of chain banking is to serve each
other's interest.

A) Structural] Classification D) Classification by Ownership

1. Unit Bank 1. Government Bank

2 Branch Bank - Lethae satk

3. Chain Bank :

4 Group Bank 4. Autonomous Bank

co : 5. Partial Bank
S

104 Finance and Banking

B) Functional Classification 6. Foreign Ownership Bank

1. Central Bank E) Regional Classification

2. Commercial Bank 1. Regional Bank

3. Agricultural Bank 2. National Bank

4. Industrial Bank 3. International Bank

5. Cooperative Bank F) Classification by Registration

6. Investment Bank 5 pomestic Bank

: . Foreign Bai
gd. Beonatigs Baik G) Classification by Specialized Clients
8. Mortgage Bank
3 1. Labour Bank

9. Transportation Bank 2. Women bank

10. Small and Cottage Industrial Bank | | 3. school Bank

11. Import-Export Bank 4. Consumer Bank

C) Classification By Business H) Classification by Control

Organization 1. State-controlled Bank

1. Sole Proprietorship Bank 2. Partial-controlled Bank

2. Partnership Bank 3. Market-controlled Bank

3. Joint Stock Bank 1) Banks on Basis of Religious Ideology

4. Cooperative Bank

5. State Bank

Diagram: 9.2: Classification of Bank

4. Group Banking: When two or more banks join together and are directed and
controlled under a holding company, this banking system is called Group
Banking. In such a bank, a larger bank purchases shares of a weaker bank. As a
result the weaker bank becomes the subsidiary bank of the larger one.
B) Functional Classification
1. Central Bank: Central bank is the custodian, regulator and director of all
other banks. It is the life-blood of the whole banking system. It is mainly created
to regulate money market. Generally circulation of currency, supply of money
and special power of regulating loan are the main functions of central bank. In
Bangladesh ‘Bangladesh Bank’, in England 'Bank of England; in Japan 'Bank of
Japan’ play the role of central banks.
2. Commercial Bank: The bank which collects people's money as deposits and
invests it as loan for earning profit is called a commercial bank. For example:
National Bank Limited, Dutch-Bangla Bank Limited etc.
3. Agricultural Bank: The bank which provides various term-loans and other
benefits to the farmers for their agricultural development is called Agriculture S
bank. »

An Introduction to Commercial Banks 113

8) Employment Generation: A purpose of commercial banks is to create

opportunities for new employment by increasing economic
activities.

9) Mitigating Gap between Rich and Poor: Through collecting deposit
and offering loans, commercial banks enable participation of all class of
people in economic activities, which help mitigate economic gaps
between rich and poor classes of the society.

10) Forming a Saving-tendency: Another purpose of commercial banks is to
create a saving tendency among people.

11) Security: Ensuring security of money, valuable ornaments of people is
one of the purposes of commercial banks.

12) Economic Stability: Another purpose of commercial banks is to ensure
economic stability by meeting the demand of funds in the market through
providing loans and by working in line with the central bank's loan policy.

13) Development of Trade and Industries: An important purpose of
commercial banks is to develop trade and industries by providing all-out
support in import and export.

14) Improving Standard of Living: Improving standard of living by
ensunng overall economic development is also a goal of commercial
banks.

10.2 Functions of Commercial Banks

As a monetary organization, banks provide various kinds of service in industrial,

commercial, social and economic development of a country. We can divide the

functions of banks into two categories:
A) Main Functions
B) Special and Other Functions.

A) Main Functions

1) Receiving Deposit and Payment of interest: One of the main functions of
commercial banks is to accept the savings of the holders in various types of
deposits, such as current, savings and fixed deposit. A bank pays interests to
the holders of fixed and savings accounts on their deposited amounts in
certain rates. No interest is allowed for the current accounts but various
other facilities are offered to them.

Forma-15, Finance and Banking, Class-9,10

114 Finance and Banking

2) Creation of Capital: Banks create capital by accumulating all separate
savings of people through different accounts.

3) Granting Loans and Charging Interests: Banks offer loans to the
borrowers from the deposited money of their clients in various terms.
Granting loan is an important function of a bank. Because by providing
loans, a bank facilitates productive economic activities on one hand, and
on the other hand, the amount of interest received from the borrowers is
its main source of income. A bank charges higher rate of interest to its
borrowers than the rate of interest it offers to the clients. It is the real
interest which is a part of banks opertional income.

4) Creation of Loan Deposit: When a bank sanctions a loan to the
customer, a deposit account is opened in his name and the amount is
credited to his account. Then, the amount of money withdrawn by the
borrower is debited from that account. In this way banks create deposits
by sanctioning loans.

5) Creating Medium of Exchange: Banks use cheque, bill of exchange,
certificate, bank draft, pay order, debit card, credit card etc. as payment
mechanism and medium of financial transaction.

6) Issue Notes: Notes are usually not issued by commercial banks but by
central bank. But commercial banks issue notes in indirect forms. For
example, if you have a deposit of taka | lac in a saving account of Sonali
Bank and if you buy a computer costing taka 60 thousand, you can make
the payment through a check from your account. Thus, sometimes bank
cheques serve as a medium of exchange as an alternative to notes issued
by the government.

7) Service as Trustee: Commercial banks serve as trustee of properties of
their customers and issue solvency certificates to them.

8) Assistance in Import and Export: An importer needs to convert local
currency into foreign currency while an exporter needs to convert foreign
to local currency, which is one of the functions of banks. Moreover, banks
arrange for payment to the exporters on behalf of the importers through
letter of credits (LC) in international business. Letter of Credit plays an
important role in international trade by creating financial and business
connections between importers and exporters. Providing operative
assistance and suggestions in import and export related functions are S

An Introduction to Commercial Banks 115
representative jobs of commercial banks.

9) Service as a Government Treasury: Central bank or any other selected

bank serves as the treasury of the government.

10) Change Bill of Exchange : Banks change bills of exchange by barter in

favour of its clients to support business and commerce.
B) Special and Other Functions

1) Investment of Capital: Besides disbursing loans, banks invest capital in
industrial plants and commercial organizations, which help increase gross
national production and capital mobilization.

2) Role in Economic Growth: Banks help a country's overall economic
growth, especially development of trade, commerce, transportation,
communication, housing and education etc.

3) Money Transfer: Banks transfer money inside and outside the country
through their mediums of exchange.

4) Security of Money: Banks ensure security of public money by keeping
deposits. Besides, clients can also protect ornaments, documents of their
properties in banks by using locker service.

5) Guidance: Offering various types of business guidance when sought by
the clients and management of their properties, for example, collecting
house rents are also included in the functions of banks.

6) Employment Generation: As a monetary organization, banks help in
employment generation and indirectly create new employments by
supplying loans in a country's economy.

7) Loan Regulation: As the regulator, central bank regulates supply of
money and loans by expanding and contracting loans given by the
commercial banks. This is vital for ensuring economic stability and
regulating inflation of money.

8) Agricultural Development: Banks facilitate agricultural development by
offering loans and other assistance in this sector.

9) Industrial Development: Banks assist industrial plants by offering
long-term loans.

10) Regional Development: Regional development is also supported by

S banks as they have network of branches in different areas of the country.
N

116 Finance and Banking

10.3 Sources of Funds of Commercial Banks

Commercial banks usually collect funds from the following sources, some of which

are external sources and some of which are internal sources.

1) Paid Capital: First and foremost source of banks is paid capital. The
capital is provided by the owners for joint stock company, and in cases of
joint capital company, capital is formed by issuing shares.

2) Reserve fund: At the time of declaring dividend, a certain portion of the
profit is set aside every year which is called reserve fund. This is fund is
used as capital in future.

3) Deposits: Public deposits are a powerful source of funds to a commercial
bank.There are three types of bank deposits (i) current deposits (ii) saving
deposits and (iii) time deposits, which the clients do not withdraw all at
once. So, the bank can earn more capital by using this money as loans or
business investment.

4) Borrowing: Commercial banks in times of emergency borrow loans from
the central bank or from other commercial banks of the country. They can
also raise funds by issuing security bonds, credit certificates etc.

Activity : Which is the most popular commercial bank of your locality? Mention

some reasons of that.

10.4 Sources of Income of Commercial Banks

Commercial banks earn money through different businesses, which are detailed

below

1) Interest on Loans: Commercial banks lend money to the industrialists,

traders or consumers, and charge interest on the loans. This is their main
source of their mcome.

2) Investment: Commercial banks earn profit by investing in profitable

sectors like shares, issuing letters of credit, government security etc.

3) Bill Discount: Commercial banks also earn money by making discounted
payment of bills of exchange in advance.

4) Commission Received from Bank draft, Traveller's cheque etc.:
Commercial banks earn a big amount of money by charging commissions
on bank drafts, traveller's cheques etc. ~

Ss
N

An Introduction to Commercial Banks 117
5) Correspondence: Commercial banks also earn money through charges
teceived by offering various correspondence services for the clients at

their request.

6) Rent of Lockers: People can use lockers of commercial banks for
safekeeping of their valuable documents, ornaments etc. by paying
certain charges, which is also a source of income of the commercial
banks.

7) Agency Service: Commercial banks perform numerous agency services
on behalf of their clients, such as collection and payment of cheques or
bills etc. Commercial banks charge commission for such services which
earn income for them.

8) Brokerage in Purchase or Trade of Shares: Banks also earn through
brokerage in purchasing or trading shares.

9) Foreign Exchange: Commercial banks earn profit by buying and selling
foreign exchange.

10) Import-Export: Commercial banks earn income through commission or
service charges for the role it plays in international trade and
transactions.

11) Letter of Credit: Banks charge commissions for issuing letters of credit
on behalf of importers.

12) Trustee: Banks also charge commissions for performing services as
trustee.

10.5 Expenditures of Commercial Banks
Commercial banks make following expenditure in operating its business:
1) Giving interest to the clients on their deposits
2) Giving interest to the central bank on the borrowed amount
3) Giving interest to commercial banks for the received loans
4) Payment of salaries and allowances to the employees
5) Allowances of directors and managers
6) Auditor’s charges
Lo]
S 7) Charges for cases or other legal measures for collecting unrecovered loans

118 Finance and Banking
8) Rent for offices and warehouses
9) Tariffs and taxes
10) Insurance Premium
11) Charges for making correspondence through post office, telephone, telex,
fax, swift etc.
12) Advertisement cost
13) Training charges of the employees
Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. Which one is the source of income of commercial banks?
A. Rent of lockers B. Insurance Premium
C. Tariffs and axes D. Auditor’s bill
2. In organizational operation, commercial banks —
i. spend money in advertisement.
ii. charge profit on deposited money in savings accounts.
iii. gives advance for apprenticeship.
Which of the following statement is correct?
A. i and ii B. i and iii
C. ii and iii D. i, ii and iii
Read the following stimulant and answer to question number 3
Garments trader Mr. Rafique is involved in international trading. He always takes
help from commercial banks for his business.
3. On behalf of Mr. Rafique, commercial banks —
i. help in making payments of buyers and sellers.
ii. issue letters of credit.
iii. distribute profit.
Which of the afollowing statemet is correct?
A. iand ii B. i and iti co
C. ii and iii D. i, ii and iii S

An Introduction to Commercial Banks 19

Short questions:

1. What do commercial banks issue as a medium of exchange?

2. How can a bank ensure security of public money?

3. What tendency is created among people because of commercial banks?

Creative questions:

1, Mrs. Shila Rozario holds a high position in a commercial bank. That has
enabled her to help out two of her neighbours namely Mr. Md. Araf and Mr.
Mridul in their businesses. Mr. Mridul is an international trader of jute, and
Mr. Md. Araf is involved with real estate, where he requires borrowing a large
amount of money. So, they both had to take assistance from her. Mrs. Rozario
said, this is how we try to serve people of the country, service to people is our
main mission.

A. What is the basic purpose of a commercial bank?

B. How does a commercial bank build its credit?

C. Considering Mrs. Shila’s actions, attempt to label the bank Mrs. Shila
works in.

D. ‘Service to people is our main mission’ — evaluate this speech made by
Mrs. Rozario.

2. Worrying about the present social condition, school teacher Ms. Shaila
Shabnam sought suggestion from a financial organization regarding her
ornaments and valuable documents. She adhered to the suggestions given by
the organization. While going to purchase a land with money in cash, she
became a victim of hijacking on her way to Savar.

A. What does an intended borrower need to open with a bank at the time
of borrowing money?
B. What is reserved fund? Clarify.
C. What measures will Ms. Shaila Shabnam take regarding her valuable
documents and ornaments? Explain.
wo D. What role can a financial organization play to avoid the accident faced
3 by Ms. Shaila Shabnam? Explain.

Chapter Eleven
Bank Deposit
By studying this chapter, students will be familiar with main sources of bank
deposits or those of funds. This chapter discusses various kinds of bank accounts
as well as processes to open and close bank accounts. Moreover, students will
have an elaborate idea on various new and innovative banking productss,
especially modem and electronic banking products. Initiative has been taken to
introduce some products of electronic banking to students.
SV © : _
~—
After reading this chapter we shall be able to:
e explain the concept of bank deposits.
e describe objectives and importance of bank deposits.
e analyze differnt bank account.
e practise how to open a bank account.
e assess the modern banking services. SI
N

Bank Deposit 121
11. The concept of bank deposit
Deposti is the main source of banking business. Deposit can be collected in
many ways. In particular commercial banks collect deposit through opening
different bank accounts on the basis of the needs of the clients and organization.
Generally, commercial banks collect deposit through current, savings and fixed
accounts and then utilize it effectively.
11.1 Purposes and Importance of Bank Deposits
Importance of bank deposit or bank account has completely different
significance from the client's or depositor's and bank's perspectives. Again, in
mirco-economics bank deposits play some important roles. These are briefly
demonstrated in the chart below:
Economics
money 2. Investment saving
2. Business 3. Foreign Exchange 2. Building capital
transaction 3. Investment and
3. Loan facility production
4. Risk-free 4. International trade
investment
5. Availing service
6. Meeting demand of
excess fund
Chart number: 11.1: Purposes of bank deposit
A) For Clients:
1) Security of Money: One of the main purposes of bank is to ensure
security of surplus money of the clients.
2) Business Transaction: Banks make business transaction through cash or
other banking products, such as cheques, bills of exchange, bank draft etc.
3) Loan Facility: Banks offer loans to its current or savings account holders
if needed. To receive this facility its necessary to open a bank account.
4) Risk-free Investment: Banks offer interests in certain rates to its depositors.
It does not involve any risk like making an investment in the share
market. Therefore it is a risk-free investment.
Forma-16, Finance and Banking, Class-9,10

122 Finance and Banking
5) Availing Services: Banks offer various welfare activities to clients for
opening a bank account and this attracts people to preserve bank accounts.
6) Meeting Demand of Excess Fund: Banks allow their clients to
overdraft so that they become attracted to deposit money.
B) For the Bank:

1) Collecting Deposit: Banks accept the savings of people as deposits
through various accounts and create their fund.

2) Investment: Banks invest the money collected from their clients in various
profitable sectors. So it is a major objective of banks to ensure profitable
investment.

3) Foreign Exchange: Banks also do business of foreign exchange,
where sometimes the clients need to open bank accounts to receive
the facilities offered by the banks.

C) In National Economic Development:

1) Forming a Habit of Saving: People form a habit of saving by opening
bank accounts.

2) Creating Capital: Idle savings of people accumulate through bank account
and create capital.

3) Investment and Production: Investment increases because of bank
accounts which play important role in a country’s production and economic
growth.

4) Employment Generation: New employments are created due to
enhanced economic activities facilitated by investment through bank accounts.

5) International Trade: Banks participate in export-import business through
their clients’ accounts and increase international trade.

11.2 Kinds of Bank Accounts
Banks offer scopes for opening various kinds of accounts according to their
clients' demand. Bank accounts can be categorized into the following types
based on people's occupation, need, time, location and demand:
A) Current Account
B) Savings Account
C) Fixed Deposit %
S
N

Bank Deposit 123
In addition to the above three accounts, banks offer following more
types of accounts:

D) School Savings Account

E) Insurance Savings Account

F) Foreign Savings Account

G) Deposit Pension Scheme Account

H) Loan Deposit Account

I) Resident Foreign Currency Deposit Account (RFCD)

1) Current Account: The kind of account that facilitates a client to deposit
and withdraw money whenever a client wants is called a current account.
This type of account is more suitable for businesspersons and usually no
interest is offered for such an account. More than deposited amount of
money can be withdrawn in such an account.

2) Savings Accounts: The account in which money can be deposited any time,
but withdrawn twice a week or in such regulated frequency is called savings
account. Usually fixed income people who are not involved in business
open such accounts. A small rate of interest is offered for such accounts.
However, now a days some banks don't impose any restrictions in frequency
of depositing or withdrawing money.

3) Fixed Deposit: When a bank account is opened for a certain period of time,
it is called fixed deposit. A fixed deposit account can usually be opened for
a period of one month, three months, six months, one year, two years, five
years etc. In such an account, high rates of interest is offered but a client
cannot withdraw his/her money. However, the client may be allowed to
withdraw money before the period ends if urgently needed, but in such a
situation he/she will not be able to get any interest.

4) School Savings Account: Such an account is opened to create a tendency of
savings among school students. The students deposit their savings in this
kind of account.

5) Insurance Savings Account: Both life insurance and current account
facilities are offered for such an account. A depositor is required to save a
certain amount of money in this kind of account.

6) Foreign Exchange Savings Account: Any person or organization earning

- foreign currency can open such an account. Only foreign exchange is
Ss transacted in this kind of account.

124 Finance and Banking

7) Deposit Pension Scheme Account: A certain amount of money is deposited
every month within a certain time-frame. Money is thus saved for a certain
period and at the end of this period the total savings is paid back along with
a certain percentage of interest.

8) Loan Deposit Accounts: A businessperson, industrialist or any other
borrower is given loan through cheque to transfering client's accounts for
which he/she needs to open an account in the borrowing bank. The borrower
can withdraw money according to his requirement from that account. Thus
the deposit and credit are circulated.

9) Resident Foreign Currency Deposit Account: This kind of account is
customized for those citizens of a country who regularly travel abroad. This
account is helpful when the stipulated quota of using foreign currency is not
enough during overseas travel. Usually exporters and importers as well as
people involved in business relation or consultation services with foreign
companies take this service.

11.3 Things to Consider while Opening a Bank Account

You may find several banks nearby. You now intend to open an account with a
bank. But how will you decide which bank you will open your account with?
Consider the following points while opening a bank account:

1) Location of Bank: Before opening an account a depositor considers
location of bank from his/her business centre or his residence.

2) Efficiency: Efficiency of the employees of bank is one of the issues to be
considered before opening a bank account.

3) Multifarious Services: The bank that offers diverse services is more
suitable for opening an account.

4) Foreign Exchange: Every branch of a bank cannot do foreign exchange. If
you need to have foreign exchange facilities, you should examine whether
the bank in which you intend to open your account is allowed to deal with
foreign exchange.

5) Good-will: Good-will of a bank plays an important role in considering
whether to open account. The bank that is better-known and older has a
better good-will.

6) Branches: The bank that has more branches is more suitable. ~

Ss
N

Bank Deposit 125
7) Scheduled Bank: As the central bank, Bangladesh bank recognizes better
banks as scheduled banks. Scheduled banks are considered more
secured compared to non-scheduled banks
8) Loan Facility: The bank which has more liberal policy in offering loan is
more preferred.

9) Interest: Clients prefer the banks that offer relatively higher interest on
deposits and lower interest on loan is more acceptable.

10) Service Tariffs: It's better to open an account with the bank that charges
lower tariffs on more services.

11) Electronic Banking: The banks which offer services like online banking,
any branch banking, ATM facilities etc. are now-a-days more attractive to
the potential clients.

11.4 How to Open a Bank Account

A client may open different types of accounts in different banks according to
his/her purpose and requirement. When he/she needs to make transaction of
large amount of money and in high frequency for business or trade, it's better to
open a current account. Otherwise savings account is preferable for both
transaction and saving purposes. However, a client opens a fixed deposit
account only if he/she is interested in making time-bound saving. To open any
kind of account, a client is required to fill-in a client's details form. A sample of
client's identity form is demonstrated in picture number 11.10. In this form, a
client usually gives details of him/herself and his/her transactions:

e Name of the client e Amount of deposit

e Sources of income a Bresemnaddiess

e Photocopy of National Identity card/passport « Pe ent Addvese

= ‘Deeupation e Business/Office Address

e Photograph of the client

e Contact number, etc.

e Photograph of the nominee

he)
:

126 Finance and Banking
wrret Bee ARCS
fora For cong ert raf mare wore
af. ere ON UHC RR EN ECT PT |
hl Und
reo moe OU te nnn
Doreceret Cyrene Oe  Coetn
‘aaren rear NTO Fry At Fee core WE CR aE HRYPATIOR Rte wy Fg FR ©. Pane ate ae ne ee ee rr
2 fearm €oR (ES 99) 3 CR OJP Cw Cy eA LecLy arcane... : — 1 setaneienasninememnnnnsntanineimanaauaainnai
2, 9Un (Be Ra) + Oe oe WAGE OT oar : pe : Sess rnammattinnannnnannnamn tmnt pmm nent nisi Hahaha
9 emcee are Res cee thee RT NOR so he
2, na UTA UTC fe Cul IC) 2 + Per he Py ' Ow Dire
LE  ” Qeitn Geen pir TEM GAME) 1 ocen emt
Siminiomnmm — nmenennanunn QUOC] TR Clemra I RF sscscpainasscernannmmsnnin dreamin
Soren a ee OPO ENP onnnnenomnneseien FY occa uesine srecee
er FF, BH cess ERE HI ev eeremegempzcernec U0 Oo umenee me
OO arapg 1 o>, Bros Yer (be fra x Dafne Ochre
eal ¥ (RRNA CVC UICe LER CE CHEE BRR AOA EPRI HT OU te FE)
‘Ren thos
Chart number: 11.1: A Sample of Client’s Details Form
In addition to these details, an intended client needs to apply with a reference
and signature of an existing client of the bank. If the bank is satisfied after
scrutizing all provided information, it opens an account for the applicant with a
minimum initial deposit. All the details of the client furnished in the application
form are saved in a database of the bank. To open an account, the applicant has
to submit his/her recent pictures and detail information together with pictures
and details of nominee in case of his/her absence. A copy of the applicant's
national identity card or passport or driving license is also required to open the
account. While opening an account for a company, a copy of trade license and
resolution company meeting are also required.
ol
=
S
N

Bank Deposit 127
11.5 How to Close a Bank Account
A client can close his/her bank account in various ways, which are discussed below:

1} Client’s request letter to close the account (request letter approved by

the company meeting in case of a company account)

2) Unused cheque-book, pass-book, debit/credit card must be returned.
If there is no unpaid loan from the client, the bank closes his/her account
when requested.
11.6 Various Electronic Banking Products and Services
Development of computer and electronic products paved the way for
innovative electronic products in banking business. Bangladesh has also
progressed in electronic banking keeping pace with the modem world. In such a
service, banking facility is available for 24 hours. We shall now be familiar with
various electronic banking products:

1) Debit Card and Credit Card 2) ATM 3) Mobile Banking

4) SMS Banking

5) Internet Banking

6) Any Branch Banking/Online Banking

7) Call Centre
1) Debit Card and Credit Card
This is a kind of plastic card which a bank issues for its clients. Through this
card, a client can purchase without any cash and withdraw money through ATM
machine whenever needed. Debit card is used if the client has money in his/her
account. The main difference between a debit card and a credit card is that a
client can purchase with his/her debit only if as) aoe
there is money in his/her account, but he/she cyan me es s
can buy products on credit even if he/she does pect em \
not have money in the bank account. Credit @e@qipives 3 q* a)
card is a form of personal loan which the es a ‘+.
client has to pay with interest after a certain fi ies) ¢ yIsA
period of time. In this case, there is no e.. -
obligation to have a bank account of the ie
client. Credit card and Debit card

« | Activity : Which electronic banking is mostly used in your locality? Make a list
iS on the basis of priority.

128 Finance and Banking
2) ATM. =. =on
ATM (Automated Teller Machine) is an electronic device Hummes
through which a client can make aome primary tranaactions (i
such as withdrawing money, balance information, deposit ® Mien
cash or cheques without any help or presence of bank ls eecesseeees
employees. This is a kind of plastic card which a bank
issues for its clients. A client can, therefore, withdraw
money by using this machine beyond 10 A. M. to 5 P. M.
office hours. ATM
3) Phone Banking i
This is a kind of banking service by which clients can 7.
make their banking transactions uaing phone. In this case, — me
cians a
identity. | a
Phone Banking
4) SMS Banking
Providing various types of banking services such asaccount 39 <=
balance information, request for cheque book ete. through
SMS is called SMS banking. =
+ iS: '
SMS Banking
5) Internet Banking —
Now-a-days client can transact his account through internet
by using a website and a password. client can check his
statement of account and can pay bill by internet service. ed
— se
Internet Banking
6) Any Branch Banking
A client with account in one branch of the bank can make ¢
transaction from any other branch of the country by availing
thia service. For example, a client after opening his account at asad
branch in Dhanmondi, Dhaka can make transaction in any Re
branch located in Chittagong if he is provided this service. day Banking 3

Bank Deposit 129
11.7 Prospect of Modern Electronic Banking System and Bangladesh
Electronic banking system is now providing valuable banking facilities
including money transfer, delivery of remittance and 24 hour banking services
to remote areas of the country. To provide these services, a large investment is
initially required by the bank. However, greater numberof people can be
provided with these services through a small number of skilled employees by
charging commission and service charge. These banking facilities are more
convenient in terms of both service and income. That is why like many other
countries of the world, E-banking is gaining a huge acceptance in Bangladesh.
Electronic banking is playing a vital role in providing services to a large number
of people living in distant locations of the country. It is hoped that banking
sector will further expand to provide its facilities to all the people of the country
irrespective of rich or poor, educated or uneducated. This banking system has a
growing popularity every day because it can facilitate banking service 24 hours
a day. Clients of banks in Bangladesh are becoming more inclined to E-banking
facilities day by day because the service is becoming cheaper and more easily
available in present competitive market.
Exercise

Multiple choice questions

1. Which is the purpose of deposit for clients?

A. Loan facility B. Building capital

C. Investment D. Foreign exchange

2. Which is the place for risk-free investment?

A. Business B. Share Market

C. Bank D. Private Organization

Read the following stimulant and answer to question numbers 3 and 4
Read the following stimulant and answer to question numbers 3 and 4 Mintu
Borua and his family visited Cox's Bazar. There he made all his expenditures by
using an electronic card. When his deposited money against the card finished, he
asked his brother to deposit money in his bank account. Then he withdrew some
money and returned Dhaka after completion of his visit.

3. Which of the following Mintu Borua availed to withdraw money?

A. Phone Banking B. ATM

C. SMS Banking D. Internet Banking
Forma-{7, Finance and Banking, Class-9,10

130 Finance and Banking

4. Mintu Borua’s tour was successful due to
i. Internet banking
ii. Phone banking
iii. SMS banking

Which of the following statement is correct?

A. i and ii B. i and iii C. ii and iti D. i, ii and iii
Short Answer Questions:
a. What type of bank account does not offer any interest to its clients?
b. In what type of bank account a client is not allowed to withdraw his/her
money with interest?
c. For whom resident foreign curreny deposit account is applicable?
d. Which banking product does not impose its user to open a bank account?

Creative questions:

1. Mr. Arif is a businessman in Dhaka. He has an account with "Jabed Bank"
from which he can withdraw money as many times as he needs. Once he
went to Chittagong for a visit. There he got some business products in a very
cheap rate. He became able to buy those products with the help of that bank.
It has branches in every district of Bangladesh, but it has no provision for
cards.

A. What is the main source of fund in banking business?
B. Why does a bank offer different kinds of accounts? Explain.
C. What kind of bank account does Mr. Arif has with “Jabed Bank”? Explain.
D. A service of the bank makes business of clients like Mr. Arif easier - Elucidate.
2.
po Shoytee Bank | Shoukhin Bank |
Products Debit Card
Credit Card
SMS Banking
Any Branch Banking
s

Bank Deposit 131
Now the Directors of ‘Shoylee Bank’ intend to launch services similar to
those of ‘Shoukhin Bank’.
A. Who recognizes good banks as Scheduled Banks?
B. What kind of bank account incorporates insurance service? Explain.
C. What type of banking service is available in ‘Shoukhin Bank’? Explain.
D. How far is it logical for ‘Shoylee Bank’ to introduce similar services of
‘Shoukhin Bank’? Clarify.
2}
S

Chapter Twelve
Bank and Client
From this chapter, student will learn about different services provided by a bank
to its clients. Besides this, they can also gain knowledge about the bank's
responsibilities towards the clients and clients’ responsibilities towards the bank.
Also, students will be able to realize the importance of account secrecy.
gi.
| lll \ (=
After reading this chapter we shall be able to:
. evaluate the nature of Bank- Client relationship
. discribe the responsibility of banks and clients towards each other.
. explain the necessity of account security.
eS
i~J
N

Bank and Client 133

12. Introduction

Main ideology of a bank is the relationship and belief between the Bank and

Client. If any step of each party is against this belief and trust, then relationship

between them gets disrupted, which causes the business to be dissolved.

12.1 Nature of Bank-Client Relation:

Persons, corporations ro companies involed in banking business are called

"Banker". Such a way client means that person who is involved with the bank

through his account or any of the service of the bank. On the basis of the

functions and services provided by the bank to its clients, Bank - Client

relationship can be considered as:

1. Debtor -Creditor relationship: When a client deposits money in the bank,

the bank is a debtor and oppositely other party is creditor. Thus this relationship

grows through depositing money by the client.

2. Contractual relationship: This relationship establishes through opening a

bank account by the client. This relationship creates rights and responsibilities

for both the parties. Under this contract, bank remains liable to return the client's

deposited money.

3. Client's trustee: Most of the time banks give protection to the client's

valuables, documents etc. through providing the locker services . This

relationship can be considered as legal relationship.

4. Mortgage provider and receiver relationship: Bank provides loan against

the client's property. This relationship is the outcome of the client's long term

relation and trust on the bank and bank's long term services delivered to the

clients.

5. Agency relationship: Payment dues and collect receivables are on behalf of

the clients are the responsibilities of bank.

12.2: Bank’s responsibilities towards the clients:

According to the principle of banking business, doing welfare and protecting

client's interest are wholly the responsibilities of the bank.

1. Pay back money: Generally bank is bound to pay back the client's money.

But it is paid on the fulfillment of some conditions specified by the contract. For

example: If money is deposited in the current or savings account, client can
RS withdraw money by writing the Cheque and any approval of the bank is not
needed.

134 Finance and Banking
2. Secrecy of account: Bank never discloses any information of the clients
except asked or advised by the Court, Bangladesh Bank or respective client.
3. Carrying on depositor's order: According to the order of the depositor, bank
utilizes the deposited money. For example, if client orders bank to repay the
dues to some specified person or party, bank does this as per order. In the same
way if client orders bank, after meeting the condition, to colect the receivable,
cheque or bill from a third party, the bank also does the same.
4. Exchanging of interest and service fee: Bank collects money of receivable
interest on behalf of the client and deposits properly to the client's account.
5. Opportunity of easy loan repayment: Banks will have adequate fair dealing
with the borrower for loan repayment and will give the client suitable time and
opportunity to repay the loan.
12.3 Client’s responsibilities towards the bank:
As bank has responsibilities toward the client, the client also has responsibilities
towards the bank in a similar way. Client's responsibilities are the following:
1. Honesty: Client should show the honesty to maintain the relationship towards
the bank. When opening a bank account, client should disclose all required
information to the bank.
2. Loan repayment: Client should pay installment of loan as per repayment
schedule. So ifloan cannot be repaid according to contract, then bank will collect
money by seizuring or selling the mortgaged property of the client by the
adoption of law.
3. Collection of interest: If there is overdrawing in current account, banks cut
interest in the case of a borrower. Though a bank provides other benefits and
services, it takes off some reasonable service charge. It is also the responsibility
of a client to repay the interest and principal of a loan as per contract.
4. Cautiousness: Clients have to follow cautiousness and rules in writing
cheques. For example, there should be correct signature, correct date and money
referred in the cheque should be in the account etc. By 'cheque', we understand a
written order to a bank from the depositor.
ho)
s

Bank and Client 135
Cheque is a bill of exchange Generally the following types of Cheques
are available to use.
1. Bearer Cheque: In case of this Cheque, bank is bound by order of the client
to pay the specified amount of money to the specified bearer within a specified
time period.
2. Order Cheque: Order Cheque is such a cheque where the money of cheque
cannot be drawn from bank without named person. An order cheque is generally
issued to a specific named payee across the bank's account.
3. Crossed Cheque: When a bearer cheque or order cheque is marked with 2
parallel crossed lines in the left comer of it for assurance of the collection of
money and security, the cheque is called a crossed cheque. Generally between
the two parallel lines, 'A/C payee' or 'and co." is written. Money of this type of
cheque is withdrawn after depositing it in an account instead of withdrawing it
directly in cash.
Activity : Different types of cheque, will be filled by groups.
receiver’s part name of bank date branch account number
GATT Ae fa LN a |
‘ ie HST BIS | TACOG gy __ seme
o =f { Saini = $48 dues wom wee
Ce) 3 wry oa in
Cheque no. check bearer orconsumer money innumber moncyinwords signature
12.4 Secrecy of bank account and related information regarding this:
« Relationship between the bank and client is of trust. This relationship dissolves
S only when conspiracy, fallacy or illegal activities occur. The possible reasons

136 Finance and Banking
those may dissolve the relationship between the bank and client:
1. Declared as bankrupt: If client is declared by the court as bankrupt,
Bank-Client relationship dissolves.
2. Mental disorder: If client is not capable of doing the bank transaction or may
not remember anything, at that time relationship will dissolve.
3. Garnishi order: If any Garnishee Order is enforced by the court, bank
becomes bound to close the client account.
4. Bank's own decision: If client doesn't follow the bank's rules and principles,
then bank may become bound to close the client's account.
5. Client's own decision: If client is not interested to continue his account,
relation comes to an end.
6. Enmity due to war: If bank and client stay in a location on which division has
taken place due to war, relationship dissolves.
7. Complete balance transfer: If client orders the bank to transfer all his
account balance to the other bank, the client's account automatically closes
down.
8. Death of client: Due to this reason account comes to an end.
9. Not making transactions for a long time: If any client doesn't make any
transaction through the account for long time, account of this client will be
closed automatically.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions:
1. What is Cheque?
a) Deed of contract b) Written notice
d) Personal document c) Written order of the depositor
2. Relationship between bank and client mainly is-
i) Debtor-creditor relationship
ii) Contractual relation
iii) Social relationship
Which one is correct?
a)i & ii b) ii& iii a
c)i & iii d) i, ii & iii. 8

Bank and Client 137
3. Which kind of relationship is expected between bank and client?
a) Social relationship
b) Business relationship
c) Personal relationship
d) Honest relationship
Short Questions:
1. What is the main motto of banking business?
2. Through which paper bank pays money by order to the payee?
3. Of whom bank works as representative?
Read the following stimulant and answer question no. 4
After running her business for long term, Miss. Sadia closes down all her
banking transaction with the intention of going abroad.
4. How did the relationship between Sadia and bank come to an end?
a. Due to the declaration by the court
b. Because of the decision of the bank
c. Due to long term discontinuation of transaction
d. Due to client’s decision.
Creative Question:
Even after trying for a long time, abed couldn't convince his friend Rafiq
opening an account in a bank because he laways prefers to keep his money in an
association run by Municipal Corporation due to certain procedure and interest
rate. But some months Abed had withdrawn certain amount of money from the
bank when he needed urgently to purchase different goods and decoration items.
But Rafiq failed to withdraw the money in time though he submitted the
application and requested the treasurer of Phulpur Co-oper-ative repeatedly.
a. What is the person who is involved in banking business called?
b. Explain what the Order Cheque is.
c. Explain the reasons why Abed could withdraw the money instantly.
d. Which one of the two institutions of Abed and Rafiq do you think is safer
for depositing money?
Forma-]8, Finance and Banking, Class-9,10

Chapter Thirteen
Central Bank
By studying this chapter students will be able to learn about the roles and
responsibilities of Central Bank as a guardian of commercial banks and its
contribution to the development of economy, business, agriculture and industry
of the country and they will also be able to realize the relationship between
Central Bank and Government. In this chapter, concept on different levels of
banking management and their responsibilities has also been given.
Picture: Bangladesh Bank
After reading this chapter we shall be able to:
e describe the concept of Central Bank.
e identify the objectives of Central Bank.
e analyze the functios of Central Bank.
e identify the relationship between Central Bank and Commercial Bank. wo
e evaluate the role of Central Bank in economic development. $

Central Bank 139
13.The concept of Central Bank
During the 17th century, different kinds of banks were evolved in different
regions; thus the money market controlling activity became most important
activity. From this realization central bank was established. This bank couldn't
leave money market in its own way rather it was liable to control the money
market mechanism. At the very beginning of the civilization, central bank used
to doing its responsibilities in currency circulation, money supply and credit
control. Different economists have given the definition of central bank in
different ways. for example:
According to Prof. R.S. Sayers, "The central bank is the organ of government
that undertakes the major financial operations of the government and by its
conduct of those operations and by other means, influences the behavior of
financial institutions so as to support the economic policy of the government.".
According to Prof. Kisch & Elkin, "Central Bank is a bank whose essential duty
is to maintain stability of the monetary standard.”
According to Dr. S. N. Sen, 'Central Bank is as if the leader of banking society,
the King and the Sun-everything. It rules the banking sector like a leader and like
the sun(in monetary and currency market) gives out light and energy."
13.1 Objectives of the Central Bank:
Central Bank is the non-profitable public welfare based national institution.
Implementing welfare activities and strengthening the economy are the main
responsibilities of central bank. The objectives of the central bank can be
classified in following ways:
1. Strong money market formation and control: Main objective of the central
bank is forming, monitoring and controlling the money market.
2. Economic development: Achieving economic prosperity through economic
planning and implementation is the objective of the central bank.
3. Notes and currency circulation: According to the market demand, central
bank circulates notes and currency and thereby preserves the currency value.
4. Controlling foreign currency: Central bank maintains the foreign currency
reserve and controls the exchange rate through the application of different
control mechanism.

2}

S

140 Finance and Banking
5. Maintain currency value: Central Bank controls the home currency value
with the intention of creating positive balance of trade.
6. Banker of the other Bank: Central Bank plays important role in structuring
and building the efficiency of scheduled bank and non- scheduled bank thus it
acts as a banker of the other banks.
7. Acts as a clearing house: Central Bank provides services to the commercial
banks in the resolution of different exchange and maintain co-ordination with
the commercial bank through all over the country.
8. Credit Control: One of the improtant objectives of central bank is to provide
enough credits to the commerci banks if any excess credit is provided then
central Bank has to ensure the financial market stability.
9. Gives advice to the Government: For the purpose of giving force in
economic development of all internal and foreign aspects, central bank gives
guidance and prepares plan and implemens these.
10. Maintains price stability: Central Bank controls money supply to keep
price level stable through applying different mechanism. Instability of price
creates dull economy.
11. Bank of the government: Preserves money of the government and
reconciles different transaction on behalf of the government.
12. Public welfare: As central bank is not a profit oriented company, it performs
different social and national activities for public welfare.
13. Equal distribution of wealth: Central Bank is liable to invest in all sectors
and in all regions those have positive impact in national and economic
prosperity .Thus equal distribution of wealth ensures balanced development.
14. Facilitate capital formation: By providing credit facilities to commercial
banks, central bank increases the ability of their borrowers for capital
formation.
15. Establishing organized banking system: Organized banking system
development is another function of this bank.
16. Guide of banking system: Guiding other banks of the country is one of the
main activities of the bank.
oo
S

Central Bank 141
13.2 Functions of the Central Bank
Central Bank acts as a controller of money market and thus provides services towards
the government, public and other banks and overall acts as a development body
of the country.
a) General Functions:
1. Notes and currency circulation: Responsibility of circulating the money
and currency is only vested upon central bank.
2. Guardian of the money market: Central Bank acts as a guardian and
controller central bank of the money market.

3. Creation of easy medium of exchange: This bank creates easy medium
of exchange like currency, bill, hundi etc.

4. Credit control: One of the main functions of this bank is controlling the
credit. Bank Rate policy, Open Market Operation, deposit rate etc. are the
different mechanisms of credit control.

5. Controls the purchasing power of currency: By increasing and decreasing
money supply, central bank maintains the currency value in the country.

6. Controls foreign exchange: Central Bank controls the exchange rate
and preserves prestigious value for home currency.

7. Maintains stability in price level: By controlling money supply, central
bank maintains stability in price level.

8. Maintains foreign currency reserve: Exchange rate of any country depends
on the foreign currency reserve. So central bank preserves necessary
amount of foreign currency.

9. Development of banking: Central Bank is responsible to develop
the infrastructure of total banking sector.

10. Creating employment opportunity: By approving and permitting to
open different branches, central bank creates opportunity for employment.

11. Monitoring Govt. loan: On behalf of the government, central bank monitors
the uses and repayment of loan given by the government.

(B) Functions as a government bank:
20 1. Source of credit: In financial crisis, government collect fund from central
ES bank. So this bank is a source of government fund.

142 Finance and Banking
2. Maintaining Government Fund: Central Bank maintains government’s
fund, assets, and documents.

3. Maintenance of accounts: Central Bank maintains different accounts of the

government.

4. Handling of government transaction: Central Bank provides supports
in handling government documents.

5. Purchase and sale of foreign currency: On behalf of the country, central
bank purchases and sells home currency and foreign currency.

6. Advisor: Central Bank acts as an advisor by involving in planning,
policy making and implementing.

7. Collection and maintenance of information and statistics: Central
Bank collects, coordinates and maintains different information and statistical
data and reports in taking some plans.

8. International relationship: Central Bank helps to build relationship
of government with the international financial organizations, foreign banks
and other different foreign institutions.

9. Representative of government: Central Bank conducts different activities
in home country and in foreign country as a representative of government.

C) Banker of the other banks:

1. Approving and scheduling: Central Bank does the activities of approving
and scheduling in the establishment of new banks.

2. Opening new branch: This bank provides approval for opening a new branch.

3. Clearing House: Central Bank resolves different inter-banking transactions
through clearing houses.

4. Lender of the last resort: At the time of financial crises when fund
cannot be collected from anywhere, central bank extends its financial
support. So central bank can be called as lender of the last resort.

5. Controlling the activities of the commercial bank: According to the
tules, regulation and policy central bank controls the activities of
commercial bank.

6. Examine the accounts: Central Bank examines the accounts of the
commercial banks. s

Central Bank 143

7. Advisor and consultant: Central Bank provides different advice
and consultancy related with banking issues to the Commercial Banks.

8. Statutory reserve: All scheduled banks are bound to retain specified
portion of their total deposit to the central bank.

9. Representative of other banks: Central Bank is the representative of all
scheduled banks.

10. Recovery of loan: This bank provides support in loan recovery of
scheduled bank.

11. Development in international trade: For the expansion of international
trade, central bank provides different support to the commercial banks.

D) Other functions:

1. Development in agriculture: For the purpose of development in
agricultural sector, central bank establishes agricultural bank under its
direct supervision and makes arrangement to pay loan at low interest rate.

2. Industrial development: Central Bank extends its cooperation to
the government in forming motivational plan and its implementation
for the development of industrial sector.

3. Development of co-operative bank:Central Bank takes different initiatives
for the development of co-operative banks.

4. Research based activities: To introduce different ways policies, methods
for the development of trade and commerce, this bank conducts many
research activities.

5. Ensuring the utilization of loan: Another main responsibility of central
bank is to ensure the proper utilization of floated loan.

13.3 Formation and management of central bank:
Without one or two exceptions, all central banks of the world are formed under
government ownership. In Bangladesh, central bank is known as "Bangladesh
Bank". In Bangladesh Bank, as a chief of management, Governor is performing
his responsibilities. As a chief of executive, assistant governors are co-operating
% the Governor.
&

144 Finance and Banking
In 1971 Bangladesh was born as an independent country. Being felt the necessity
of a central bank, as a symbol of sovereignty, with the intension of economic
restructuring of the financial sectors, Bangladesh Bank started its journey on 31
October in 1972 by the order named as " President Order - 127" in the Dhaka
Office of the Local Deputy Governor of the then State Bank of Pakistan.
However, effecting from 16 December, 1971 this ordinance was declared as the
permanent and active rule of Bangladesh Bank. Bangladesh Bank is directed
under the government ownership and is controlled by the same Governing Body
of which the executive chief is Governor. 4 Deputy Governors, 12 Executive
Directors and 1 Financial Advisor assist the Chief Executive. Moreover,
Bangladesh Bank includes other officials in its management. Look at the
organogram of Bangladesh Bank below.
Assistant General Senior System Chief Maintenance
Manager Specialist Engineer
oo Joint System Joint Chief Supervision Chief
Joint Director Manager Specialist Maintenance Engineer Manager Physician
Assistant Director Assistant Manager Programmer Maintenance Physician
Engineer
Figure 13.1: Organogram of Central Bank (Bangladesh Bank). x
NX

Central Bank 145
On the basis of divisions, functions of Bangladesh Bank can be classified
as follows:

1. Note Issuing division 6. Bank Auditing Division

2. Banking Division 7. Exchange Control Division

3. Accounts Division 8. Statistics Division

4. Administrative Division 9. Secretariat Division

5. Banking Control Division
Activity: Mention some reasons of dependency of the commerical banks on the Central

Bank.

13.4 Relationship between the Central Bank and Commercial Bank:
From the view point of economic activity, specially as a guardian of money
market, central bank has following relationships with the commercial bank:
1. Statutory Reserve: It is obligatory for the commercial banks to maintain
fixed portion of their deposit as a statutory reserve with the central bank.
2. Clearing House: Central Bank provides the clearing house facility to the
commercial bank and thus a good relation creates between them.
3. Working Paper: Commercial Bank has to send weekly or monthly working
paper to the central bank. By analyzing the information of the working paper,
central bank gives guidance to the commercial bank.
4. Information provider: Central Bank collects worldwide information on the
money market, economic condition and other related information on banking.
5. Liquidity: Every commercial bank has to maintain specific portion of total
deposit as liquid asset and central bank always monitors the liquidity position of
the commercial bank to protect the client's interest.
6. Role as guardian: Central Bank acts as a guardian of the commercial banks.
7.Lender of the last resort: Central Bank provides loan to the commercial
banks.
8. Benefit of scheduling: Central Bank provides advice, guidance, financial
support to the scheduled bank.
9. Bank- Client relationship: Bank provides loan to the clients and clients keep
their savings in the bank as deposit.
Forma-]9, Finance and Banking, Class-9,10

146 Finance and Banking
10. Assistance: Central Bank implements its plan and policy through
commercial banks.

11. Banker of all Banks: Central Bank is closely related with the commercial

banks as banker of the other banks.

13.5 Role of Bangladesh Bank as a Central Bank in the economic

development:

Bangladesh Bank has great contribution in economic development.

Bangladesh Bank mainly :

1. Issue Notes

2. Maintain the foreign currency reserve

3. Conducts Government’s Account.

4. In distributing the industrial and agricultural loan, this bank Executes the policy
of the government through commercial banks.

5. Controls scheduled and non- scheduled bank’s activities and Monitoring Cell of

Bangladesh Bank ties all commercial banks by rules and regulations.

6. Through the publication of economic and _ statistical information, Bangladesh
Bank keeps aware of the entire scheduled banks.

7. Plays important role in transferring and handling the foreign currency.

8. Research Division of Bangladesh Bank provides guidance through different
research based activities.

9. Through the monitoring of Rural Micro Credit projects and other special
credit projects, this bank is struggling to ensure the economic freedom of the
distressed class.

10. Creates employment opportunities to eliminate poverty.

11. Keep on active rule to stabilize the price level by the controlling of foreign
exchange rate.

12. Besides this, Bangladesh Bank assists government in implementing
different developmental activities.

13, Now-a-days Bangladesh Bank is contributing lots in protecting the law and
order of the country which also has great economic impact.

Lo)
ES

Central Bank 147
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions:
1. What is the objective of Central Bank?
a) Acting as medium of exchange b) keeping price level stable
c) Creating employment opportunity d) Creating tendency of savings
2. Which Bank plays the role for maintenance of monetary value?
a) Central Bank b) Commercial Bank
c) Investment Bank d) Exchange Bank
Read the following stimulant and answer the questions 3 & 4-
The Sidr affected potato farmers of Borguna established a cooperative society
named "Prottoy" which has improved their fate. After this they are thinking to
take assistance from a financial institution.
3. Which financial institution can help in the programme of “Prottoy”?
a) Central Bank b) Industrial Bank
c) Grameen Bank d) Investment Bank
4. With the help of financial institution “Prottoy” -
i) Can play a role in country’s agricultural development.
ii) Will get loan facility.
iii) Will improve life style.
Which one of the following is correct?
a) i&ii b) ii & iii
c) i&iii d) i, it & iii
Short questions:
1. Which is the banker of all banks?
2. Which bank represents government in international arena?
3. Who acts as the head of management in Bangladesh Bank?
eo 4. Where do the commercial banks put their compulsory deposit?
3
N

148 Finance and Banking

Creative Questions:

1. Mr. Karim is serving in ‘B’ bank, when he drew new notes for Eid his seven
years old doughter asked him why the name of bank ‘A’ is written on all bank
notes?

a) Which banks’ functions are controlled by Central Bank?

b) What does a commercial bank deposit as ‘Reserve’ in the central bank?
Explain.

c) Which type of bank is bank “A”? Explain.

d) What role will bank “A” play in liquidity crisis of bank “B”?

2. People of Ramgor are facing different types of problems as there is no
commercial bank in that locality. Administration opened a branch of Bank
"A" when the local people informed the local administration that there is no
bank. The local people were benefitted. Later "B" bank opened another
branch there. After a few days the central bank notify bank "B" to shutdown.

a) By which way does central bank resolve inter bank transactions of
commercial banks?
b) Explain what central bank keeps stable?
c) Why does the central bank notify bank “B” to shutdown? Explain.
d) How can the central bank involve bank “‘A” to develop the area like Ramgor?
Discuss.
The End
oo
ES

CATH CTC, CHCA ARTA Sry <P Pa
— TANT TTT OP APTA
gfadlera BIR cates
Aart Tt VERS CIE
ala 6 Fle fratecs ebat xocr afSats 6 afecaices Gey AT Capea OToICa
Sod ARF-4 (oT BF, 28 VOT ASA) HT SET
r:)
US:
Tener
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh

