®
Geography and Environment
Classes Nine-Ten
[LE ee TD
| re
ie; SS SO RR
AN
¢ vs 3) NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH
Frenew*

ers GAY.) RO 27a

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a Textbook for Class Nine-Ten from the Academic Year-2013
Geography and Environment
Class Nine-Ten
Written by
Selina Shahjahan
Dr. Sk. Md. Rezaul Karim
Julakha Shahin
Edited by
Dr. Hafiza Khatun
Translated by
Dr. Naznin Afrose Huq
Md. Kamruzzaman Molla
Masum Billah
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka
[All rights reserved by the Publisher]
First Publication : December, 2012
Reprint : , 2017
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
For Free Distribution by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Printed by :

Preface
The aim of secondary education is to make the learners fit for entry into higher
education by flourishing their latent talents and prospects with a view to building the
nation with the spirit of the Language Movement and the Liberation War. To make the
learners skilled and competent citizens of the country based on the economic, social,
cultural and environmental settings is also an important issue of secondary education.
The textbooks of secondary level have been written and compiled according to the
revised curriculum 2012 in accordance with the aims and objections of National
Education Policy-2010. Contents and presentations of the textbooks have been selected
according to the moral and humanistic values of Bengali tradition and culture and the
spirit of Liberation War 1971 ensuring equal dignity for all irrespective of caste and
creed of different religions and sex.
The present government is committed to ensure the successful implementation of
Vision 2021.Honorable Prime Minister, Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina expressed her firm determination to make the country free
from illiteracy and instructed the concerned authority to give free textbooks to every
student of the country. National Curriculum and Textbook Board started to distribute
textbooks free of cost since 2010 according to her instruction.
The textbook, Geography and Environment, has been introduced against the backdrop
of new life style of 21‘ century as well as life and environment. Countries, capital
cities, the rivers, export-import business, industries and minerals are not the essential
focus of secondary level Geography and Environment. Its scopes has been extended to
inter-relation between human life and environment, how to cope with environmental
changes, worldwide endeavours along with people’s realisations for environmental
development. Learners’ need and understandability gets highest priority aligning these
issues to develop the book.
In regards to spelling of the words, the spelling rules developed by Bangla Academy
have been followed. I thank sincerely all for their intellectual labour who were
involved in the process of writing, editing, art and design of the textbook.
Professor Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

Contents
fom | earwvattomn e
fe [se | mae
fr [etic | or
[= [ree a
foo [ meee
Sd
Thirteen Development Activities of Bangladesh and 205-215
Environmental Balance

Chapter One
Geography and Environment
The earth is the planet where we live. We live have in different regions with
distinctive natural environments. Naturally, our lifestyles, societies, cultural, economic
and political activities have unique characteristics. All these things are the topic of
discussion in modern geography. So, geography is a science of nature and it is a
science of environment and society. In this chapter we are going to deal with
geography and environment, their scope, different branches of geography and the
importance of geography as a subject.
e |
. = ; S | ea wee
At the end of this chapter, we will be able to :
e Explain the idea of geography and environment.
e Describe the scope of geography.
e Explain the importance of studying geography and environment.
e Explain the inter-relationship among different elements of geography and
environment.
Forma-1, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

2 Geography and Environment
Concept of Geography

The word geography is derived from two Greek words ‘geo’ (earth) and ‘graphy'
(description). But the discipline does not simply describe the earth, it explores the
planet as peoples, habitat. Eratosthenes was the first Greek scholar who used the term
“geography' as the study of earth as human habitat. Professor E.A Macnee said,
‘geography is the study of environment of man both physical and social, particularly
in its relation to human activites.' Professor L. Dudley Stamp has defined geography
as, 'A description of the world and of its inhabitants.’ Professor Carl Ritter said, that
geography is concerned with the objects on the earth's surface around man.Geography
is the science of nature, environment and social science. According to Richard
Hartshorne, ‘geography provides accurate, orderly and rational description and
interpretation of the variable character of the earth's surface.'

Academy of Science of Washington D.C. gave a definition of Geography in
1965. According to them, Geography searches for how the sub-management
of natural environment of the surface and how human beings adjust themselves
with these natural phenomena or physical body.

People live in this world and lead their life on it.The natural environment influences
their way of living. Climate, physical features, natural vegetation, animals, rivers,
seas, and mineral resources which influence the life of the people in different ways.
Activities of man change the environment, such as, their homes, roads, ports and
cities change the nature and environment in different ways. Settlement is built by
cutting trees, by filling up canals, wetlands, and ponds. There is interaction between
man and environment.

The main function of geography is to find out the cause of interaction between
man and environment.

Concept of Environment

People live in an environment. An environment is made up of rivers, oceans,
mountains, forests, settlements, roads, plants, animals, water, soil and air. All activities
of human beings have profound effect on natural and man-made features of the
environment. Environmental scientist Arms said, ‘environment is the surrounding
organic and natural situations of animals.’

C.C. Park says, environment means the sum of all the situations of humans at certain
point of place and time. %
Environment changes with the change of time and place. For example, at the 8

Geography and Environment 3
beginning of mankind, water, air, plants and animals made up the environment.
Later, human interference, social, economic, cultural and political activities
developed a new environment i.e. human environment.
Elements of environment : Environment is made of two kinds of elements - living
and non living elements. Those who have life, take food, have intelligence, have
birth/death and growth are living things/elements.Trees, birds and animals, insects,
humans and other animals are living things. These are the living elements of
environment. Earth, water, air, mountains, rivers, seas, light, temperature, moisture
are the non living things/elements. They make non living environment.
Task : Make inter-relationship among different elements of environment.
Scope of Geography
Science and technological expansion, new inventions, innovations, expressions of
thoughts, change of social values have extended the scope of geography. So, various
subjects such as Geomorphology, Climatology, Oceanography, Soil Science, Botany,
Sociology, Economics, Politics and History etc. have been included in Geography.
Branches of Geography
Branches of Geography
Physical Geography Human Geography
Biogeography Climatology Economic Population Political
Geography Geography Geography
Geomorphology Soil Geography Oceanography Zoo Geography
Regional Social Quantitative Transport Urban
Geography Geography Geography Geography Geography
io}
S
“ Medical Geography | | Geographical Information System

|
4 Geography and Environment
(a) Physical Geography : Physical Geography is that branch of Gerography dealing
with the natural features of the earth, the home of human beings. Physical
Geography deads with water, air, animals, and the land of the planet earth i.e.
everything that is part of the four spheres-the atmosphere, biosphere, hydrosphere
and lithosphere.
1. Geomorphology :Geomorphologists study the landforms of the planet, from
their development to their disappearance through erosion and other processes.
2. Climatology : Climate geographers investigate the distribution of long term
weather patterns and activities of the earth’s atmosphere.
3. Biogeography : Biogeography studies the distribution of plants and animals on or
near the surface of the earth.
4. Soil geography : Soil geographers study the upper layer of the lithosphere, the
soil of the earth and its categorization and patterns of distribution.
5. Oceanography : Oceanography discusses the transport and communication
among continents through ocean, the rise and fall of ocean surface and the
management of ocean resources.
(b) Human Geography : Human geography is a major branch of geography that
studies people and their interaction with the earth and with their organization of
space on the earth’s surface.
1. Economic Geography : Economic geography examines the distribution of
production of goods, the distribution of wealth and the spatial structure of economic
condition.
2. Population Geography : Population geographers are concerned with the
distributions, migrations and growth of population in geographic areas.
3. Regional Geography : Regional geographers focus on areas as large as continents
or as small as an urban area.
4. Political Geography: Political geography investigates all aspects of boundaries,
country, state and national development, international organizations, diplomacy,
internal country sub divisions, voting and more.
5. Quantitative Geography : Quantitative Geography uses quantitative techniques
and models to test hypothesis. Quantitative methods are often used in many othe
branches of Gerography but some geographers specialize in quantitative methods only.
6. Transport Geography : Transport geographers study both public and private
transport networks and the use of those networks for transporting people and goods. 3

N

Geography and Environment 5
7. Urban Geography : Urban Geography deals with the orgin, evolution,
classifications, environment, and different areas of cities and towns.

8. Disaster management : Disaster management focuses on how to reduce loss

during disaster and how to protect environment and ocean from disaster.

Whatever branch we discuses, environment is always an issue. At present Geography

and Environment are taught in integrated way. Natural and social environment

bear equal importance in geographical science.

Types of environment : There are two types of environment--natural environment and

social environment. Earth, water, air, mountains, rivers, seas, light, trees, birds, animals

and insects, constitute natural environment. On the other hand human behaviors,
rituals, education, values, economics and politics constitute social environment.

Importance of Studying Geography and Environment

The disciplines deal with :

¢ The environment of the world, the nature of a particular place, the origin and
structure of particular landforms i.e. hills, mountains, river, sea, plains and deserts.

e Origin and evolution of the earth along with the evolution of plants and animals.

° Plants and animals of different environments--their behaviors, food habits,
and their habitats.

e How social environment has changed due to the development of agriculture,
industry, trade and commerce, transport and communication.

e How natural calamities occur, how to control them and what harm they do to the
human beings.

e How human interference spoils the environment-- the intensity of the damage,
the cause of the rise of temperature and the greenhouse effect as well as their
influence on the environment and how to minimize the loss.

e How to develop human resources for economic development by utilizing
natural resources.

e Ocean and the management of its resources.

Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. Which of the following belongs to Biogeography?
co a. Running trade and commerce b. Plants and animals
ES
& c. Latitude and longitude d. Evolution of towns

6 Geography and Environment
2. The topic of discussion in Geography is —
i. nature.
ii. power.
iii. society.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iii
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
Answer the questions 3 and 4 from the following stem :
Mr. Nayeem has established a shop on the side of a cross road filling up a lowland and
built a house just behind the shop as well.
3. Nayeem’s work belongs to which branch of geography?
a. Biogeography b. Human geography
c. Climatology d. Geomorphology
4. The above activity is —
i. the evolution of village.
ii. urbanization.
iii. developing locality.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iii
c. tiand iii d. i, ii and iii
Creative questions
:
Hills and mountains Biogeography
Humans Physical geography
Climate Human geography
Plants and trees Economic geography
a. Who has for the first time used the term ‘Geography’?
b. What is the subject matter of Oceanography?
c. Which environment does include the elements of group ‘A’? Explain it. co
d. Analyze the influence of group ‘A’ and ‘B’ in human life. S

Chapter Two
The Universe and Our Earth
The earth is our habitat. It is surrounded by the universe.The sun is at the centre of the
solar system. There are many other stars in the space. Moreover, the Moon (satellite),
the Earth (planet), comets, meteors and nebulaes are there in the space. The universe
is made up of small particles, and insects on earth, distant seen and unseen stars. In this
chapter, we will discuss space, universe, solar system, earth etc.
x % P P 3 “ we .
wt 2 ; 4
- ee Pad ~ . é
. ih 5

At the end of this chapter, we will be able to :

e Describe the location and characteristics of the solar system, earth and other

planets and satellites.

e Describe the nature and diameter of earth and satellite.

e Explain the importance of lines of latitude and longitude.

e Identify different places using latitude and longitude.

e Explain rotation and revolution.

e Analyze the cause of day and night, its increase and decrease and its impact.

e Cause of season change and its impact.

e Make the model of solar system using different materials.

x e Have more interest to know about our only place of habitat, earth.
N

8 Geography and Environment
Space and Universe
The sky we see above us is limitless. This is called space Our Earth, Sun, Moon
and innumerable stars, plantes and sattelities are the parts of this sky. They move around
the space their own axis at a certain motion. Among them some have light of their
own and some don't have. At present Sun, Moon, planets, stars, comets, meteors,
nebulaes, pulsars, black dwarfs, black holes etc. are called extra terrestrial body.
Nobody knows how big the universe is. Nobody knows the nature and form of this
universe. Many scientists believe that the universe has no beginning and ending.
Some still believe that the universe has form and diameter. Scientists are discovering
new things about the Universe everyday but most of the things are still unknown.
Stars
The terrestrial body which has light of its own is called Star. There are innumerable
stars in the Universe (fig. 2.1). We can see some of them with our maked eyes. Some
of them can be seen from the Earth only through powerful telescopes. The stars are
burning gasballs, made of hydrogen and helium gases. These gases are burning at
a very high temperature (6000 Celsius).Other stars are not seen at day time due to the
scorching light of the sun.
It seems that all the stars are
Ko faa ines vn lying on the same level when
Ursa Major oD seen from the earth. Actually,
ca mE 2 ; BAAN they are lying at different
“arcturus Hes \ distances from the earth.The
tigen tome Poy \ distances between the earth
rans ss eagle and stars are so great that it
SH Ek tg Se KS weiss] cannot be measured by
Zubenel Genuri Eclittic Cancer’ PRY fr. ¥
oy ¢ toe es 27 Bien kilometres. These are
ee Aes pets! measured by light years.
KAS ~ a LSE / ‘ The distance covered in one
SE RT year is called one light year.
(a cXSpus Light passes about three lakh
South kilometres per second. The
takes 8 minutes 19 seconds to
Fig. 2.1 : Location of stars in the sky The closest star to the Sun is
our nearest star. Light Sun is Proxima Centauri. Its distance come to earth from
the Sun. from the Earth is about 4.2 light years. S

The Universe and Our Earth 9
Constellation : At night some stars are seen in groups.These groups of stars
are called Constellation.Astrologers of ancient time gave them different names
based on their appearance, some of them look like bear or hunter.
Therefore they are named as Great Bear, Orion, Cassiopea, Little Bear, Canis
Major etc.
Galaxy : Planet, stars, dust, comets, vapours together make a galaxy or star world.
There are one hundred billion galaxies in the space (fig. 2.2).They are of different sizes
and forms, but most of them are snakelike or parabolic. Snakelike galaxies are large
in size and parabolic galaxies are very bright. They move at great distance from
each other. A small part of the galaxy is called Milky Way.
Fig. 2.2 : Galaxy
Nebulae : A nebulae is an interstellar cloud in outer space that is made up of dust,
hydrogen and helium gases, and plasma. It is formed when portions of the interstellar
medium collapse and clump together due to the gravitational attraction of the particles
that comprise them.
Milky Way : The Milky Way is a spiral galaxy with a concentration of stars at its
centre. This gives the galaxy a central bulge from which arms of stars radiate out.We
live in one of these arms. Like all galaxies, the Milky Way is moving. Not only
is the whole galaxy travelling through space, but the stars within it are continuously
moving around the galactic centre.
Meteor : A meteor is a meteoroid or a particle broken off an asteroid or comet
orbiting the Sun that burns up as it enters the Earth’s atmosphere, creating the effect
of a ‘shooting star’. Meteoroids that reach the Earth’s surface without disintegrating are
Forma-2, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

10 Geography and Environment
called Meteorites (fig. 2.3).
Fig. 2.3 : Meteor
Comet : Comets are often referred to as ‘dirty snowballs’. They contain billions of icy
lumps.When the gravity from a large passing body like a star,becomes strong enough,
some large chunks of ice get pulled away from the cloud and head toward the Sun
(fig. 2.4). As that ball of ice gets close enough to the Sun, its heat begins to melt some
of the ice that makes upthe comet.The melted ice becomes a gaseous tail that extends
away from the source of the heat i.e. the Sun. English scientist Halley calculated the
comets orbit around the sun which brings it closer to the Earth every 76 years. So it
is named after him. Halley's comet has been seen regularly since 240 BC and last
came in 1986.
28 2
Se aed
j x
1g. 2.4: 8

The Universe and Our Earth 11
Planet : A planet is a celestial body orbiting a star or stellar remnant that is massive
enough to be rounded by its own gravity. Unlike stars, planets do not give off light.
They shine at night because they reflect light from the Sun. The planets and other
objects which orbit the Sun travel in flattened circles called Ellipses. In the solar
system there are eight planets, namely Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn,
Uranus and Neptune.
Satellite ; A satellite is an object that goes around, or orbits, a planet.While there are
natural satellites, like the Moon, hundreds of man-made satellites also orbit the Earth.
The man-made satellites which are moving around the earth are used for weather
forecasting, information technology, telecommunication, detection of mineral
resources etc.
Solar System
The Earth is one of eight planets which orbit the Sun, and these planets and their
moons make up the solar system (fig. 2.5).The word solar means ‘of the Sun’. The
solar system also contains thousands of minor planets, called Asteroids, and
countless comets. The planets, asteroids and comets are all held in their orbits by the
Sun’s gravity or Pulling force.
Mercu Mars 8 Comet
Moon = = RESET ke)
Fig. 2.5 : Solar system
x Sun: The sun is a star. It is a middle sized yellow coloured star. The original
& source of heat and light of earth, other planets and their satellites is the sun.

12 Geography and Environment
Its diameter is approximately 13 lakh and 84 thousand kilomiters and mass is
1.99 x 1013 Kilogram. Eight planets are moving round the Sun. They can be
listed from the nearest to the furthest as follows: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars,
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. The largest planet is Jupiter and the
smallest one is Venus. Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn are quite
bright and can be seen without any instrument from the earth. Uranus and
Neptune are less bright and they cannot be seen without telescope.
Mercury:Mercury is the smallest and nearest planet of the sun.Its average distance
from the sun is 5.8 crore kilometres and its diameter is 4,850 kilometres. As it is
closest to the Sun intense light sometimes makes it invisible. It takes 88 days to move
around the sun and so,88 days make one year in Mercury. Its gravitational power
is so weak that it cannot retain in the atmosphere. Mercury has no satellite.
Venus : You must have heard about the morning star or the evening star and might
have seen it too. Venus in fact, is not a star. It glows in the sky like a star which
prompts us to call it a star.Venus is covered with dark cloud. So,the sun can never
be seen from its surface. Cloudy atmosphere mainly consists of carbon dioxide. It is
the brightest and hottest planet of the solar system. The distance between venus and
sun is 10.8 crore kilometres. No significant difference of light between day and night
is seen. It rains here but it is acid Rain. Its diameter is 12,104 kilometres. It takes 225
days to move around the sun. So, its year is of 225 days. It doesn’t have any satellite.
Though all planets move around on their own axis from west to east, venus moves
from east to west.
Earth : Earth is our habitat. It is the third nearest planet from the Sun. The average
distance from the sun is 15 crore kilometres, and the diameter is nearly 12,667
kilometres. Earth takes 365 days to orbit the Sun. Moon is the only satellite of the
Earth. Earth is the only planet where the atmosphere contains oxygen, nitrogen,
and carbon dioxide in proper amount for the plants and animals to survive. Earth
is the only planet in the solar system where life exists.
Mars :Mars is the nearest neighbour of Earth. Average distance from the sun is 22.8
crore kilometres and the diameter is 6,787 kilometres. Length of day and night is
equal. It takes 687 days to orbit the Sun. In this planet there is scarcity of water and
the amount of carbon dioxide in the air is very high which is the cause of no life on
Mars. Mars has two satellites. One of them is Phobos and the other is Deimos. ES
8

The Universe and Our Earth 13
Jupiter : Jupiter is the largest planet of the solar system. Its diameter is 1,42,800
kilometres. It is 1,300 times larger than the Earth. It is 77.8 crore kilometres away from
the Sun. Jupiter’s atmosphere is made up of hydrogen and helium. It takes 4,331 days
to orbit the Sun. Jupiter has 67 satellites.

Saturn : Saturn is the second largest planet of the solar system. Its distance from the
Sun is 143 crore kilometres and the diameter is 1,20,000 kilometres. Atmosphere
contains a mixture of hydrogen and helium gas, methane and amonia. It takes 29.5
years to orbit the sun once. Saturn has the brightest rings and 62 satellites.

Uranus : Uranus is the third largest planet of the solar system.This planet is 287
crore kilometres away from the Sun. It takes 84 years to orbit the sun once. Diameter
of the Uranus is 49,000 kilometres. Methane gas is very high in the atmosphere. It
has rings around it but not bright like the Saturn. Uranus has 27 satellites.

Neptune : Its distance from the Sun is about 450 crore kilometres. Light and heat of
the Sun is less. Its diameter is 48,400 kilometres. Its area is as large as 72 Earths and
the atmosphere is made up of Methane and Amonia. Neptune has 14 satellites.

Task : Table below will be filled by the students in groups within 15 minutes.
Position of Average | Time Number of
planets in terms| distance taken to satellites
of the distance | from move Structure

around the
from the sun the sun | gun once
| Mery [oT Tt
| ves | oT
1.
| reth | |
1.
po Mrs ||
| mpiter fT
ee es
| Urems fT
| Napune [OO |
Size and Shape of the World
The shape and size of the Earth was a long debated thing but nobody was absolutely
sure about its shape. When Astronaut Uri Gagarine moved round the earth on 12th
April 1961 and could understand that the earth is round with a little flat in north-south.
2 Moreover, the picture taken by him is also round, but a little swelling to east-west.
& It means the real shape of the earth is oblate spheroid.

14 Geography and Environment
As the shape of the earth is not fully round, so its diameter in equatorial region from
east- west is 12,734.5 kilometres and north-south polar diameter is 12,714 kilometres.
For the benefit of measurement it is calculated as 12,800 kilometres. According to
this measurement the average radius is 6,400 kilometres. Equatorial diameter is
40,009 kilometres but for the benefit of rounding it is taken as 40,000 kilometres.
Latitude, Longitude and other Important Lines
To locate a certain place on earth or to know its location, it is necessary to understand
the ‘latitude’ and ‘longitude’. The time of a certain place can be known from the
location of longitude.The location from south or north can be known from latitude,
in the same way location from east or west can be known from prime meridian.
Latitude =
A latitude is the angular distance of a place rN
north or south of the Equator. There are is
180° parallels of latitude. Each parallel of ° yon
latitude is a circle. All the parallels of s
latitude are not of equal length. The ‘ites L-\ taustr Fad
Equator, at 0°, is the most important latitude er
and the largest circle. It divides the earth
into Northern Hemisphere and the Southern FF
Hemisphere. The distance between any two
parallels of latitude is always equal. The North .
Pole and the South Pole are the fixed points and he
serve as basic points of reference (fig. 2.6). Fig. 2.6 : Angular distance from equator
North Pole
90° Determining Latitude
The imaginary line is actually the radius of the
n earth sphere.The value of the angle thus formed
through those two lines is equivalent to the
a pol latitude of that particular place. Therefore, the
(esses equatorial Zap latitude is the angular distance of a place north
Nee] or south of the equator. If a line is drawn from
— 0 autor pee any place on the earth to its centre then that
line will create an angle with the equatorial
plane. The value of that angle is the latitude
of that place (fig. 2.7). The latitude of a place
; sou Poe situated to the north of the equator is ~
Fig. 2.7: Equant ene north pole designated as the north latitude 8

The Universe and Our Earth 15
and that of the south as the south latitude. The total value of the angle created by the
circle at the centre of the earth is 360°.These angles are being divided into degrees
(°), minuets (’) and seconds (”). Thus the value of the equator is 0°.The latitude of
the north pole is 90° North and that of the south pole is 90° South.
Some latitudes are very famous.
wins <a a worm POLE One of them is 23.5° north latitude,
wu? atl 2 y ae it is called the Tropic of Cancer and
[ Pineal hy gat. 23.5° south latitude is called the
“Yoeread. | ake te ‘ Tropic of Capricorn. 66.5° north
wtwh FPP | wegen ee latitude is called Arctic Circle and
Ae ce la EOF CANS | TSE ai
| i 8 = ¢ Lag! lo | equaron similarly 66.5° south latitude is
Va PEN PT ns called Antarctic Circle (fig. 2.8).
aes ao a. j-th The equator is known as the great
Sct pata SOUTH POLE There are different methods of
Fig. 2.8 : Latitude and longitude determining the latitude of a place.
Out of them we are discussing about
two methods.
1. Determination of latitude by sextant : Sextant is an instrument by which the
altitude of the sun can be measured. The latitude of any place can be determined
after finding out the altitude of the noon sun with the help of a sextant. The following
formula can be applied to find out the latitude of a place.
The formula is : 90° minus the altitude of the sun at noon + the sun's declination.
So, the latitude = 90° — (altitude of the declination) = 90° — (50°+ 12°) = 90°- 38° = 52°
south. If the place under consideration is in the northern hemisphere then it will
require to add the declination value of north and to subtract the declination value of
south. Similarly if the place is in the southern hemisphere then the declination value
of south is to added and that of the north to be subtracted.
2. Determining latitude with the help of a pole star : In the equator, the location of
the pole star is in the horizon and its latitude is 0°. From the equator towards north pole
for every 1° of approach the altitude also increases by 1°. Ultimately in the pole, the
altitude of the pole star rises to 90°. So,the degree of latitude for the equator is 0° and
that of the north pole is 90°. In other words, the degree of latitude increases with
any approach towards the north pole.
<
R

16 Geography and Environment
Longitude Nort
Longitude is the angular distance of a place ia BIW
east or west of the Prime Meridian. There are

+48 “ z sag 167 18F 6h ta \
360° meridians of longitude which run from wo 28 tt Bese
North Pole to South Pole. All longitudes ese Ee tI o0'E.
are half circles. The Prime Meridian is Cay ae aoe i we
longitude 0°. All meridians are of equal length Nee a ae inside /
but they are not parallel. The distance between é f J
any two meridian is not equal. They converge a
from the Equator to the Poles (fig. 2.9). Fig. 2.9 : Longitude and angular distance
Determination of longitude : The longitude of a place can be determined by two
methods. These are : (1) by the difference of local time, (2) by Greenwich mean time.
(1) By the difference of local time : Whenever, the meridian of any place comes in
front of the sun i.e. when the sun appears just overheads then it is considered as noon
and the local time is taken as is noon. Ultimately other times of the place are
determined on the basis of local time.We know that there is a difference of 4 inutes
of time for 1° of difference of longitude. In other way, we can say that for every 4
minutes, the longitude differs by 1°. For example, if in any place, the local time is 12
noon, then the local time for any place located 10° east of the previous place will be
12:00 noon + (10 X 4) minutes or 12 hours 40 minutes. For the place lying 10° west of
the former place, the local time would be 12:00 noon — (10 X 4) minutes or 11 hours
20 minutes.
(2) By Greenwich mean time : In order to maintain international uniformity, one
uniform time, corresponding to the Prime Meridian, is adopted by all countries. Each
place lying on this line of the world has the same time, called Greenwich Mean
Time. Every 15° east or west of Greenwich Meridian, the time changes by one hour.
East is ahead and west is behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT). The Greenwich
Meridian is 0° and 90° meridian run exactly in the middle of Bangladesh. So, the time
difference will be 90 X 4=360 minutes of 6 hours. This is the local time of 90°
meridian which is considered the standard time of Bangladesh. When it is 12 noon in
Bangladesh, London time is 6 in the morning.
Important Lines
Equator : Keeping both the place in equal distance, an imazinary line has been drawn
which encircles the globe from west to east is known as the equator. Others name co
of equator— 0° latitude and great circle. S

The Universe and Our Earth 17
. . * Arctic °
Tropic of cancer and Tropic of capricorn : The 665N.
23.5° latitude in the northern and southern isi” ;
hemisphere are know as the Tropic of cancer and . i Greenwich ot 235N.
the Tropic of capricorn. The Tropic of cancer 4 q+ Te
passes through the central part of Bangladesh. “|S Sinttnew canine o
In the middle region of these two lines, <n TtOpi6 Fm |
sunshine falls on the earth perpendicularly. — mS aay.
pire Ci,
Arctic circle and Antarctic circle : The 66.5° See
i h Antarctic
north acid spat ta tudes are: know ax the Fig. 2.10 : Some important latitudes and
Arctic and Antarctic circles (fig. 2.10). prime meridian
Task : Find out the capital cities of the neighbouring countries by their latitudes
and longitudes.
International Date Line
In 1884 in United States of America, an international convention regarding
‘Longitude and Time’ created a special longitudinal line. It identified the 180°
longitudinal line as the International Date Line (fig. 2.11). The International
Date Line is not a straight line. The longitude of 180° passes through
many islands in the Pacific Ocean.
suey Monte Ships or planes when
tao"
=i > A they cross _ the
eset re ; International Date
[WorcockatNahl ry eS & oot Eo Sea I ADOT] according to the
5 a VAN direction Line, add or
HAO subtract aday they are
ES peas i hee oe. Tee cockatAtemon) travelling in. When
PERCH LG | travelling eastward ,
wo abe: S they add a day.When
w. COTS g/ ‘TesaaKaNOT ©— travelling westward,
OTB they deduct a day
Monday 0° Greenwich (fig. 2.12).
. . (Get eoek at Morning) . . Calculations for a
Fig, 2.11 : The difference betweens international date line and local time given meridian to find
out the time and place
have been explained
in the next chapter.
Forma-3, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

18 Geography and Environment
The International Date Line has been a}
>) Aretle || Ocean
curved in some places. Though running 7 | ls {| mai
along 180° east and west longitude over the Set |
Pacific ocean but to avoid the land masses wef Se aie 2h ===
of north eastern Siberia and Aleutian, pele Cr Stera 5 Le a ETS
Figi and Chatham islands. The International © “0 Baging
Date Line has been curved 11° towards 9 3 6 ca {| ean ee
the east in Aleutian, Figi and Chatham 7 - fog | ;
islands to avoid land masses and 12° east Fad : i 53
in the Bering Strait over the water bodies. = | 2% a3
If it was not drawn this way, the people ~~, |feeeicacr ("8% Hawai land
would have to count two different local times “ | har a %
in the same place of the island. ope Se ;
880 | 4 Samos Island i
Task : Write about the importance of a TioiaiGiwon SS ao eae
International Date Line in human life x Prenat funge ene _| .
a SP hen |
re <2" _|q | Chatham Island
8 |Y
Nor IZaeweeel
FLEES 135° 160° 188" E 180° 165° W150” 135°
: Fig. 2,12 : International date line
A ae B The antipodes : The earth is round, so it has an
ta opposite place on the other side of the earth. From
VAN 7 any point of the earth surface any imaginary line
G Nae crossing through the centre of the earth is called
South the Antipode of the first point i.e. opposite side of
Fig. 2.13 : The antipodes the earth (fig. 2.13).
A certain place situated in a particular longitude is situated in the opposite longitudinal
line. It means the summing up result will be 180°. As the distance between two
longituds will be 180° the time difference will be 180 x4 = 720 minutes or 12 hours
= 12 hours.
Task : Find out the antipodes of Dhaka of the globe in group. te
3
S
N

The Universe and Our Earth 19
The Movement of the Earth
The Earth has two motions or movements, rotation and revolution. It was thought
earlier that the earth was stationery and the sun moved round the earth. But it was
proved later that the sun is stationery and the earth moves round the sun. The earth
moves round the sun on its own axis once every 24 hours a day. The axis of the
earth is inclined at an angle of 23 degrees 30 minutes with the perpendicular to its
plane of orbit. The earth moves from west to east on its own axis a day. Movement on
its own axis a day is called Rotation and movement round the sun a year on orbit is
called Revolution.

Rotation

The movement of the earth around the Sun is called its Rotation. The path along

which the Earth travels around the Sun is called the Orbit.

Different places on the Earth’s surface move at different speeds. Places near the Poles

hardly show any movement, while those at the Equator spin around at more than

1,600 kilometres per hour.

We are not thrown away from the earth surface and we don’t feel it inspite of the

motion of the earth. The reasons are :

1. Humans, animals, air etc. move in the same speed along with the surface of the
earth so we don’t feel the motion of the earth.

2. The earth attracts all the things towards its centre by its gravitation power, so we
are not thrown away from it.

3. We don’t feel earth’s motion or we are not thrown away as we are too small
compared to its huge size.

4. We don’t feel the motion as the motion of moving of the earth is certain at every
place.

5. If one thing out of two moves and another one keeps standing on earth, then
it is understood that it has motion.Thus, there is no matter before the earth which
is static or equal though we can understand the motion of the earth.

Proofs of Rotation

The proof that the earth moves from the west towards the east on its own axis is :

1. Pictures sent by spacecraft : Pictures sent from the satellite and spacecraft show
« _ that the earth moves from west to east. These pictures are the most modern and
~ ’ .

S correct proof of earth’s movement or rotation.

20 Geography and Environment
_ eS. 2. The size of the earth :If any delicate round shaped
naan i “~s thing spins on its own axis like a top, then a
a | ? centripetal and centrifugal power develops at a time
a I Yeo which makes the poles a little bit compressed and
SY middle part a little bit enlarged. By virtue of
iy movement at the time of birth the delicate earth got
toe squeezed in the north and south poles a little bit
= and centre part swelled up. Scientist Newton said,this
Fig, 2.14 : Size of the ear size of the earth has become like this due to this
movement (fig. 2.14). Northen Hemisphere
3. Cause of day-night : In most parts of the world there | Low Pressure High Presaure
is day and night. It means 12 hours day and 12 hours night &
which are the principal reasons of rotation of the earth. If
there was no rotation then one part of the earth would
have been dark for ever and the other part would have High Pressure Low Pressure
been sunny. Lew Preseure High Pressure
4. Ferrel’s law : We know that sea waves and air tums o
right hand side in the north pole and left hand side in ‘4
the south pole. This turning away is known as Fertel's % Xe
law (fig. 2.15). High Pressure Low Preesure
The results of Rotation : The changes we see because Southem Hemisphere
of the rotation are : Fig, 2.15 ; Ferrel’s law
1, Occurrence of day and night in the world : Day and nightis the result of rotation.
The earth is round and it does not have any light of its own. The earth gets light from
the sun. The Earth during movement around its axis, becomes lighted with the rays
of the sun. When it faces the Sun, that part is day. And the opposite side remains
dark as the sunlight does not reach there. This dark part is night (fig. 2.16).
Evening 4 Due to rotation of the earth,
aS $9] alternately the illuminated portion
VA \ becomes dark and the dark portion
# : becomes illuminated and that is
= : i When the dark portion is
XS / illuminated, it becomes day and
gi : similarly the illuminated portion
Morning 2 turns dark, it becomes night there.
Fig, 2.16 : Occurrence of day and night In this process, day and night =
occur. So, in some places it is 12 hours of day and 12 hours of night. N

The Universe and Our Earth 21
2. The cause of the high and low tide : High tide and low tide happen due to
rotation of the earth. Tide does not occur at the same time everyday. For sample,
time of high tide in two consecutive days may vary by 52 minutes. This time
difference occurs because of rotation.

3. The cause of air and sea wave : From the equator to both the poles the diameter
of latitude and the motion of earth’s movement become slower gradually near the
two poles. The air wave or sea wave of the earth turn away towards right side in the
north pole and left side in the south without going down directly from high pressure
to low pressure zone.

4. The cause of temperature difference : At day time, temperature rises
because of sunshine. At night it cools down after radiating heat. If there were no
rotation, night would not have come after day and the difference of temperature
would not occur. This difference of temperature is one of the results of rotation.

5. Measuring time : It becomes easier to measure time because of rotation. One-
twenty fourth time which is full round of one movement is taken as one hour and its
one sixtieth part is called one minute. And one sixtieth part is counted as one second.
6. Animal and plant world : Because of the rotation of the earth all parts of earth
experience sunlight at day time and no light at night time. Sunlight is necessary for
plants and animals. They collect energy from the sun at day time and utilize it for
their metabolism at night. Some animals collect food at day time while some do
it at night. Day and night occur because of earth’s rotation and the rules and
regulations of plants and animals depend mostly on it.

Revolution

The earth moves continuously on its axis towards a particular direction because
of the gravitation of the sun (opposite of the hands of watch) and moves round the
sun at a certain period. This motion of the earth is called Revolution.

It takes 365 days 5 hours 48 minutes 47 seconds to move round the sun once. It is
called Solar Year. But we take 365 days as one year. According to this account, extra
6 hours remain every year. To bring a balance for this extra time in every 4 years in
the month of February, 24 hours or 1 day is added. Thus, in the year in which February
is of 29 days there are 366 days and this is called a leap Year.

22 Geography and Environment
The results of Revolution : The results of Revolution are : (1) the increase and
decrease of day and night, (2) season change.
The increase and decrease of day and night : The real causes of the increase and
decrease of day and night are :
(a) Earth’s round shape with curves in two poles, (b) Earth’s parabolic orbit, (c)
Earth’s continuous rotation and revolution, (d) Location of poles in the one direction,
(e) Angular location of the earth on its axis.
At the time of revolution earth leans itself on 66.5° angle towards the Sun. On 21st March
the sunshines vertically on the equator. Then, the sunshine goes towards north pole
gradually. ;
; On 21st June the earth comes to a certain
% aah eet place where the sun rays fall on the earth’s
eS P. surface at 23.5° north latitude (fig. 2.17).
sy ef During this time the north pole leans
Aes toward the sun and south pole is far away
—s oa from the sun. For this reason the length of
weet BY the day is longer and the temperature is
Earth higher in the north pole. In the north pole
31 3 the longest day and shortest night is
; Sout Fe June 21. On this day, the sun reaches
Fig. 2.17 : Angular location .
of the earth on its axis the Tropic of cancer.
On the 23rd September the sun again shines vertically on the equator like 21st March.
So, the day and night are equal. From 23rd September the sun starts moving again
towards south pole. On December 22 the sun rays fall on the Tropic of capricorn
causing the longest day in South Pole, and shortest day in the North Pole.
On 21st March and 23rd September the sun shines vertically on equator. These two
days and nights are equal all over the world. That day is called Equinox. On
March 21 there is Spring in the north pole, so it is called Vernal Equinox.
On 23rd September there is Autumn in the north pole, and the day is called
Autumnal Equinox.
Proofs of Revolution
1. Displacement, disappearance and reppearing of stars in the night sky : In a
cloudless night sky it is seen that the stars change their place from east to west.
Then one day they disappear. After one year they come back to their original place. 2
This change proves that the earth has motion. &

The Universe and Our Earth 23
2. The change of location of the sun in the sky : The sun is seen in different
places in different times. It does not rise in the east from the same place everyday
and does not set in the west in the same place.Six months of the year the sun moves
a little towards south and rise from the east. The rest six months, it moves towards the
north and then rises in the east. If the world had not moved and stayed in a fixed place,
the sun would have risen from the same place. It happens due to the revolution of the
earth.
3. The revolution of different planets : It is seen through the telescope that all the
planets are moving round the sun. The earth is a planet, so it also has motion or
revolution.
4. Direct experience : The astronauts saw the motion of the earth from the space.
5. Gravitational theory : The earth is very small compared to the size of the Sun.The
Sun is 13 lakh times bigger than the earth. So, usually the earth moves round the sun
because of its gravitational force.
Change of Season
The entire year is divided into several parts according to the difference of temperature.
Each part is called a Season. The whole year is divided into 4 parts according to the
difference of temperature. They are : Summer, Autumn, Winter and Spring. We know,
the entire world is divided into two poles. The northern part of the equator is north
pole and the southern part is south pole. When there is summer in the north pole,
winter prevails in the south pole. Again, when there is winter in the north pole, there
is summer in south pole. In the same way, when there is Spring in the north pole,
there is Autumn in the south pole. And Autumn comes to the North pole and spring is
in the South pole. The geographical location of Bangladesh is in the north pole. Here
extreme heat is felt around the month of June. During this period cold winter prevails
in the south pole.
Causes of changing season : There are causes for changing the season on earth :
(1) Increase and decrease of heat because of the difference of temperature in
day and night in different parts of the world :The sun comes near the pole which
sees the longest day and shortest night because of the revolution of earth. Its
opposite pole experiences longest night and smallest day. The earth receives
temperature at day time and the land surface becomes heated. And at night, it
becomes cool after radiating the heat. During this time the amount of temperature it
« absorbs in the longer day, the same amount of temperature cannot radiate in a shorter
S night. That place experiences hot weather because of the heat stored there and

24 Geography and Environment
summer is felt there. In the opposite pole the day is small and the heat it absorbs
cannot radiate at night and winter is felt there.
(2) The round shape of the earth : As the earth is round, the sun rays fall on
somewhere vertically and somewhat obliquely. As a result, there is difference of
temperature and the change of season.
(3) Parabolic orbiting path of the earth : The orbiting path of the earth is parabolic.
So, the distance between the earth and the sun increases and decreases at different
times of the year. Temperature changes because of it and so the season changes.
(4) Angular location on the orbit of the earth : At the time of revolution, earth’s
polar region lies towards the same direction at 66.5° angle without making a right
angle. For this reason the north pole and the south pole come near the sun due to it once
| a year. The pole which bends towards
A Y the sun, experiences vertical sunshine.
y Yo, | Vertical Sun Rays | At that time it experiences the highest
io L ‘ temperature. When the sun does not
~ shine vertically, the temperature falls
Gi ae and the season changes.
AS we ~ ee 4 | (5) Due to revolution : The sunshine
Slanting Rays >. <i LEE ———7 5
/ NEB aes ‘| falls on different places due to
je LL ./ | revolution and the difference of
 , temperature of air occurs. As a result,
the difference is seen in climate. It is
Fig. 2.18 : The sun light falling vertically on the 3
‘A’ location gets hotter then that of ‘B’ location called Changing of season.
The process of changing season : We know there are four seasons on earth —
Summer, Autumn, Winter and Spring. Now we will see how the season changes.
The causes of changing season can be learnt from the four locations of earth during
its moving round the sun.
Summer in the North Pole and Winter in the South Pole : After 21st March the
earth bends towards the sun gradually when going forward on its axis, in this situation
the greater is the lighted up days in the north pole. Following this system
on 21st June the sun starts shining vertically on the Tropic of cancer. So, 21st June
has the longest day and the shortest night in the North Pole. That day is the last day
of the Sun to come towards the north, from next day it again starts coming back to
the South Pole. In the North Pole before the beginning of summer it starts one anda
half months earlier because of the day being bigger and the next one and half &

The Universe and Our Earth 25
months Summer lasts. During Summer time in South Pole just the opposite
situation is seen and winter is set. The sun shines for a lesser period because of its
bending position. So, the day becomes shorter and night is longer. At day time the
surface becomes heated, at night it becomes cooler because of the radiation of
heat. Then winter weather prevails there. In the South Pole this time is called
Winter Season (fig. 2.19).

23rd September

Autumnal Equinox

N. Pole
Day and Night of Equal Duration
Pe oe
a “s
N. Pole /* L Pole *N. Pole
PT Longest Night Le st D: L/
pone beeen EA Shortest Day »y a Shortest Nighi mee 2tst June,
Winter Solstice aX ol ae y, S. Longest Night eas ummer Solstice
“ee Shortest Night “ /" wN Shortest Day "Qs
S. Pole N. Pole Day and Night of # S. Pole
< Equal Duration o”
° ° eo 7
S. Pole
21st March Vernal Equinox
Fig. 2.19 : Revolution of earth - fluctuation of day and night - change of season

Autumn in the North Pole and Spring in the South Pole : From June 21 the
South Pole starts bending towards the Sun. The parts of South Poles experiences less
sunshine and the parts of south see more sunshine. So, on September 23 the sun
shines vertically on the equator. Therefore, day and night become equal everywhere at
that time. The heat absorbed at day time gets radiated at night. So, the amount of
heat and cold in the weather remains same. During this time Autumn and Spring
prevail in North and South Poles respectively.One and a half months before the 23rd
September Autumn dawns in the North Pole and it lasts for one and a half months.
Winter in the North Pole and Summer in the South Pole : After September 23
the earth starts bending towards the sun, during this time the South Pole comes closer
to the sun. The North Pole starts going further away. So, the sun shines vertically in
the south and angularly in the north pole. As a result, the day becomes shorter in the
North and longer day and shorter night in the South Pole. On the 22nd December
the sun shines vertically on the Tropic of capricorn. On that day, day becomes shorter
Forma-4, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

26 Geography and Environment
and night becomes longer in North Pole, and so winter season dawns. That is the last
day of the sun to go 23rd September
towards south and from autumn
the next day the sun again “a : — i aN
and continues upto one JN
and half months. During , i. :
this period summer owevent
prevails in the South Pole. Fig. 2.20 : Seasons of the earth
Spring in the North Pole and Autumn in the South Pole : On moving in its own
orbit the earth comes back to such a place after December 22 up to such a place
between December 22 and March 21 that it starts shining vertically on the equator.
So, day and night become equal all over the world on March 21. The air space
remains heated at day time because of sunshine and at night it gets cooled after
radiating heat. During this period spring is in the North pole and Autumn in the South
Pole. On March 21 day and night become equal all over the world and that day is
called Vernal Equinox (fig. 2.20).
Impact of Changing Season
e The change of season controls the daily life of human beings.
e It influences the economic activities as well as the professions of human beings.
@ Many places in the world appear to be the centres of recreation due to season change.
e The change of season controls the growth and distribution of animal kingdom.
e Different kinds of natural disaster are related with the change of season.
2
g

The Universe and Our Earth 27
Task : Fill in the blanks in the table below in a group.
What happens in the case of northern hemisphere?
Time The rays of the sun | Information on | Names of seasons
falling vertically on | day and night
geographical lines during
revolution of the earth
Tisiwe —_[feicofemer | |
23rd September|Equator ||
22nd December | Tropic of capricorn a
aistMarch equator | |
Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. Which planet does have 22 satellites?
a. Mars b. Jupiter
c. Saturn d. Uranus
2. Due to revolution —
i. day and night occur in the world.
ii. season changes.
iii. temperature gets different.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iii
c. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii
25
Ss
AQ

28 Geography and Environment
From the following figure give answer to the questions of 3 and 4.
a ?m=>
GUNN
QA
SIT”
3. Which vertical line marked by 0° is called —
a. Equator b. Axis
c. Prime meridian d. Tropic of cancer
4. The above lines are important because by them —
i. local time and standard time can be determined.
ii. the exact location of a certain place can be known.
iii. the right location of the ship bound for sea can be known.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iii
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
roy
|

The Universe and Our Earth a9
Creative questions
1. ea,
QE :
\ | Wy, ids
a. What is moon? a
b. What is meant by Equator?
c. Explain why the planet marked with ‘P’ is suitable for animals living.
d. Make a comparative analysis of the planets marked by ‘Q’ and ‘R’.
2. 23rd September
4
oT 12th July
why v Mis
WZ
22nd December s = 21st June
oy, S
CX
3rd January
21st March
a. Which one is the longest day in the northern hemisphere?
b. What is meant by Leap Year? Explain.
c. Explain how day and night will be changed in the place ‘W’?
iS d. Is the same season seen in the place “W’ and ‘X’ during the rotation of earth?
“ Describe it.

Chapter Three
Map Reading and Its Uses
Map is a very important tool for a geographer. A clear idea can be formed about a
region from it. We can show the whole world or a part of it through a map.We
can provide information about a particular region by drawing a map and using
some signs. A map is necessary not only for the geographer but also for all
people especially travelers, administrators, planners, architects, engineers,
agriculturists, meteorologists and even the common people. In this chapter
classification of map, its importance, uses, local time and standard time etc. will be
discussed.
Cop PoalOoo hw, 7 i
mda poo; OOO Sy ewe + A MAP OF A VILLAGE
[| A can gu aa Woeee of
ees n ° Uttar Para” a ae . ry
Petr a POA A
an [7 (_] Play Ground ' LZ 7 TT a te
on | TI] VY | | is a eS S|
iP r i [| School fal o//aMadhya Para o — ‘Waters, |
EAHA | CELT LIT Mesaue, 4oaB - ( a0 LS eS
aI 1
= mel fa] S| <a TFA Fen ca OCT TTT S
iMohajan Bar > }---{ Fisherman Para s\\bea5 SEAL LL
Elpashchim Para o Post Bazar Ue
[ [\mosque___/ .-? Temple, Office TiC Tp 3
= ‘Lt | LT, ct L_| U Le Purba pao
* | 4 S ich
WA [| jo Reo _.
ZZ AFP 7 a FER epee
: = ie ob Pen Gael
tl Soon pie Ree lore
fo Dakshin Para aos nf gran ef
Py ood rt SS\\ Marsh Land
N Settlement =9 Rad Oo
t Scale 4 Inches = 1 Mile River —— Railways +++
At the end of this chapter, we will be able to :
e Explain the concept, importance and use, of a map.
e Describe the maps of various kinds.
e Explain how to present information on a map for practical use.
e Explain local time and standard time.
e Explain why time changs from place to place? x
e Use of GPS and GIS in the map. »

Map Reading and Its Uses 31
Concept of Map, Importance and Use
Look at the following map. It is the administrative map of Bangladesh. On the
paper the international boundary of Bangladesh, countries around the borders of
Bangladesh are located and the sea is drawn. Besides these, it also shows the seven
divisions, the districts in each division, their names and areas. The whole
administrative area has been shown in one page (fig. 3.1). In this way, the whole
world, different continents, countries or different divisions and districts can be shown
on a map in one page.
8° 9” 90° a1 92°
BANGLADESH
” a . ADMINISTRATIVE UNITS -
Parke ¢ \ International voundany n Capital e
| A RANGPURIDIMISION™ 5.1 ©/ we Rivers a
; “\pintpur ‘a ie wh ni .
ia INDIA Hy . FR al INDIA 28
(West Bengal) i ~~ fg ROL. fee
~) Fn Sey 5 oo eg AN,
a y%s Napgaon! -” Ko Sad, SNe Rouen
fo Se eR , sid onde
eo Pees Oey
SC) me a
Fs scun Ne otiges beasione'y 2s
INDIA 2 ae Fa oT, ea (Pirpura) A \\
yon Jeol onto A Stetconc prs >
cr, Liga Viste. Sahai apa Srtanh
Ne. lice a
oe ‘Hf t G, oe “Ne \ Beans \
A eo 5 ee ’ 2S vf
SUEY GO L AI
Cox's Bazar aN i
BAY OF BENGAL arn)
oO 32 64 Kilometres \. © MYANMAR
\ \)
\
% 82° 88° East of Greenwich 90° 91° Ta,
8 Fig. 3.1 : Administrative units of Bangladesh

32 Geography and Environment
You might have seen a wall map in your school. In your Geography and Environment
books or in any atlas you might have seen maps. Map gives us ideas about a region,
the nature of land, climate, plants, earth, water and many other things.We can learn
a lot about different continents and oceans through it. The map may be defined as a
representation of the earth’s pattern as a whole or a part of it on a plane surface with
conventional signs, drawn to a scale and projection so that each and every point on it
correspond to the actual part.
The word map comes from the Latin words ‘mappa’. In earlier times maps were
drawn on clothes. The size of the map varies according to scale. There are three
ways with which the scale of the map is shown.
Methods of showing scale
(a) By statement
(b) By graphical scale
(c) By representative fraction or R.F.
(a) By statement : We express the scale by statement such as four miles to one
inch, one mile to 16 inches, etc. in every respect the first 1 (inch) is the map
distance and second number (mile, yard, kilometre) is the distance on the ground.
(b) By graphical scale : The scale of map can be expressed by dividing a particular
line into a number of equal parts and is marked to show what these divisions
represent on the actual ground. By drawing a line of 5 centimetres and dividing it into
5 equal parts,each part is 10 kilometres (fig. 3.2). Leaving one centimetres on the left
side and further dividing into equal parts of smaller sections each representing
2 kilometres.
A
Kilometres 10 6 20 10 20 30 40 Kilometres
Fig 3.2 : Linear scale
(c) By representative fraction or R.F: Representative fraction expresses the
proportion of the scale by a fraction in which the numerator is one and the
denominators also in the same unit. Representation fraction is commonly written
as R.F. and is shown in the map as 1:100,000. This means one unit on the map «
represents 100,000 on the ground. If the 1 unit is in inch then 100,000 is also in inch, &

Map Reading and Its Uses 33
if it is in centimetres then both the units should be same. The formula of calculating
RF. is given below :
RF= Map snISe
Ground distance

Information that will be given in a map depends on (a) scale, (b) projection, (c)
conventional signs, (d) skill of the cartographer and the, (e) type of map.
In the modern world, use of maps is very important. Map is known as the tools of
geography but it is also very important for the students, historians, engineers,
businessmen, journalist, soldiers, pilots, captains of the ships and many more.
Classification of Maps
There may be various types of maps. Generally, on the basis of scale used in
scale, again the maps and subject matter, the maps are classified into two groups.
According to the maps are of two types : (a) large scale maps and (b) small scale
maps.Navigation charts, aeronautical charts, mouza maps or cadastral maps are large
scale maps. As a small area is enlarged, so many date or information can be
accommodated in the map. Atlases, wall maps are small scale maps. The whole
world or the continent or any big region like that of a country when shown ona
sheet of paper, small space remains in the map. So, alot of information cannot be
shown on this type of map.
There are many types of maps : Mouza Map
1. Cadastral or Mouza map : The term
cadastral is derived from French word |
‘cadestre’ meaning register of territorial Py Le)
property. The cadastral maps are drawn to os
register the ownership of landed property by (|
demarcating the boundaries of fields and een)
buildings. The village maps of our country <a (:"\
and the city plan maps belong to this {20 |
category (fig. 3.3). These maps are very large | ~~ 1999-2000 Kilometres
scale maps which are drawn on a scale of 16 —_
inch to 1 mile or 32 inch to 1 mile. Fig. 3.3 : Mouza map

Forma-5, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

34 Geography and Environment
2. Topographic map : Topographic maps are made on a large scale on the basis of
precise survey of the area. They show general surface features in detail which
contain both natural landscape and man-made features. The scale of the topographic
map varies from | inch to 1 mile to %4 inch to 1 mile. Topographic map shows relief,
rivers, forests, villages, towns, roads and railways (fig. 3.4). The topographic maps
are prepared in different scales in different countries. The standard and most
popular topographic survey map of British Ordinance Survey is 1 inch to 1 mile.
Topographic maps of Bangladesh have been made into three scales. ie.
Gi.) 1 inch=1 mile, (ii.) 1:50,000 and (iii.) 1:250,000. The last two types of scales
have been adopted for the latest topographic maps of Bangladesh.
“Ae 13 P CSET 16 Pa 18° 19
RACE Murnamagge ES sear? Pome ae
Ba aS ft. | Pirerchak “| (S227 ter op aye at oe NY
L c Se iQ. Torbag A - t6o wpe of AEs fee
SX SSG ual > = —
on “ek te = sae = je te s ba
2. SOS EF Bagerkhol - <& ‘ qer gta ai] ry. Market bell
Ut, SR = A ee at sgt, er
2a sie ae OR = veer fps eng Oo {et %
elf ATER EE fo § Hathimganj, * GANT rte)
oi ~ xt \ a sole “. ot Sie x, vat ed
‘® Srirampur Bazar “2 Melagon aoe ~~ ts 4 ayet am ar) ee
Sed DS er ET SE ae
Gat OMe ace tee Maanaboag ev oe Jay jayai Bul ‘
fate 88: 7 panpur Nabe ae Ere te Me
TN an. et tye ef.
ce : wen hte sy. one
4, OE ree ee arene ae
TOPOGRAPHIC N a at axt ath nt at. & TPE 25 33 ot
0 its | Sripur) #8 grt Kotowaten AS we ry 27.
a . wa” Ae Eh. Banua Bill 72 4
24° 50! vel aw Hl on " seipgfiar=* 50
. “8 telat SY. (PRESS) fe/a 82
ea ae Ryle: "2030 T Nayaaat ¢/E== ee Bae t
Tene gig thes { Mohangari* 3 / 8 eS te ANG) tee
Pai Soe Ce es mh fe Pe Ctl Ne ae
wee Se RE Tre te) at Fad Vets x. au
fe ff ist eg PSO Paes 16" me ist ne vy,
Fig. 3.4 : Topographic map
oo
ita)
>
N

Map Reading and Its Uses 35
3. Wall map : Wall maps are generally drawn a o o Ey ca
for using in the classroom. The world as a | Woy BANGLADESH _,.
whole or in hemispheres are shown on the f My 0s _84kilomeres
wall maps. Wall maps may also be prepared |, ~~-Raneru ) INDIA j -
for a country or continent, large or small INP at IN meee,

. . : J { \MYMENSHING) ~)_7*y
according to need (fig. 3.5). Their scale is | | 7” passuat ‘ay /oyuner f .
smaller than topographic maps but larger than Se 4 us p ene
atlas map. Fn OMS wo
4. Chorographical or Atlas map : A| maT 4 GU bn
collection of map is called an Atlas. The scale Le 5 {i we fh Ne
of the atlas map varies from 1:100,000 to \ y i clipart |
1:1000,000. These are small scale map which |... bya _ } 4 a
gives a more or less highly generalized BANOP SENSE a
information regarding the physical and %
economic conditions of different regions of wt a5"careftnmm 6° ge NB
the world. Fig. 3.5 : Wall map
5. Physical map : Map which shows the natural features as mountains, plains, rivers,
deserts, wetlands of a country or a region is known as physical maps.These natural
features are shown with different colours. Plants are shown by green colour,
mountains and hills by brown colour, rivers and water bodies by blue colour and
highland or plateau by yellow or orange colour.

6. Geological map: The rocks that form the crust of the earth, their mode of
formation and deposition are shown on geological map.
7. Climatic map : The climatic map shows the average condition of temperature,
pressure, wind and precipitation of a region over a long period of time.
8. Vegetation map : Vegetation map shows the natural vegetation of a region.

°9

8

36 Geography and Environment
9. Soil map : The soil map shows the various types of soil covering the area.
Agriculturists use this map usally as it highlights the quality of soil of a particular area.
10. Cultural map : Economic condition, political boundary, historical places are
shown on cultural maps. Cultural map can be divided into some parts. These are :
a. Political map : Most widely used map showing the boundary of a region,
country, division, districts etc.
b. Distribution map : Map showing the distribution of population, crops, animals,
industries of a region or a country is known as the distribution map.
c. Historical map : Map showing places of historical importance is the historical map.
d. Social map : Map showing the distribution of religion, language, nationality is
known as social map.
e. Land use map : Major land uses of an area or region are shown in land use maps.
These maps show various kinds of land uses in urban and rural areas such as
toads, buildings, industries and parks are shown in urban land use maps and
cropland, homestead, fallow land, forest etc. are shown on a rural land use map.
Techniques of Presenting Information in a Map
A Map is a geographer’s tool which is used by various types of people from
different occupations. The natural and cultural features that are shown in a map should
be universal, so that people belonging to any country can read the map by
knowing the international conventional signs used in the map. The international
conventional signs are given so that students have a general understanding of those
26
signs (fig. 3.6). s

Map Reading and Its Uses 37
Table of international conventional sign used in map
Broad Gauge Railway | Metre Gauge Railway | Duel Gauge Railway| Water Bodies
SS Sa See a=
River Lake Village Mosque
= fw)
SS Ct) ite
Temple Tree/Forest Light House Airport
‘ g
lan foe He
tr % 22 9 i
a. 9% 0
Bridge , Idgah Industry
f._N
Embankment
=e
Fig. 3.6 : International conventional sign
Marginal information of a map : All the information required to understand a map
should be around its margins. Marginal information includes (i) Title/heading, (ii)
Scale, (iii) North line, (iv) Legend and (v) Source of data.
(i) Title/heading : Each map has a title or heading. It shows the type of map. If
it is a political map of Bangladesh, the title will be ‘political map’ followed by
Bangladesh.
o (ii) Scale : There are three common ways to show the scale by statement,
& representative fraction/R-F or linear or graphical scale.

38 Geography and Environment

(iii) North line : North line is important for a map. It is usually considered the top

section of the map as northern part of the map. North line can be shown anywhere in

the map within the margin of the map. The position of the north line depends on the

layout and size of the map within the margin.

(iv) Legend : In each map some data is presented in the form of some conventional

signs, colour or shades. The representing signs, colours and shades are shown in the

legend.

(v) Source of data : All maps are drawn on the basis of information or data so the

source of data should be provided outside the margin i.e. border of the map layout.

Local Time and Standard Time

As the earth rotates, every place has its sunrise, sunset and noon.When the Sun is

at its highest point in the sky, it is noon and also known as zenith.

The earth rotates from west to east. So, places in the east see the Sun first. Places in

the west see it later. So, for each 1° of longitude towards the east, a time of 4 minutes

has to be added. For each 1° of longitude towards the west a time of 4 minutes to

be subtracted from the Greenwich Mean Time or GMT, which is the 0° meridian

or prime meridian located at Greenwich in London.

Local time

Everyday the earth moves round her axis from west to east. As a result, the sun

appears earlier in the places located in the east. Due to rotation of the earth, the sun

reaches the zenith of the sky,or in other words, the sun reaches its highest altitude on

a certain place and that hour is treated as 12:00 noon.On the basis of this noon time,

the other time for the day is determined. The time thus determined is the local time

for that place. So, the local time of a place is determined on the basis of the highest

altitude of the sun which can be observed with the help of a sextant.

The earth at the centre creates 360°.The earth requires 1,440 minutes (24 hours

x 60 minutes) to cover this distance of 360° for one time.So,the earth needs

4 minutes (1,440 + 360) to rotate 1° of longitude. Therefore, for 1°difference

of longitude, the difference of time will be 4 minutes. 00
2
S
N

Map Reading and Its Uses 39
Standard Time
In any country there are many meridians of longitude that run through the country.
If there are ten meridians running through a country as each meridian is 4 minutes
apart so, 10 x 4= 40 minutes, so in that country there will be ten different local
times according to the meridians. To avoid this confusion, the local time of a central
meridian of a country is taken as the time for the whole country. This is called the
Standard time. Some countries have great longitudinal extent, so they have more than
one standard time. Example USA has five and Canada six time zones.
There is a general understanding among the countries of the world to select the
standard meridian of any country in multiples of 7.5° longitude. Every 7.5°
longitude makes a difference of 30 minutes.
Time Difference on the Basis of Location
In the earlier chapter we have seen for 1° longitude, the time difference is 4
minutes. We know, earth rotates from West to East. For this reason, in Bangladesh
day comes earlier in the places which are located in the East than those which are
located in the West. From this we can understand that morning comes earlier in
those countries which are located in the East of Bangladesh and those countries
which are located in the West of Bangladesh, morning comes later.
We know for the difference of 1° longitude, time difference becomes 4 minutes. This
1° is divided into 60 minutes and for every 1 minute, time difference becomes 4
seconds. So, for 60 minutes it requires 60 x 4 = 240 seconds or 4 minutes.
On the basis of above discussion, some mathematical calculations will make
it clearer.
Example 1 : The difference of longitude of a place east of Dhaka is 50°30’. When
Dhaka sees 6 0’ clock morning, what is the local time of that place?
Solution
The difference of the place from Dhaka = for 50°30’
=(50x4)minutes+(30 x 4)seconds (east longitude the difference of time will be added)
= 200 minutes + 120 seconds

eo 7 200 minutes + 2 minutes (as 1 minute = 60 seconds)

\ =202 minutes

40 Geography and Environment
Time difference will be 202 minutes or 3 hours 22 minutes.
Here, the place whose local time is to be determined lies to the east of Dhaka. So,
local time will be greater because the sun rose earlier in the east. So, 3 hours 22
minutes is to be added to the time of Dhaka. Noth
fe)
So, the time of that place Dhaka Determind place
= Time in Dhaka + time difference sa
=60' clock + 3 hours 22 minutes West 60’ clock a iUeE at
‘ at morning morning
=9o0’ clock 22 minutes
So, the local time of that place is 9:22 minutes South
Answer : 9:22 minutes.
Example 2 : The longitude of Dhaka is 90° east and that of Riyadh is 45° east.
When the local time of Dhaka is 2 0’ clock noon, what is the local time of Riyadh?
Solution
We know that there is 4 minutes time difference for each longitude
The longitudinal difference between Dhaka and Riyadh 90°— 45° = 45°
Time difference will be 45 x 4 = 180 minutes or 3 hours.
We can understand from the question mentioned 45° east longitude that Riyadh lies
to the west of Dhaka. So, this 3 hours will be deducted from Dhaka’s local time.
So, the local time of Riyadh will be
= 2.0’ clock at noon —3 hours (here 2 0’ clock means 14 hours).
= 14 hours —3 hours
= 11 hours
Answer : The local time of Riyadh will be 11 0’ clock.
Example 3 : The longitude of ‘A’ city is 70°45’ east and that of ‘B’ city is 15°15’.
When the local time of ‘A’ city is 7 0’ clock in the morning, what is the local time of
‘B’ city? a
8

Map Reading and Its Uses 41
Solution
The difference of longitude of the two cities is
= 70°45'-15°15'= 55°30’
We know for each 1 degree time difference is 4 minutes and for each 1 minute
time difference is 4 seconds. So, 55°30’ time difference will be
= (55 x 4) minutes + (30 x 4) seconds
= 220 minutes + 120 seconds
= 220 minutes + 2 minutes (as 1 minute = 60 seconds)
= 222 minutes = 3 hours 42 minutes
As the value of longitude of ‘A’ city is less than “B’ city, we can understand that
‘B’ city stands west of ‘A’ city. So, the local time of ‘B' city can be obtained by
deducting the local time of ‘A’ city.
So, the time will be at place ‘B’
=70' clock morning — 3 hours 42 minutes
= 3 hours 18 minutes means morning 3 hours 18 minutes
Answer : The local time of ‘B’ city is 3 hours 18 minutes.
Example 4 : The local time difference between Dhaka and Tokyo is 3 hours 17
minutes 16 seconds. If the longitude of Dhaka is 90°26' east, what is the longitude of
Tokyo?
Solution
The difference of time between Dhaka and Tokyo is 3 hours 17 minutes 16 seconds.
By calculating = (180 +17) minutes 16 seconds = 197 minutes 16 seconds
In every 4 minutes 1 degree and every 4 seconds | minute time difference. We can get
— For 196 minutes 49° and for rest 1 minute 16 seconds 19’ means 49°19".
So, Tokyo lies to the east and its longitude will be = 90°26’ + 49°19’ = 139°45' east
Answer : 139°45’ east.

Forma-6, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

42 Geography and Environment
GPS and GIS Maps

At present the use of GPS and GIS are the most modem form of information for
study and management.

The English of GPS is Global Positioning System. If we want to know the global
location of a certain place, the easiest way of knowing it is through GPS.

Through GPS the latitude, longitude, height and distance of a certain place can be
found. Besides, the north line, date and time of that place can be known.

Working Principle of GPS i

GPS collects information from the land-satellite through its

receiver (fig. 3.7). To collect this information GPS needs cloud J .
free sky. The GPS machine can work accurately in the clear ff a
sky. Sometimes it faces problems to identify the location of |
steep high hills, buildings and it is time consuming also. | | ea ED \
Benefits of GPS : Among many discoveries of technology | aw
GPS has earned a wide popularity as a very valuable tool for the {|i} es
geographers. With the help of this tool we can find out latitude, (SG ——
longitude and other matters within seconds. In our country a great | \iaayaniae|
problem lies in land surveying. We will be able to identify the | Se
boundary of our land without any problem. This will save much

of our time. During any natural disaster we will be able to send Fig. 3.7: GPS
relief goods to a certain place by identifying its exact location by

latitude and longitude with this GPS.

Demerits of GPS : GPS has some problems along with its benefits. These are— its
Price is high, so it'1s not easily available . Most of the people are not familiar with
it. Besides these, people tend to use traditional system.

Geographical Information System

Storing and analyzing geographical information system is known as GIS. It isa
computerized system of storing information and analysis. This system helps to prepare
future plan through storing geographical information, analysis and management,
identifying spatial problem.The use of GIS started first in 1964 in Canada. Gradually
people started using it widely around 1980. S

Map Reading and Its Uses 43
At present it is being used in land management, natural resource development,
water research, urban and regional planning, population analysis, transport and
communication system analysis.
The utility of a map is increased by it through the presentation of many kinds of
data and analyzing those data in the map. For example,we can have a full idea
of a particular place by showing its water management, topography, land use,
communication, soil, road etc. in a map.
Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. Why is wall map prepared?
a. For classroom b. For field
c. For hills d. For climate
2. What will be the time difference when one moves 5° east from the prime
meridian line?
a. 16 minutes b. 20 minutes
c. 24 minutes d. 28 minutes
Read the following text and answer questions 3 and 4:
The village in which Sumon lives has both plains and lowland. He has drawn a map
after the chapter dealing with the study of map and its use.
3. What kind of map is Sumon’s village?
a. Atlas b. Physical
c. Cultural d. Cadastral
eo
Ss
N

44 Geography and Environment
4. Which colour will be used for land of Sumon’s village?
a. Blue b. White
c. Green d. Brown
Creative questions
1. Flora Begum started for London at 9 o’clock in the morning on Friday from Dhaka.
After landing at Hitherto Airport she saw that it was 6 0’ clock in the evening but
her own watch showed/read 12 o’ clock night.
a. What is Local Time?
b. What is Standard Time? Explain.
c. Ifthe longitude of the city Flora saw was 0°, what is the longitude of Dhaka?
d. Analyze the causes of time difference between Dhaka and the city mentioned
in the lines.
2.
TCO eS
ALTO eS
Y A mii Zea 258
Ba sees:
le : See ees ee ae ¥
Fig.1 Fig. 2
a. What is the full name of GIS?
b. What is Representative fraction? Explain.
c. Explain which map can describe the above figure 1.
d. Analyze the importance of figure 2 in our life.
og
Ss
N

Chapter Four

Internal and External Structure of the Earth
In the very beginning of earth’s history, this planet was a giant, red hot, gaseous
ball. Gradually this gaseous sphere began to cool and solidified forming a thin crust
on its surface. The earth consists of three main layers—the core, the mantle and the
crust. The core is the inner part of the earth, the crust is the outer part and between
them is the mantle. The crust of the earth is composed of a great variety of rocks.
Enduring processes of the landforms of the earth are influenced by form of rocks
and minerals.The surface of the earth is always changeable. This changing nature
has two faces. One occurs suddenly and the other is a slow process. In this chapter
we shall discuss about internal and external structure of the earth, types of rocks,
slow and abrupt change of the earth surface and different types of landforms.

is Ae Mountain Range
at : b
— =e. Plateau —~<< 25 Sy Basin ~—
Peninsula Ar chipe iano Nistand

At the end of this chapter, we will be able to :

e Describe the internal structure of the earth.

e Describe the external structure of the earth.

e Describe the landform change of the earth surface.

« Explain the reason of the abrupt change of the earth surface.

« e Analyze the result and reason of earthquake, tsunami and volcano.
s e Explain the result and reason of slow change of the earth surface.

46 Geography and Environment

e Explain the rivers path way.

e Discuss the landforms created by rivers.

e Describe the characteristics of the main landforms of the earth.

e Analyze the impact of tsunami occurred in the past on the basis of data.
Internal Structure of the Earth
In the very beginning earth was a hot, gaseous ball. From that condition it became
cool and solidified. During that period the heavy metals concentrated at the centre
and comparatively lighter materials sequentially concentrated around that heavy core
according to its density and weight. These different layers called Spheres. The
upper most sphere is called Lithosphere. The upper part of lithosphere is known as
Earth Crust.
The earth's crust : The hard stratum of the rock covering the outer shell of the whole
earth is known as the earth’s crust (fig. 4.1). The thickness of the earth’s crust is
the lowest in comparison to the other interior layers of the earth. On an average, it is
about 20 kilometres. The thickness below the earth’s crust on an average is about 35
kilometres known as SIAL which is composed of Silicon (Si) and of Aluminium
(AL). On the other hand, the earth’s crust beneath the ocean is composed of basalt
which is heavier than that of Sial layer and its major elements are Silicon (Si) and
Magnesium (Mg) and is generally known as SIMA. The external structures such as
Mountains, Plateau, and Plains are visible. The temperature beneath the earth’s
crust is increased by 30° Celsius for each kilometre towards its centre.

LITHOSPHERE
106 em. oe
Po aassmnege
CONTINENTAL: Of:
Fig. 4.1 : Cross section of the Earth’s structure %
Source : Trabuck and Lutgens (1994) 8

Internal and External Structure of the Earth 47
Barysphere : The stratum beneath the earth's crust which is about 2,885 kilometres
thick is called the Barysphere. Barysphere mainly consists of Basalt rock. This
sphere has silica, magnesium, iron, carbon, and other minerals. Barysphere is divided
into two parts. (a) Upper Barysphere which is extended up to 700 kilometres. This
stratum mainly composed with silicate minerals enriched with iron and magnesium.
(b) Lower Barysphere mainly consists of minerals of iron oxide, magnesium oxide
and silicon dioxide.
Centrosphere : Centrosphere is situated just after the Barysphere. It is extended
from the lower parts of the Barysphere up to the centre of the earth. The thickness of
this layer is about 3,486 kilometres. It is known from the seismic waves that the
Centrosphere has a liquid cover which is about 2,270 kilometres thick and also has
a hard inner-part which is about 1,216 kilometres thick. The scientists believe that iron,
nickel, mercury and lead exist among the elements of Centrosphere. But the two major
elements of Centrosphere are iron (Fe) and Nickel (Ni).
Rocks and Minerals
Earth’s crust is formed with rocks. Rocks are composed of different types of
minerals. Mineral is the compound form of some basic elements mixed by natural
process. Minerals are natural inorganic elements which have distinct chemical
composition, physical and chemical characteristics. Though generally minerals are
formed by two or more elements but some minerals can be formed with only one
basic element. Such as, diamond, gold, copper, silver, mercury and sulphur.
Rock forming minerals have different characteristics and most of the rocks are
composed with two or more minerals. In that sense minerals and rocks are the
same things. For example, limestone which is a sedimentary rock also known as
calcite is a mineral.
Difference between rocks and minerals : Minerals are homogenous inorganic matter
and the rocks are heterogeneous materials. Minerals are solids and crystallized, though
some rocks are solid but are not crystallized. Minerals have specific chemical
composition but rocks have no such thing. The characteristics of minerals are
determined by the nature of their constructing elements. Whereas, the nature of rocks
are regulated by the nature of the minerals that compose them.

2

ES

48 Geography and Environment
Rocks | Minerats
Classification of Rocks

The materials of the earth crust or lithosphere are generally called Rock. Every
solid and fluid material which formed the earth surface is rock. Such as pebbles,
sandstone, granite, clay, chalks etc. According to formation of rocks can be classified
into three major parts : (1) Igneous rocks, (2) Sedimentary rocks, (3) Metamorphic
rocks.

(1) Igneous rocks : At the beginning the Earth was a hot gaseous spheroid. This
gaseous spheroid was transformed into liquid by radiating heat. heat. After radiating
more heat its upper part became cool and solidified. Rocks which became solidified
from liquefied state are called Igneous Rocks. As the igneous rocks form at the very
beginning of earth's origin it is also called the Primary Rocks. There are no layers in
this rock type. So, it is also called Unstratified Rock. There is no fossil in this rock
type. The characteristics of igneous rocks are : (a) granular or crystalline rocks, (b)
do not have strata, (c) hard and less fragile, (d) do not contain fossils, (e)
comparatively heavy.

Often volcanism and earthquake create fracture at the weak part of the earth surface.
Then the hot molten lava comes out from the interior of the earth and forms igneous
rocks. In this way Basalt and Granite are created. Igneous rocks can be divided
into two parts : (a) Extrusive igneous rocks, (b) Intrusive igneous rocks.

(a) Extrusive igneous rocks : The hot liquid material in the interior of the earth
which is called Magma finds its way to the surface of the earth through the crack of
the earth’s outer skin. It is called Lava. The lava after cooling becomes extrusive
Igneous rocks. The granules of the igneous rocks are refined and have deep colour.
The examples of extrusive igneous rocks are Basalt, Rhyolite, Andesite etc. &

Internal and External Structure of the Earth 49
(b) Intrusive igneous rocks: When the rising magmas during a volcanic activity do
not reach the earth’s surface
rather they are cooled and Volcanic
solidified below the Cone ——§ > ne Laccolith
surface of the earth, the P Ne i=
resultant igneous rocks are sil === ——¥ —
called Intrusive Igneous a Se eee ey
Rocks. The granules of = es soa RiGee
these rocks are coarse and | SS aseeae! a = =
have light colour. Granite, — i
gabbro, dolerite, laccolith, pijton ;
batholith, dike and sill are
the examples of intrusive Batholith
igneous rocks (fig. 4.2). Fig. 4.2 : Igneous rocks
(2) Sedimentary rocks : Sedimentary rocks are formed due to aggregation and
composition of sediments. Due to influence of rain, wind, glacier, heat, wave etc.
igneous rocks are eroded and disintegrated and transformed into gravel, mud, sand
and dust. These eroded rock debris are transported by stream, wind and glacier and
deposited in lowlands, lakes, ponds, basins, rivers and seas. So, sediments and debris
are regularly deposited by layers. Continuous sedimentation increases the weight
and pressure and different
my “6, Vayers are consolidated and
. AEROS compacted to form sedimentary
LEP OG rock. Sedimentary rocks cover
Ripe RO RSS EME Hig However, 75 percent of the
LY Tesora continental land mass is
aes = eee sedimentary rock. This is called
Fig, 4.3 : Sedimentary rocks from sediments or debris (fig.4.3).
Sedimentary rocks are also
called as Stratified or Layered Rocks because these rocks have different layers
or strata of different types of sediments. Sedimentary rock can be formed by
Forma-7, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

50 Geography and Environment
mechanical, organic or chemical processes. Sandstone, coal, shale, limestone, claystone,
kaolin are the examples of sedimentary rocks. As coal and mineral oil originated from
organic body these are also called Organic Rocks. In many sedimentary rocks different
types of fossils of plants and animals are found.
Characteristics of sedimentary rocks: Sedimentary rocks are stratified, soft and
light, easy to erode. Fossils can be seen in sedimentary rocks. This rock is porous.
(3) Metamorphic rocks : Metamorphic rocks form deep in the earth where
high temperature, great pressure, and chemical reactions cause one type of rock to
change into another type of rock. The rocks are partially melted and the chemicals
within them are rearranged so that the final rock is very different from the original
rock. One very common metamorphic rock is marble. Marble is formed when
heat and pressure are applied to limestone for many thousands of years. Some
other examples of metamorphic rocks are gneiss, slate, schist, and quartzite.
Characteristics of metamorphic rocks :
(a) Classified by texture and composition.
(b) Rarely have fossils.
(c) May have alternate bands of light and dark minerals.
(d) May be composed of only one mineral, example marble and quartzite.
(e) May have layers of visible crystals.
(f) Usually made of mineral crystals of different sizes.
(g) Rarely have pores or openings.
(hb) May have bent or curved foliation.

Task : Fill in the blanks of the classification of rocks in a group in a table below.

Classification of Types Characteristic Examples

rocks on the basis

of structure

Tencous Rocks Sp

N

Internal and External Structure of the Earth 51
Changing Process of the Earth Surface

The earth’s crust is always changing. Different landforming process bring about this
change. Landforming processes are the activities through which the changes are
caused naturally in the formation of the land. For example, a river is building a flood
plain through deposition. Therefore, the depositional activities of a river is a
landforming process. The landforming processes are done with the help of different
natural forces such as the gravitational forces, interior temperature, and the solar
bring changes on the earth’s crust either slowly or rapidly. Generally, energy. The
different landforming processes with the help of the aforesaid agents external force
like solar energy brings about a slow change in the formation of land. The changes
brought about on earth’s surface through longer period of time, is known as slow
changes. The slow changes are caused in two processes, i.e; denudation and deposition.

Landforming process
Slow/Gradual change Slow and sudden change Sudden/Rapid change

Earthquake
Gradual change : This is the opposite of rapid change where changes occur due to
natural forces like solar energy, wind, rain, stream, glacier etc.Generally slow process
occur over a huge area.

Rapid change : The inner part of the earth is still hot and molten. When there is a
difference in temperature and pressure within this portion there causes
earthquakes. Due to the earthquakes most of the changes occur. Rapid change of
the earth surface mainly occurs due to Earthquakes, Volcanoes, and Tsunami.

io
§

$2 Geography and Environment
Earthquake
An earthquake is a shaking of the ground caused by the sudden breaking and shifting
of rocks beneath the earth surface. The shaking could last seconds or minutes, and
there may be several earthquakes over a period of time.
Causes of Earthquakes
The scientist have determined various reasons of earthquake by examining different
types of geological events. The causes of earthquakes may be divided into three
main groups (i) surface causes, (ii) volcanic causes and (iii) tectonic causes.
(i) Surface causes : Great explosions, landslides, slips on steep coasts, dashing of sea
waves, avalanches, railway trains, heavy trucks, some large engineering projects
cause minor tremors. Some of them are man-made, others are natural.
(ii) Volcanic causes : Volcanic eruptions produce earthquakes. Earthquakes may
precede, accompany and frequently follow volcanic eruptions. They are caused by
sudden violent displacements of lava within or beneath the conduit of the volcano.
(iii) Tectonic causes : Structural disturbances resulting in the relative displacements
of the parts of the lithosphere is the main cause of this type of earthquake. Most of
the disastrous earthquakes belong to this category and occur in areas of great faults
and fractures. Sudden yielding to strain produced on the rocks of accumulating
stress causes displacements especially along old fault zones known as great
transform faults.
Earthquakes often occur on the ocean floor. This produces large sea waves known as
tsunami that produces devastating effects on the sea coasts. Recently, the tsunami
produced by the earthquake near the Sumatra coast affected distant places like
Sri Lanka and South India and even African coast.
Effects of Earthquakes
Earthquake is accepted as a natural calamity. Most of the times, it causes great loss
of lives and wealth. Generally, it may be mentioned that the devastative nature of
earthquakes brings the following damages and changes in the earth’s crust.
(i) Faults, cracks or landslides occur in the earth’s crust due to the earthquakes. The
course of the rivers is also changed. For example, the bed of the Brahmaputra River
was raised and the river changed its original course and started flowing through the
channel of the Jamuna due to earthquake of Assam in 1787. %
S
N

Internal and External Structure of the Earth 53
(ii) Earthquakes can cause severe and widespread damage to weak buildings or
structures, or to those located on ground subject to fault breakage, strong shaking, or
landsliding. The slip (movement) on the fault may break the surface of the Earth,
offsetting roads and tearing apart buildings or pipelines built across the fault. Such
damage can be spectacular, but it is limited to the vicinity of the fault.
(ii) Most damage results from strong shaking during the passage of seismic waves,
which spread out from the fault over a large region. Shaking may be severe enough
and long enough to collapse weak buildings, overturn furniture, topple water heaters
and storage tanks, and collapse unsafe dams. These effects can result in further
damage through fires resulting from broken gas pipeline and fallen electric wires, the
loss of water to fight fires because of broken water lines, oil spills caused by failure
of storage tanks, and flooding resulting from dam failure. Shaking can also cause
landslides. These in turn can damage buildings, roads, and pipelines built on slide
areas or downhill from them.
Tsunami
Tsunami is a Japanese term that means ‘harbor wave.’ Tsunamis are giant waves
caused by earthquakes or volcanic eruptions under the sea. Tsunamis have very
long wave lengths. Crest to crest they measure between 10 and 500 km and they
travel through the ocean at more than 700 km/h. Sometimes there appears to be
just one wave but often there are multiple waves travelling a few minutes apart.
Most tsunamis are caused by submarine earthquakes but not all submarine
earthquakes cause tsunamis. Movement on the fault must have a vertical component
that generates sufficient displacement to set a tsunami running. Earthquakes,
landslides, volcanic eruptions, explosions, and even the impact of cosmic bodies,
such as meteorites, can generate tsunamis. Tsunamis can savagely attack coastlines,
causing devastating property damage and loss of life. An under sea earthquake in the
Indian Ocean on 26th December 2004 produced a tsunami that caused one of the
biggest natural disasters in modern history. Over 200,000 people are known to have
lost their lives.
Task : In 2004 and 2011 there were two tsunamis in Asia. By group list the badly
2
R

54 Geography and Environment
Volcano
A volcano is an opening in the crust of the Earth through which molten rock
known as magma and gases from the interior of the Earth reach the surface. The
definition of volcano can include layers of ash and lava
the mountain like structures that crater

lava
may be created from the ; ~,
material ejected at the volcano. mainvent J By, secondary cone
Magma erupting from a y,
volcano is called Lava and is the ,
material which builds up the s §
cone surrounding the vent ,
(fig. 4.4). This opening allows " |
hot ash, molten rock and gases Peis :
to blow off from the vee
underground spaces. Volcanoes eee .
generally acquire shape of a
mountain. Volcanoes are usually
found at places where tectonic Fig. 4.4 : Volcano
plates get converged or diverged. But their existence at a particular place
depends upon many environmental and geological factors.
Reasons of Volcanic Eruption
Volcanic activity frequently occurs at the boundaries of the Earth’s tectonic plates
which are a series of large blocks moving between each other. The movement of
these plates plays a significant role in the type of volcano formed, which influences
its shape.
Types of Volcano
On the basis of eruption there are three types of volcanoes :
1. Active volcano : The volcanoes which are erupting or have erupted recently are
known as active volcano. Mauna Loa and Mauna Keya of Hawaii are the best
examples.
2. Dormant volcano : These volcanoes show no signs of activity. They have not
erupted for a long time. A dormant volcano can be active again. Fujiama of Japan is a
dormant volcano. S

Internal and External Structure of the Earth 55

3. Extinct volcano : These volcanoes have remained dormant for many years

and all volcanic activities have stopped. Kohisultan of Iran is an extinct volcano.

Volcanoes Classified on the Basis of Shape and Size

1. Shield volcano : Shield volcanoes are dome shaped mountains with broad bases

and gentle slopes, commonly great in size. Shield volcanoes, formed when large

flows of lava spread rapidly from central vents or rows of vents. Mauna Loa of Hawaii

island is a shield volcano.

2. Strato volcano : It is formed as layers or strata of ash and lava from the erupting

volcano. Most strato volcanoes are irregularly shaped mountains formed by material

ejected from both central and other vents on the sides of the mountain.

3. Cinder cone volcano : Small volcanoes are called Cinder cone volcanoes.

They are formed asa result of repeated small explosions of gas rich magma, which

ejects small chunks of lava and ash onto small area around vent. The average size

of cinder cone is about 800 metres wide base, and 100 metres high. Paracuting of

Mexico is an example of cinder cone volcano.

Effects of Volcanic Eruption : Due to volcanic eruptions many changes occur on the

earth’s crust.On the other hand, volcanos have some good impacts.Various dimensions

of volcanoes have been discussed below :

(1) Sometimes the molten materials are ejected from the volcano accumulated

in the surrounding places and form a plateau. Black soil plateau of South India is

formed from volcanic lava.

(2) There are many volcanoes in the ocean floor. Lava ejected from these volcanoes

produces island. These are known as high island. Hawaii archipelago in the Pacific

ocean is a volcanic island.

(3) Volcanic eruption can create a deep trench in the surface of the earth. In 1883

a deep trench developed due to volcanic eruption between Java and Sumatra.

(4) A lake is formed in the crater of an extinct volcano. Mount Adakama of
S Alaska, Kosegaina of Nicaragua are this type of lakes.

56 Geography and Environment
(5) Lava flowing for a long time from the volcanic eruption forms mountain which is
known as the volcanic mountain. Vesuvius of Italy is a volcanic mountain.

(6) A volcanic plateau is produced by volcanic activity. Lava plateau is produced
by numerous successive eruptions through numerous vents.

Volcanic eruption destroys villages, cities, agricultural land, and everything. In
1879 AD eruption from Vesuvius mountain destroyed two cities of Italy Pompeii and
Herculeum.

Volcanoes not only destroy the cities and agricultural lands but also increase the
fertility of the soil. Layer of lava produces fertile black soil which is good for
producing cotton. Many mineral substances flow with lava which is useful for the
industrial activity.

Cause and Effect of Slow Changes of the Earth’s Surface

Sudden changes occur on the earth’s surface and produce three types of landform.These
are : mountains, plateaus and plains.These landforms gradually change through natural
processes like solar heat, temperature, wind and rain and transform into a different
landform.This process of change is known as slow change. In this process, solar heat,
wind and rain erodes the surface layer of the earth very slowly. As a result, rocks
of the upper layer of the surface break down. Rocks are eroded, transported and
again this process takes place and new layer of rock is broken down. In this way,
natural processes erode the surface.There are four processes through which the earth
surface is changing. These are :

a. Weathering and Erosion

b. Transportation

c. Denudation

d. Deposition

a. Weathering and Erosion : Weathering is the process of decomposing the rocks.
Rock particles are loosened, chemically or mechanically and stays in place is called
Weathering.

When the rock particle is moved by some flowing agent such as air,water and ice it is 20
called Erosion. ES

Internal and External Structure of the Earth 57
b. Transportation : Transportation is the movement of solid particles, typically due
to a combination of the force of gravity acting on the sediment and the movement
of the rivers, wind and glacier.
c. Denudation : Denudation is the long term process of wearing of the earth’s surface
leading to a reduction in elevation and relief of landforms and landscapes.
Denudation can involve the removal of both solid particles and dissolved materials.
d. Deposition : Deposition is the geological process by which material is added
to the landform or land mass. Eroded particles from wind, river and glacier are
deposited to a new place.
The natural processes through which gradual change in the landform occurs are
wind, rainfall, river and glacier. Erosional work of these agents are discussed below :
Wind : Air contains oxygen, carbon dioxide and water vapour. The chemical process
of these three elements break down the rocks. Erosional work of the wind is more
prominent in the desert. Desert areas are dry, rainless and are without vegetation
coverage. Due to less vegetation coverage in the desert area the soil is not strongly
compacted. The solar heat in the day time and radiation at night make the rocks
expand and contract. As a result, the rocks prone to become erosion. Wind blows
the loose rock particles from one region to another and slowly change the landform.
Rainfall :Rain water flowing on the surface of the land erodes it gradually in a large
scale. Flowing rain water erodes the rocks partially and loosened eroded rocks are
expanded. In high rainfall area the soils of cultivated lands are easily transported.
In mountainous areas hard rock lies on the clay layer in a slanting position. When
rainfall enters the cracks of the clayey layer of the mountain and erodes the hard
rocks they become unstable and eventually fall down as landslide. In this way
landforms change with the passage of time.
Glacier : Glacier is also an agent of change in cold region. The rocks underneath the
passage of the glacier are eroded while it moves. When glacier moves through
the valley in the mountains the rocks are broken into smaller pieces and moved away
farther along its path. If there are cracks in the mountain sides water enters in those
cracks, freeze and loosen the rocks and the pressure of glacier erodes the rocks from
the sides of the mountain. This is the gradual process of change of the landform by
glacier.

Forma-8, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

58 Geography and Environment
River :The natural process that is changing the earth’s surface regularly is the river.
When the river flows through the mountainous region the velocity of the current
erodes the rocks into smaller pieces in the river bed and the sides of the mountain
walls. In the mountainous stage of the river the work of the river is only erosion.
When the river enters the plains it works both as an erosion and deposition agent. In
the river course where the river flows over soft rocks it makes its way on it by
erosion.Eroded materials are deposited in the course of the river and finally it reaches
the sea.

Definition of river : In the high mountain, plateau or highland where rainfall, spring,
glacier or melted waters from the glacier flow downwards due to gravitational force in
a fixed course is called a River.The river flows in a course through plains and reaches
at ocean or lake. The origin of the river is called the Source of river. The place
where the river reaches the ocean or lake called the Mouth of the river. The
extended area along the Mouth of the river is called the Estuary.

River course : River is important in the life of the people. All ancient civilizations
flourished beside the river. At that time river was the only medium through which
people could move around.

Doab : Land between two active rivers is known as doab.

Confluence: When two or more rivers meet together at a place is known as confluence.
Tributary : A stream or river that flows into a main stream or a lake is called a
Tributary. A tributary does not flow directly into a sea or ocean.

Distributary : A stream that branches off and flows away from a main stream
channel. They are common in the delta areas in the lower course of the river.

River valley : A valley formed by flowing river is called by River valley.

River bed : The river bottom through which river flows is called the River bed.
River basin : The vast regions having branches of rivers through which water flows
from its origin and fall into ocean and lake are called River basin.

9
§

Internal and External Structure of the Earth 59
Life Cycle of a River
On the basis of area, depth, slope, velocity from the source to the mouth of the river,
the life cycle of a river has been divided into three stages (fig. 4.5). These are :
1. Youthful stage/upper course
2. Mature stage/middle course
3. Old stage/lower course
AEE... 1. Youthful stage/upper
Upper course SS os oe Youthful stage/
Coy ee Fe ee course : You stage/upper
Nee YOR lee HEeNEP
sy ss | course is the primary stage
Ye P Se eral of the river course. The upper
ENV course of the river is from the
Ao netge  \*” ‘N’ shape of a river on .
Lower course Kees valley’ 9 upper origin in the mountain up to
, LEE Middle course reaching the plains. In the
KS ae \__ Broad shape upper course or youthful
cts elt cance Of Vane A stage the main work of the
Fig. 4.5 : Life cycle of a river river is vertical erosion. In the
upper course the river erodes the landforms and transports it.
2. Mature stage/middle course : When the river enters the plains it is called the
work starts. In Mature stage. In the mature stage the velocity of the river reduces and
the deposition this stage lateral erosion is more than vertical erosion. In mature stage
alluvium is deposited on the banks of the river which eventually forms the alluvial
plains. Majority of lands in Bangladesh is alluvial plains.
3. Old stage/lower course : Lower course is the last stage of a river where it
reaches the ocean. At this stage velocity of the river decreases. There is no vertical
erosion and very less lateral erosion. River is very wide and shallow. Due to
decrease of velocity of river flow, alluvium is deposited at the river mouth forming
deltas.
Landforms from River Erosion
% ‘V’ shaped valley : In the upper course of the river due to high velocity large
& rocks are broken down and transported downwards. Mountains are formed with

60 Geography and Environment
hard and soft rocks. In the river “ear ae Se pte
course soft rocks are eroded

more and cutting downwards

makes the channel shape like a
“V’. The sides of the mountains are
less eroded as the lateral erosion ig, Stal W ahaped-walley

at this stage is less (fig. 4.6).

= yy SUR, 4 Gorge and Canyon :A gorge is anarrow valley
~ ee eK Loe oa ST he with steep rocky walls located between hills or
Ke ee id Buh, mountains. Rivers carve through hard layers of
BASS - ‘ on BEG rock, breaking down or eroding. Sediment from
eee os Be yy the wor away rock is then carried downstream.
Se , CESS 1 Over time, this erosion will form the steep walls
ere = eee . .
hee 2, Egor 5, of gorge (fig. 4.7). The Indus river gorge is 518

Fig. 4.7 : Gorge metres deep, one of the deepest in the world.
Canyon :
Canyon is a steep sided valley where depth is considerably greater than width. These
features are the result of river erosion in the upper course of the river in dry region. In
North America Grand Canyon is the largest in the world which 137-157 metres
wide, approximately 2.4 kilometres deep and 482 kilometres long.
Waterfall : Waterfalls are found in the upper _ River
course of the river. They happen when there JERE % ie .
U i 2 2
is a piece of hard rock overlaying a soft Hike Hae Rook pen ay
rock which the river cannot erode. So, Bian puiveass ahah = ate
water has to drop from a high place to a Shit momma
low place (fig. 4.8). Most waterfalls are TAN 2 ed Rox 9 eS.
small but the biggest waterfalls are ; 22S oe
hundreds of metres high. In North America 772220) NS ene LEE
5 Fig. 4.8 : Waterfall
formed this way.
2
&

Internal and External Structure of the Earth 61
Landforms from River Deposition
Alluvial cone and alluvial fan : An alluvial fan is a fan shaped or cone shaped
deposit of gravel, sand and smaller materials. When water flows down a mountain,
it picks up sand and other materials from the mountain. When the water reaches the
base of the mountain and spreads out onto flat land, that material is deposited. As the
materials builds up over time, an alluvial fan/and alluvial cone is created (fig. 4.9).
In the foothills of Himalaya tributaries of Ganges forms these types of alluvial fans.
iver Mountain River Moyntain
: —" } i = ™%
r ‘ 4 iB wee 1 -
N oS get XS
BP) MMR
/ in A
ere fod ~ Alluvial Fan
Fig. 4.9 : Alluvial cone and alluvial fan :
Piedmont alluvial plain : Mountainous
. |
river deposits sediments at the \ |
foothills of the mountains. These | | ae p> ~
deposits gradually form extensive \N) FEE. wea
plains. These type of plains are known as l | Can Aa en)
piedmont alluvial plains (fig. 4.10). a we fi PAAR Ses
Adjacent areas of the rivers Tista, ~~ oe
Karatoa and Atrai in Rangpur and Fig. 4.10 : Piedmont alluvial plain
Dinajpur regions of Bangladesh are known as the piedmont alluvial plains.
These rivers originated in the Himalayas and brought sediments from the mountainous
region and deposited in those region forming the piedmont alluvial plains.
« Flood plain : A flood plain usually is a flat area with areas of higher elevation on both
s sides. Flood plains can be very small or very large. Small flood plains sometimes

62 Geography and Environment
River Oy.Bow Lake are part of a valley. Large flood plains
avn canalmost tae up entire country.

\ = oT S , Flood plains usually are very fertile
ns | agricultural areas (fig. 4.11). Floods

J Flood Plain = Za f* Flood Plain i carry sediment rich in nutrients. They

= _# 2 oe spread that sediment to a wide

vo fe = area. Flood plains are flat and have
ht eZee relatively few rocks or other large
Fig. 4.11 : Flood plain obstacles that may prevent

farming. Floods are usually seasonal and can be predicted months ahead of time.

Delta: Deltas form as rivers empty their water and sediment into another body of

water, such as an ocean, lake, or another river. A river moves more slowly as it nears

its mouth, or end. This causes sediment, solid material carried downstream by
a 5 currents, to fall to the river bottom.
3 3 EA Delta The heavier, coarser material settles
"3 Ray, "op . first. Smaller, finer sediment is carried
2 snake 2. Le farther downstream. The finest material
= : e Ve fe is deposited beyond the river mouth.
sy) % & This material is called Alluvium or Silt.
“ey cn B woakthal Silt is full of nutrients that help
ae a oan NG microbes and plants grow. As the

a \ Wray dn) O58 % | silt builds up, new land is formed.

1) \\ } fi Chittagong

ne iy AX: ) hw) Noo 2 Not all rivers form deltas. For a delta to
Woy ie gore %) | form, the flow of a river must be slow
Bay of Bengal and steady enough for silt to be
Fig. 4.12 : Delta deposited and build up. Because many
river deltas have a triangular shape, the term delta comes from the upper- case

Greek letter delta, which is shaped like a triangle (fig. 4.12).

External Structure of the Earth

The diversified outward appearance of the earth is known as the external structure of

the earth. Some principal and important examples are described below.

Main Landforms of the Earth

Earth’s topography is made up of many different types of landforms. While the

planet is covered primarily with water, the three major types of landforms are

mountains, plains and plateaus. These can be formed by a variety of natural forces, |

including erosion from water and wind, plate movement, folding and faulting, and s

volcanic activity.

Internal and External Structure of the Earth 63
Mountains
While most mountains are created due to the slow and gigantic movement of the
earth’s tectonic plates, some are formed as a result of erosion and volcanic activities.
Mountains are characterized by a higher elevation as compared to the surrounding
areas. They are higher than 600 metres, and taller and steeper than the hills. The
world’s tallest mountains The Himalayas are located in Asia and the largest range
of mountains is present in the Atlantic ocean. You will be surprised to know that
some of the highest mountain peaks are located deep in the oceans. There are some
mountain which is not a part of a mountain range but exists in isolation such as
Mount Kilimanjaro in East Africa.
Mountains : Types and their Formation
An elevated landform is identifiedas a mountain if it has a summit and there are slopes
onits sides.They are basically made up of earth and rock materials. Regarding
mountain formation, the outermost layer of the earth or the earth’s crust is
composed of six tectonic plates. When two plates move or collide with cach
other, vast land areas are uplifted, resulting in the formation of mountains.
Depending upon the geological processes responsible for uplift of mountains and
landform characteristics. There are four major types of mountains.
Fold mountains : Fold mountains
veaing They we tetvet be enna nan
to collision of two plates, causing pe syrana woe —" ae
fold that descends on both
folding of the earth’s crust. The lg tg
sides je called Anticline, whereas, | na i I mn nn i ! Li i til | | l
the fold that ascends from a Initial stage of formation of folded mountain
common low point (on both sides) oN é .
is called Syncline (fig. 4.13). fis NENG: ; ae OES EN
Examples of fold mountains are _“_, PE REN ASN sortie ane
the Himalayas located in Asia, ues zh it I A hee :
Rocky mountains located in North [ i it) it iN ‘lh ANU
so America, and the Alps located in wi 7 Weoesoe Uh if PEN : MA snl my
g Europe. Fig. 4.13 : Fold mountains

64 Geography and Environment
Task : Collect information on famous fold mountains of the world and write it
down.
Volcanic mountains : Volcanic mountains are created due to volcanic eruptions.
When this lava erupts and piles up on the surface of the earth, it cools and solidifies
Volcanic Mountation .==-% to form a volcanic mountain. In
4 #8 active Voloano many instances, the volcanic
ey ey materials erupt to great heights
Nonny A ay due to pressure from under the
tee a Tt ss ff earth’s crust (fig. 4.14). Examples
———4 of volcanic mountains are the
me Magma ny Mount Fujiyama in Japan,
Fig. 4.14 : Volcanic mountains Mount Vesuvius : m Italy and
Mount Pinatubo in Philippines.
Fault-block mountains : Due to tectonic movement in the earth’s surface contraction
and expansion of rocks takes place. This movement creates cracks in the earth’s
surface which leads to Block Mount ai Plains
displacement of the earth’s “aN Be fee ae ZA
surface. It is called Fault. = arn & pa
Lake =< = yp
Fault mountains or fault-block oA Sie SENS ‘2 ft
. EGR Fait A
mountains are created when ipa TS
blocks of rock materials slide TERTEN Ml ‘por
along faults in the earth’s crust.
There are two types of block Fig. 4.15 : Fault-block mountains
mountains, viz., the lifted and tilted. In the former type, the mountain has two
steep sides, whereas, the tilted type has one steep side and a gentle sloping side
(fig. 4.15). Examples of fault-block mountains are the Vindhya mountains and
Satpuras mountain in India, Salt mountain in Pakistan and Black forest of Germany.
Dome/Laccolith mountains : Dome mountains are built when the hot magma rises
from the mantle and uplifts the overlying sedimentary layer of the earth’s crust. In 2%
i)
AQ

Internal and External Structure of the Earth 65
the process, the magma is not actually
“aE erupted, but it cools down and
Soe. 5 ff OY)
2 int sah ris Ri nor hardens, thereby forming the core of
alee A +7 809 D : : :
ora rarer Stee peta the mountain. As their appearance
ser fherth D me yy —
Herta me Reh oy resembles a dome shape, they are
waren ROBbahy -s  gu@@aerchosd@aca:
esessesemgacsnant Meec ae dena se memrs . .
ial rast ’ WEBCT called Dome Mountains or Laccolith
feeseeeaanacave ee Mountains (fig. 4, 16). These
Fig. 4.16 : Laccolith mountains mountains do not have any summit.
Example of dome mountain is the Henry mountain in USA.
Plateaus
Plateaus are formed by various geologic activities, such as immense lava flows,
uplifting due to tectonic plate collisions, and sediment plateaus formed from
eroded material from mountains.
Plateaus are lower than mountains Plateau
‘ . 5 Rift Valley Se
but higher than plains with steep Pe Ding Pigg: 3
slopes and extensive undulating [~~ 2 2 >A gee
surface is known as plateau (fig. 4.17). Er -7 = re me % = Ss
. ; NEEM 7 ae TN en
The height of the plateau varies from Le ae pe
few hundred metres to few thousand A nl
metres. The height of sii highest Fig. 4.17 : Plateaus
plateaus of the world varies from
4270-5190 metres.
On the basis of the location, plateaus can be classified into three categories :
1. Intermontane plateau
2. Piedmont plateau
3. Continental plateau
Forma-9, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

66 Geography and Environment

1. Intermontane plateau :This type

of plateau is surrounded by | °° Mountain Peak Fold Mountain’Peale

mountains. The Tibetan plateau is abn. Bolivian High Plteay ok

an intermontane plateau where The Hon tN cee

Kunlun mountain is in the north, i i Reena ut gy ir

The Himalayas in the south and in || \ N

the east and west there are he |

mountains. Bolivia in South America, Be “

Mexico in Latin America, and Fig, 4.18 : Intermontane plateau

Mongolia and Tarim in Asia is this type of plateau (fig. 4.18).

2. Piedmont plateau : When high mountains are eroded and the sediments are

deposited at the foothills and creates plateau is known as piedmont plateau.Colorado

in North America and Patagonia in South America are the piedmont plateaus.

3. Continental plateau : Extensive highland surrounded by sea and lowlands is

called Continental Plateau. These type of plateaus have no link with the mountain.

Examples are Spain, Australia, Saudi Arabia, Greenland and India.

Plains

Extended lands with gentle slope a bit high from the sea level is called plain land. The

plains are formed by the erosional and depositional work of different land forming

agents like river, glacier and wind. Gently sloping and undulating land is suitable for

agriculture, settlement and road construction.

On the basis of origin the plains are classified into two categories : Erosional

and depositional plains.

Erosional plains : This type of plains are formed for erosion by river, wind and

glacier. The upper rocks are eroded gradually and the lands with steep slope are

transformed into plains. The plains at the foothills of Appalachian mountains and the

plains of Finland and Siberia are these type of plains. The Barind and the Madhupur

Tract of Bangladesh are examples of erosional plains. te
FS

Internal and External Structure of the Earth 67
Depositional plains : Natural processes of river, wind and glacier transport the sand
dust and sediment, from one place and deposit in a lowland forming a depositional
plain. Formation of depositional plains are found from the mountainous region to the
sea coast. River can form valley such as the valley of Nepal. It can form alluvial fan
at the foothills of the mountains by deposition. In the middle course of a river, where
velocity of the river is reduceds it overflows the banks causing flood during rainy
season and the sediments are deposited gradually on both sides of the river forming
a plain land which is known as flood plain. Flood plains of Dhaleswari and Jamuna
are of these type. A plain land formed at the mouth of the river through deposition
is known as Delta. Ganges delta is located in the southern part of Bangladesh.
Plains are also formed in the coastal areas by the activity of ocean current. These
are known as coastal plains. Coastal plain of Bangladesh stretches from Feni river to
Teknaf. Plains are also formed by the deposition of glacial moraines in the cold
regions of the world. The Prairie of Canada are formed from the glacial deposits.
Exercise

Multiple choice questions
1. The origin of graphite is—

a. Limestone b. Coal

c. Sandstone d. Granite
2. At the lower stage of a river —

i. flow increases.

ii. depth decreases.

iii. bank erosion decreases.

Which one of the following is correct?

a. iandii b. iand iii

S c. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii

68 Geography and Environment
Answer the questions number 3 and 4 from the following figures :
1 J
Fig.1 Fig. 2
3 Where is figure 1 type of landform seen in Bangladesh
a. in south-east region b. in south-west region
c. innorth-west region d. in north-east region
4. Both figure 1 and figure 2 types of landform are formed—
i. by sedimentation.
ii. at the estuary.
iii. by erosional process.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iii
ec. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
Lo)
S
AQ

Internal and External Structure of the Earth 69

Creative questions

1. Bidhan and Himel went to Italyas migrants. One day at afternoon they have seen a
surface area with high slope and shaped almost like a cone. While they were
talking they have come to know that Bidhan came from Bandarban and Himel
came from Khulna of Bangladesh.
a. What is river valley?
b. Whyis a river valley shaped like ‘V’ at its upper stage? Explain.
c. Explain the physiographical structure of the landforms seen by Bidhan

and Himel.
d. Give a comparative analysis of the landforms of those two regions from where
Bidhan and Himel have come.
2. ee
A EEE yf LS ABP A 7
a. What is mineral?
b. Why do fossils exist in sedimentary rock? Explain.
c. Explain the characteristics of ‘A’ stratum.from the above figure.
d. Is there any difference in the structural formation of ‘B’ and
‘C stratum? Explain.
=
&

Chapter Five
Atmosphere

Earth is the only habitable planet in the solar system. The mixture of gases
surrounding the Earth or other celestial body, held in place by gravity is the
atmosphere where living things survive. Its thickness is about 10,000 kilometres.
However, about 97 percent of the total atmosphere remains within 30 kilometres
upward from the earth's surface. It forms distinct layers at different heights. The
Earth's atmosphere consists, in ascending order, of the troposphere (containing
90 percent of the atmosphere’s mass), the stratosphere, the mesosphere, the
thermosphere, and the exosphere. The atmosphere is composed primarily of nitrogen
(78 percent) and oxygen (21 percent) and plays a major role in the water cycle. A
unit of pressure is equal to the pressure of the air at sea level, about 14.7 pounds per
square inch, or 1,013 millibars. In this chapter we would like to know how this
atmosphere is important for the living things for their survival. A diagram shows
the layers of the atmosphere in the earth.
Ozone layer
At the end of this chapter, we will be able to :

e Explain the elements of the air.

e Explain the layers of atmosphere and their characteristics.

e Explain the importance and analyze the different layers of the atmosphere.

e Discuss the difference between weather and climate,

e Explain the factors of climate. -

3
&

Atmosphere 71

e Analyze the wind circulation and their impact.

e Explain the water cycle.

e Discuss different types of rainfall.

e Discuss the inter-relationship of global warming and climate change.

e Analyze global climatic change and its impact on different regions of the

world.
e Analyze the impact of climatic change on the people of Bangladesh in their
living condition and economic activities and the environment.
Composition of the Atmosphere
The Atmosphere is very important part of the biosphere. It is vital for life on earth.
Without the atmosphere life would not be possible. It gives us air to breathe and also
protects us from the ultraviolet rays of sun. It absorbs heat so that temperatures on
earth are such that life becomes possible. It separates the earth from the space Air
is made almost entirely of two gases. The most common gas is nitrogen (N2), and
the second most common gas is oxygen (O.). Nitrogen and oxygen together make up
99 percent of the planet’s atmosphere. All other gases together make up the remaining
1 percent. Although each of these trace gases is only found in tiny quantities, many
such as ozone, serve important roles for the planet and its life. One very important
minor gas is carbon dioxide (CO), which is essential for photosynthesis and is also a
very important greenhouse gas.
In nature, air is never completely dry. Up to 4 percent of the volume of air can be
water vapour. Humidity is the amount of water vapour in air. The humidity of the
air varies from place to place and season to season.
Argon, neon, helium, xenon, and krypton are noble gases. They are colourless,
odorless, tasteless, and they do not become part of ordinary chemical reactions
because they are chemically inert. The noble gases simply exist in the atmosphere.
Particles of dust, soil, metals, salt, smoke, ash and other solids make up a small
percentage of the atmosphere (Table 1) which are not gas.
oD
Ss

72 Geography and Environment
Table 1 : List of elements in the atmosphere
Name of the Elements
Nitrogen (N>) 78.02
Oxygen (O,) 20.71
Other Gases (neon, helium, krypton, xenon, ozone, methane and 0.02
nitrous oxide)

Atmospheric Layers and its Characteristics

The atmosphere can be divided vertically into five divisions according to the

characteristics such as temperature, pressure and density. These layers are :

Troposphere, Stratosphere, Mesosphere, Thermosphere and Exosphere (fig. 5.1).

Troposphere

This is the first layer of the atmosphere close to the earth’s surface. It extends to a

height of 16-19 kilometres at the equator and 8 kilometres in the polar region. The

characteristics of the Troposphere are :

(a) In this layer temperature and density of air decreases with the increase of height.
As the density of air is thin, the absorption capacity of heat is less. Generally
in every 1,000 metres of height temperature decreases 6°.

(b) Velocity of the wind increases with the increase of height .

(c) Troposphere contains most of the water vapour, clouds form in this layer.

(d) The presence of dust particle in this layer makes the heaviest layer of the

atmosphere and 75 percent of the weight of the atmosphere remains in this layer.

(e) The height at which the temperature stops decreasing is called the Tropopause. 20

Here the temperature may be as low as —54° Celsius. &

Atmosphere 73

Stratosphere

This is the second layer of the atmosphere which extends from the tropopause to

about 50 kilometres above the surface ofthe Earth. The characteristics of the

Stratosphere are :

(a) Temperature increases due to the absorption of the ultraviolet radiation of the Sun,
due to the presence of ozone, in this layer. The temperature slowly increases up to
4° Celsius.

(b) This layer is free from clouds and associated with weather phenomena. So, it is
an ideal flying condition for large jet planes.

(c) At about 50 kilometres the temperature begins to fall again. This marks the end
of the Stratosphere. The end of the Stratosphere is called the Stratopause. This
layer is between Stratosphere and Mesosphere.

Mesosphere

The Mesosphere extends to a height of 80 kilometres. The characteristics

of the Mesosphere are :

(a) In this layer temperature decreases again, falling as low as —83° Celsius. The
Mesosphere has the coldest temperatures in the atmosphere.

(b) The meteor that comes from the outer space to the earth burns down in this layer.

(c) The end of this layer is known as the Mesopause.

Thermosphere

The Thermosphere lies above the Mesosphere.The characteristics of the Thermosphere

are :

(a) In this layer temperature rises considerably, reaching up to 1480° Celsius.

(b) The increase in temperature is due to the fact that the gas molecules in this layer
absorb the x-rays and the shortwave ultraviolet radiation of the Sun. These result
in the break-up of the gas molecules into positively and negatively charged
particles. These electrically charged particles are known as ions. The process
by which molecules of certain substances are electrically charged is known as
ionization.

(c) The electrically charged gas molecules of the Thermosphere reflect radio waves
from the Earth back into space which helps in long distance communication.
This layer is also known as Ionosphere.

Forma-10, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

74 Geography and Environment
Astronomical y j
a,
| i xosphere 3 j
2 : 5) Sera
= ’ et irmament Lig! ey
iS : ; Thermosphere w\ Antificial Satelites e
Bo: Rocket ®
| —& : Mesosphere % “aie PS iasspatise™ <=
2: Paar lesopauss "***-py.
peg gg Wee
S @ : % peers y
= 2: S Ly &
e:
S: : 3 Stratosphere A DX R:
—eires Aloud...
z : } 8 Troposphere A ~ 7 aiiriin
Earth Surface 3
fs
Fig. 5.1 : Atmospheric layers
Exosphere
This layer lies above the Thermosphere. The characteristics of the Exosphere are :
(a) The Exosphere extends beyond the Thermosphere up to 960 kilometres. It
gradually merges with interplanetary space.
(b) The temperature in this layer range from about 300°-1650° Celsius.
(c) This layer contains only traces of gas like oxygen, nitrogen, argon and helium
as it lacks the gravity which allows the gas molecules to easily escape into space.
Task : Write down the characteristics of layers of atmosphere in the table (in groups).
Troposphere| Stratosphere Thermosphere
S
N

Atmosphere 75

Importance of Different Layers of Atmosphere

e Sound waves cannot travel without the Atmosphere. Radio waves sent from the
Earth’s surface is reflected back to the Earth as it is obstructed in the Ionosphere
layer.

e Weather condition like rainfall, snowfall, cloud, fog, dew and hailstorm
would not develop without the Troposphere layer. Rainfall is important for
the croplands and forests.

e The Earth is saved from the meteors as they are destroyed in atmospheric layers.

e If there was no atmosphere then there would be no life, it would be a
desert like environment of moon.

Definition of Weather and Climate

The daily average condition of temperature, pressure, wind, humidity and precipitation

for a place is known as weather. Generally, climate is the average condition of the weather

for 30 to 40 years.

Elements of weather and climate are wind pressure, temperature, wind pattern,

humidity and precipitation.

Factors of Climate

Climate is not same in the world. Some regions are hot and some are cold, some are

wet and some are deserts. Due to geographical location, the climate varies.

Factors of climate is discussed below :

1. Latitude : Sun’s ray varies with the latitude. The Sun ray falls vertically on the

equator and as a result the temperature is high in the equtorial region. In higher

latitudes inclined sun rays decreases the temperature. Generally, the atmospheric
temperature decreases from the equator towards the poles.

2. Altitude : The atmospheric temperature decreases with the increase of altitude

from the sea level. With the increase of every 1,000 metres of altitude, the

temperature decreases 66° Celsius. If two places are situated on the same latitude,

their climate will vary due to the difference of altitude. Even though Dinajpur and
« Shillong are located in the same latitude, but the climate varies due to altitude. The
§ temperature in Shillong is much lower than Dinajpur.

76 Geography and Environment
3. Distance from the sea: Location of the land mass sometime makes a mild climate.
Cox’s Bazar, Chittagong, Patuakhali located in the coastal area are milder in climate
than Rajshahi. In the coastal area there is equable temperature where the difference
between summer and winter is very less. But regions located far away from the sea
have extreme climate with very hot summer and very cold winter. Land mass get
warmer quickly than water bodies and radiates heat rapidly. So, during summer
inland continental areas become warmer rapidly and in winter becomes very cold.This
type of climate is known as continental or extreme climate.

4. Wind movement : Wind movement plays an important role on the climate of an
area. If water vapour is saturated wind blows and abundant rainfall occurs in
that area. During monsoon season the wind blows from the Bay of Bengal saturated
with water vapour which causes heavy rainfall all over Bangladesh. In winter the
opposite occurs as the wind blows from inland, the continental air is dry and there is
no rainfall and the temperature decreases.

5. Ocean currents : The air of the coastal area becomes either cold or warm due
to the influence of cold or warm ocean currents. It may be mentioned that the south
-eastern coast of the United States of America has higher temperature due to the
influence of the Warm Gulf Stream, again the cold Labrador Current keeps the
temperature low in the eastern coast of North America.

6. Location of the mountains : Wind movement, when obstructed by the high
mountains can influence the climate. The monsoon air is obstructed by the
Himalayas in the north, which brings heavy rainfall in Bangladesh, India and Nepal.
During winter the cold airmass of Central Asia cannot cross the Himalayas and so
the climate of the sub-continent (India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka) never
gets cold like Europe.

7. Slope of the land : The air and the land become warm where the sun’s rays fall
directly on the slopes of the highlands. But in the opposite side of the slope, the air
remains cold due to the inclined sun rays or meager sunshine.

8. Composition of the soil : The structure of the soil or texture plays a vital role
in the conservation of temperatures. Exposed sandy soil becomes hot and cold
quickly. But the alluvial soil and the clayey soil take much time to get warm or cold ,,
due to heat conservation of the soil. S

Atmosphere 77
9. Location of the forest :The vegetation from its evapo-transpiration activity helps
air to saturate with water vapour. This saturated air condenses and rainfall occurs.
The intensity of storms and cyclones are reduced due to the forest. The air of the dense
forest remains cold as the sun rays cannot penetrate into the soil.

Task : What factors of climate is influencing the climate of Bangladesh? Explain
it by brain storming in a group. Each group will be given 15 minutes time
to finish the work and the whole group will make a 10 minutes presentation
on the topic.

The Water Cycle

The interchange of the different states of water between the ocean, land and air is
called the Water Cycle or Hydrologic Cycle. Evaporation, condensation and
precipitation are the three physical processes involved in the hydrologic cycle.
Water evaporates due to the heat of the Sun. The oceans provide nearly 90 percent
of the moisture in the atmosphere. Moisture also evaporates from rivers, lakes and
other water bodies. The rest of the moisture is given out by plants by a process known
as transpiration.

The water vapour in the air condenses into clouds. Winds blowing from the ocean
transport the water vapour. This condensed water vapour is given out as rain and
snow mainly over land. Some of this precipitation that falls is absorbed by plants
and soil. The rest of it runs into rivers or seeps into underground streams. This is
known as surface run off.

From the land,water makes its way back to the sea,and the cycle begins again (fig. 5.2).
(1) Evaporation : Evaporation occurs at all temperatures. However, evaporation is
more rapid at higher temperatures. At lower temperatures, it takes place slowly.

The rate of evaporation is directly related to the temperature of air. When the
temperature increases, the rate of evaporation also increases.

Warm air can hold more water vapour than cold air. When the temperature of air
- increases, the capacity of air to hold water vapour increases. However, there is a
$ limit on how much water vapour the air can hold at any given temperature.

78 Geography and Environment
(2) Condensation : Condensation is the process by which water vapour is converted
into water. Condensation can only occur when the air becomes saturated.
>
a <—
BUM MEEE I Og Precipitation Condensation
1 tf Z 4 Gerson (Clouds form)
Transpiration @ Surface ttt
& hed Run off E ir
e a — yapora on sic
- ——————
Gp”?
cd
#
Fig. 5.2 : Water cycle
Air can become saturated in two ways :
1. By cooling of air : When the temperature of air decreases, its capacity to hold
water decreases. The air can become saturated with the same quantity of water
vapour by a fall in temperature.
2. By the addition of more water vapour : When more evaporation occurs, the
air can become saturated in nature. Saturation of air in this manner is nota very
common occurrence.
When the air becomes saturated, it cannot hold water any more. Any extra water
that may be present, is given out in the form of droplets of water. These condensed
droplets are very small and may be seen in different forms.
Different forms of Condensation
1. Cloud : Droplets of water suspended in the sky is called Cloud.
2. Mist : Droplets of water suspended near to the surface of the earth is called Mist.
3. Fog : A dense mist is called Fog.
4. Dew : Tiny drops of water are formed when water vapour condenses on the ground 20
or cool surfaces is called Dew. R

Atmosphere 79
5. Frost : It is the coating of ice left when moisture in the air freezes or dew freezes
into ice is called Frost.
Saturation and Dew Point
The temperature at which the air gets saturated is known as dew point.
When the air is holding the maximum amount of water it can hold, the air is said
to be saturated.
The amount of water needed to saturate the air changes with temperature since the
capacity of air to hold water is related to the temperature.
When the temperature is high, more water will be needed to saturate the air.
At low temperatures a smaller quantity of water would be enough to saturate it.
Humidity : Humidity refers to the amount of water vapour present in the air.
Amount of water vapour in the atmosphere is less than 1 percent. The air which
contains no water vapour is called Dry air and the air which contains more water
vapour is called Humid air. Humid air contains 2%-5% water vapour. The amount
of water vapour is measured with hygrometer. Humidity in the air is expressed
in two ways : by Absolute humidity and Relative humidity.
Absolute humidity : It refers to the total amount of water vapour present in a given
volume of air.
Relative humidity : Relative humidity is a ratio between the actual amount of water
vapour present in the air and the maximum amount of water the air can hold at a
given temperature.
(3) Precipitation : A form of water, such as rain, snow, or sleet, that condenses
from the atmosphere, becomes too heavy to remain suspended, and falls to the Earth’s
surface by the action of gravity. Different atmospheric conditions are responsible for
the different forms of precipitation.
Types of Condensation
e Clouds

w e Fog

& e Dew and White Frost

80 Geography and Environment

Condensation

e Condensation occurs when water vapour changes to a liquid.

e For condensation to take place, the air must be saturated and there must be a
surface on which the vapour can condense.

e In the air above the ground, tiny water-absorbent particles known as condensation
nuclei serve as the surfaces on which water vapour can condense.

Fog

Fog, generally considered an atmospheric hazard, is a cloud with its base at or very

near the ground. Fogs is formed in cold weather.

Dew and White Frost

e Dew is the condensation of water vapour on objects that have radiated sufficient
heat to lower their temperature below the dew point of the surrounding air.

e White frost forms when the dew point of the air is below freezing.

Forms of Precipitation

Rain : Precipitation that reaches the ground in liquid form is called rain. Rain drops

are 0.5 milimetres to 6.35 milimetres in diameter. Rain is the most common form of

precipitation.

Drizzle : The lightest form of precipitation is drizzle which occurs in fine drops falling

close together. Drops are less than 0.5 milimetres in diameter.

Snow and Snow fall : Snow is a precipitation composed of powdery mass of ice

crystals. Snow forms in the extremely cold upper clouds.

In cold regions, the temperature often falls below freezing point and the water vapour

of the air condenses into ice crystals. These ice crystals grow in size and form ice

which fall on the ground. This form of precipitation is called Snow fall.

Sleet : Sleet is a mixture of rain and snow. When rain falls through a layer of cold

air near the Earth’s surface, rain drops get frozen into ice.

Hailstone : Hailstones are frozen lumps of ice produced by thunderstorms. They form

inside tall cumulonimbus clouds which are warmer at the bottom and freezing at the

top. S

Atmosphere 81
Rain occur when warm moist air cools and condenses. Warm air can hold more
water than cool air.So when the warmer air is cooled the moisture condenses to liquid,
it rains.
(4) Run off : The movement over ground of rain water is run off. Run off occurs
when the rainfall is very heavy and rocks and soil cannot absorb any more. Run off
flows into lakes, rivers and oceans. Run off are divided into four categories.They are :
(a) Surface flow
(b) Subsurface flow
(c) Percolation
(d) Infiltration
The water stored underneath the earth return to air through the process of transpiration
and evaporation.
Task : What do you understand from the words below? Discuss in a group and
write it in the table.
Classification of Rainfall
Convectional rain : The formation hn,
of precipitation due to surface heating ee ee
of the air at the ground level (fig. fg eee
; SENET Cloud fg
5.3). If enough heating occurs, the Hovalraseen mae ce 6 rv
mass of air becomes warmer and HY i" TA ! {Convection
. . . 7 | PPE ie ij Currrents
lighter than the air in the ity fit tHE ‘
8 Fi F Tee Pee
surrounding environment, and just Ai i 1 /Heated surface?! —
: : ‘ F x Cini puplane canes
like a hot air balloon, it begins to rise, Ocean, ttt f i |
expand and cool. When sufficient eaullilll iil |
cooling has taken place saturation, aa *
i ae ‘ Fig. 5.3 : Convectional rain
occurs forming precipitation. This
process is active in the interior of continents and near the equator forming cumulus
Forma-11, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

82 Geography and Environment
clouds and possible later thunderstorms. Rain is usually the precipitation type that is
formed, and in most cases this moisture is delivered in large amounts over short
periods of time in extremely localized areas.
Orographic rain : Orographic rainfall is produced as a result of clouds formed
from the topography or shape of the
land. Where there is high ground or ns
mountain moist air is forced upwards ad a o>
producing cloud and rainfall. Rainfall sgt Nees
occurring in the slopes of the ! Hii at Ws a
mountain is known as the windward Ms | hon Se,
side and after crossing the mountain it | «HP. (| | AS
ss knoe omnadlee No veil ESSA ins
occurs in the leeward side of the Fig. 5.4 : Orographic rain
mountain as the descending air is dry and it is called the Rain Shadow Area (fig. 5.4).
Mountainous areas close to prevailing westerly winds are most likely to experience
this type of rainfall. South-west monsoon wind blowing from the Arabian Sea
towards South India obstructed by the Western Ghats mountain causes heavy
rainfall in the western slopes. The Deccan plateau located on the eastern side which
has less rainfall is the rain shadow area.
Frontal rain : Frontal rain occurs when two air masses meet. When a warm air mass
meets a cold air mass, they don’t mix as they have different densities. Instead, the warm and
less dense air is pushed up over the cold dense air creating the ‘front’. As a result, much
like when it is forced up over mountains, it cools, and the water condenses and falls as
rain drops (fig. 5.5).
“a
Warm and Bum AIL - —' Front
3 a i ba t ue Why Fanti
cs . ; i f if f A A if it
eo Cott | F A Hn if Dry and Cold Air
| Pei isithohiiil
MUAH Les ALE <
Fig. 5.5 : Frontal rain g

Atmosphere 83
Cyclonic rain: If a low pressure
originates in a land mass in a region,

of cos soon saturated warm air from the
land mass blow towards the low
Hr ; .
y oo F Tf My i ve nro water bodies and dry air from the
aneren at, UTED Mpa we pressure centre. Warm air blowing
a hy itd al col at oo
ass Fly from the water is lighter and full
asc? Wh il, :
; of water vapour. It rises above the
Fig 210% Comlonierent dry dense cold air and causes

rainfall. This type of rainfall is known as cyclonic rainfall (fig. 5.6).

Task : What type of rainfall occurs in Bangladesh and why? Discuss this in your

class ina group and find the answer.

Wind Movement

Due to the difference in temperature and pressure the air moves from one place to

another. This movement of air is known as wind.The wind has certain characteristics :

1. The cold and heavy air moves from the high pressure areas to low pressure area.

2. The Earth is rotating from west to east. Due to this reason the air moves towards

right in the northern hemisphere and towards left in the southern hemisphere.

Pressure belts : Due to the variation of temperature in different latitudes and the

rotation of the earth, several pressure zones have been formed. These are known as

pressure belts. Those are : (1) Equatorial low pressure belt, (2) Tropical high
pressure belt, (3) Subpolar low pressure belt, (4) Polar high pressure belt.

Some major wind system of the earth are : Planetary winds, Seasonal wind, Local

wind and Irregular winds.

Planetary Winds

These winds are controlled by the pressure belts, blow towards same direction

throughout the year. The planetary winds are three type: the trade winds, the

westerly’s and the polar winds (fig. 5.7).

o) The Trade winds : The Sun’s ray falls vertically on the equatorial region. So the
3 warm and light air is rises upward. Cold and dense air from the subtropical high

84 Geography and Environment
pressure belts blows towards the equator. According to Ferrel’s Law, the trade wind
Blows fem Toniesat i, the ont eT

northern hemisphere and south-

east in the southern hemisphere 60°N OO dont PONY

as south-east trade wind. In the iv”
ancient time the merchant ship > SpllIIINNIINININ0it:::IN0ii 0000000,
used to travel to the direction of é f ra Via a el f

the wind and so this wind is “PeSsssessieer thy Sees
known as the trade wind. The CS Seite SL
speed of north-east trade wind is °° ‘UIE: 2M) =
16 kilometres per hour and south- Pe XY \ “enna ems \ \
east trade wind 22.54 kilometres GE

per hour. As the air in the To”

equatorial region rises upward, Fig. 5.7: Plana ei

there is no horizontal movement

of air around 5° north and south latitude of the equator, a calm sphere exist which
is known as Doldrums.

The Westerlies : The subtropical high pressure belt lies from 30° north and south
latitude, and the air blows towards the subpolar low pressure belt at 60° latitude. The
air is warm and light as it blows from the tropical area. It rises above the dense cold
polar air and a part of it blows towards the subpolar low pressure belt. This is known
as the Westerly’s. In the northern hemisphere, it blows from south-west and in the
southern hemisphere from north-west direction. In the northern hemisphere land mass
is greater. So the changes occur locally. However, in the southern hemisphere, the
maximum area consists of water bodies and the Westerly’s blow without any interruption.
The velocity of the Westerly’s reaches the highest between 40°-47°south latitude and
so it is called the ‘Roaring Forties’. In ancient times when merchant ship travelled
over Atlantic ocean to America from Europe for exporting horse and other goods the
ship could not sail at 30°-35° north latitude as there was no horizontal movement of
air. The sailors threw their horses in the sea due to crisis of water and food. So, the
calm belt on the Atlantic ocean is known as Horse Latitude. In northern hemisphere, ,
between 30°-35° north latitude due to the influence of westerly’s, rain falls in winter. S

Atmosphere 85
Polar winds : Two more air masses regularly blow from north and south polar
high belts towards the subpolar lows. These are known as North-east and South-east
Polar wind.
Sea and land breeze : In the coastal regions, the temperature of adjacent land mass
rises with the advancement of day time. Therefore, a low pressure is formed locally and
comparatively the cool air from the high pressure area sea blows toward the land. This
is known as sea breeze (fig. 5.8). The velocity of this air reaches to its maximum in
the afternoon.
After the sunset, the land mass cools quickly than the sea. During that time, the high
pressure prevails over the land mass. So, the air blows from the high pressure area
to the land mass towards the sea. This is known as the land breeze (fig. 5.9).
Rising Warm Air —* —_— —_—
~~ wm Ar Rising Warm Air
Low Air Low Pressure
See eee eee en EE oo
Fig. 5.8 : Sea breeze Fig. 5.9 : Land breeze
Monsoon wind : Monsoon is an Arabic word meaning season. A monsoon is a
seasonal wind which changes direction with season. Monsoons cause wet
and dry seasons throughout much of South Asia (India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri
Lanka, Nepal, Bhutan and Maldives). Monsoons are most often associated with the
Indian Ocean.
Monsoons always blow from cold to warm regions. The summer monsoon and the
winter monsoon determine the climate for most of India and South-east Asia.
There are two branches of monsoon winds : one is the Arabian ocean branch and
the other is the Bay of Bengal branch. The Arabian ocean branch provides rainfall
in Pakistan and Western India. The Bay of Bengal branch provides rainfall in
S Bangladesh, Eastern and northern India, Nepal, Bhutan and Myanmar.

86 Geography and Environment
During winter the interior part of Asia remains very cold and so some high pressure
calls are created. The cold air blows from the north-east high pressure area of the land
mass towards the low pressure zone of the ocean. As this air originates in land
mass, it is dry and it doesn’t contain any water vapour. When this air crosses the
equator according to Ferrel’s Law blows over North Australia as the north-east
monsoon .It acquires large amount of moisture from the Indian Ocean causing heavy
shower to northern Australia.

The air which changes its direction with the change of season is known as
Andotropic wind. Monsoon wind and the Mediterranean winds are the Andotropic
wind,
Local wind : Natural characteristics or variation of temperature of an area are the
causes of local winds. Chinook from the Rocky mountains, Mistral from the
Central plateau region of France, Pampero originating in Argentina and Pampus
region of Uruguay, Bora in the Eastern coast of Adriatic sea, Sirocco in North
Africa and South Italy, Simoom in the Arab plateau, Khamsin in Egypt and Loo in
the Indian sub-continent are some of the local winds.

Task : Write down the origin and direction of the winds given below by
Global Warming and Climate Change
Global warming is one of the environmental problems of the world today. Climate
change is gradually taking place due to the global warming. Climate has been
changing since the begining of the Earth. Sometimes it was very hot, sometimes very dry.
Sometimes ice covered the whole earth. But the change was very slow. Millions of
years passed through slow change and some the change was natural such as the change
of the orbit of the Earth or the rotation of the Earth. But the change that is occurring
now is very fast and so it is a matter of concern for everybody. This rapid change
is due to various activities of human being. In the last hundred years the average
temperature increased only 0.06° Celsius. But the scientists now forecast that at the
end of the 21st century the average temperature will increase between 2.5°- 5.5° 20
Celsius. As a result, there will be greater impact on the Earth’s surface such as ice cap ©

Atmosphere 87
on the mountains will melt, glaciers will melt in the polar region which will
eventually increase the sea level.
Atmosphere is playing a vital role to control the Earth's Temperature, In this field,
atmosphere is the roof of greenhouse or the roof of glass wall of the glass house. Sunshine
is the main source of heat and energy of the earth. The earth's surface absorb the incoming
sunshine that reaches the sarth which oa
eventually warms the environment. Various ae of
sctivitics of human beings such as buming /() agg == US (a/ ee
of wood and coal, cutting tree, smoke of NM \aeomen Gaby 7 ss
the factories, imcrease carbon dioxide . ‘
(CO,), methen etc. in the atmosphere. [1 ) «\ Bil he
These gases are called ‘Greenhouse’ gas, C tardy —
gradually it creates a thick gas layer in the ts pa
atmosphere, For this reason, heat from the p09) Maine \
earth surface cannot go back again into  “~\) ] 1 \}
the atmosphere. The amount of absorbsion \ basin Ki (eae
of heat increases and gradually the \ a 3 ————
temperature rises. The heating process is Fig. 5.10 : Greenhouse
known as ‘Greenhouse’ impact or reaction.
In the polar region, polar heat is kept confined withm the glass houseand vegetables are
cultivated in it and that ia why it is called ‘Greenhouse’ (fig. 5.10).
Activities of man led to the increase of certain greenhouse gases which is one
of the cause of global warming. This is known as the greenhouse effect.Carbon
dioxide and Nitrous oxide, Methane gases are responsible for global warming.
Industrialization, increase of transport, deforestation, and agricultural extension
are some of the causes which increased the amount of harmful gases in the
environment, Due to global warming higher rainfall, too much flood, strong
cyclones, drought can cause climate change in Bangladesh. Conservation of
environment and sustainable development techniques can save the world as
well as Bangladesh and cther low lying countries of the world from the
Task : Find out the latest information on climate change of the world from
greenhouse effect by browsing in the internet at school or home.
Effect of Climate Change in the World
The pattern of climate in the world is gradually changing. Normal seasonal pattern
is not found in the nature anymore. Drought in rainy season, rainy season in
drought, cold air during summer and warm air during winter are some of the
= unnatural pattern of the climate. According to the scientists, greenhouse effect will
3 be beneficial to some countries like Canada, Russia, Norway, Finland, Sweden and

88 Geography and Environment
South America. But 40 percent of the worlds area will suffer where people live in
poverty. Along with Bangladesh there are many low lying countries in the world
whose coastal areas will be submerged under water. Many coastal cities of the
world will be destroyed (fig. 5.11).
In the middle of the 21st century 20
a percent of the world’s population
may Ce errors will face misfortune. Sea level
ees 3 cspctamostee Will rise in the Pacific region
es tee r and Asia which will change the
PA | \ Sos nature of climate. Tidal wave may
—< pe i cca ~—* destroy the crops, sweet water
Symi 2 / |) will enter inland, forests will be
Nate = ewe — / wsisard destroyed, wild animals will
ome ee [Sp / A decrease and the people of the
OE ‘ > country will migrate to other
Fig, 5.11 : Greenhouse effect region of the country as climate
refugee. In Bangladesh people living in low lying coastal areas will be the
first victims.
Worldwide greenhouse effect will create an upheaval and chaos in the developed
and the developing world in social, economic and political sectors. Developed
countries will feed the animals with their excess production of food crop and the
people of the developing countries will suffer in starvation and become refugees
crossing the borders of their own country. In the meantime economic recession in
many countries is going on. In the developing countries majority of the poor is
leading a life below poverty line. Bangladesh is not different from them. In India,
Pakistan, Indonesia, Malaysia and China the pattern of climate is drastically changing
in the recent time. In Australia, summer is getting long and the winter is becoming
more rainy.
Task : Each student may Make a list of misery due to climate change in different
regions of the world.
Impact of Climate Change in Bangladesh
Developing countries of the world already started suffering due to global warming
and climate change. Natural disaster has already started in Bangladesh. In the near 2
future the intensity will increase. According toUN forecasting, in the next 50 yearsif &

Atmosphere 89
the sea level rises 3 feet a large part of the coastal area of Bangladesh will go under
water which will be around 17 percent of the land surface. Approximately 3 crore
people will lose their cropping land and home and become a climate refugee.
According to the information of International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) by
2030 the river flow will drastically reduce, which will result in water scarcity by
2050 and 100 crore people will be affected. Due to high temperature frequent
floods, storms, drought and sea level rise, Bangladesh is experiencing some of the
weather disturbances now and the intensity will rise in future.
According to ADB (Asian Development Bank) report, if the present trend of global
warming continues till 2050 crop production in South Asian countries will drastically
reduce. Impact of climate change will directly affect more than 150 crore people of
South Asia of food and water. It has been predicted that due to global warming at
the end of this century farming in the world will decrease between 20%-40%.
According to the research of the economists of MIT (Massachusetts Institute of
Technology), the global warming will increase the gap between rich and poor
countries.
In 2009 the World Bank has pointed out 5 risky areas for global warming. These
are: desertification, flood, storm, sea level rise and uncertainty in the agriculture sector.
According to The World Bank there are 12 countries in the world which have the
possibility of all hazards and Bangladesh is one of them. (Table 2).
Table 2 : List of 12 countries in 5 category of global warming risk
Desertification Storm Sea level rise | Uncertainty in

: the Agricultural

sector
“Bangladesh
“Bangladesh
Kenya | Benin | Honduras | Senegal | Ethiopia
Source : World Bank, 2009
Forma-12, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

90 Geography and Environment
In 2009, UN conference on climate change organized in Copenhagen from
7th-18th December. In this conference out of 193 countries 189 countries participated
and a three page memorandum of understanding (MOU) was signed. According
to the MOU in order to control the climate change, increase of temperature should
be limited by 2° Celsius by the end of this century. The draft also said that a fund of 3
hundred crore dollar is to raised Climate fund will be used for forestation, technology
transfer and for being self sustainable. Fund will be used for poor and developing
countries like China, India and Brazil. UN has termed this as political understanding.
Task : From the table 2 find out the position of Bangladesh in Asia among 12
countries in the list of five categories of risk.
Exercise

Multiple choice questions
1. In which sphere of the atmosphere does argon gas exist?

a. Stratosphere b. Troposphere

c. Exosphere d. Thermosphere
2. The characteristics of troposphere is —

i. humid air.

ii. suitable for running planes.

iii. absorbs ultraviolet rays.

Which one of the following is correct?

a. iandii b. iand iii

c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
Read the text and answer the questions 3 and 4.
Ananya went to Sylhet with her father. From there she went to see Jayantika hill.
They saw from there that it was raining in one side of the hillslope whereas no rain on -
the opposite slope. s

Atmosphere 91
3. What kind of rainfall did Ananya see?
a. Convectional rain b. Orographic rain
c. Cyclonic rain d. Frontal rain
4. The cause of not raining in the opposite side of the hill —
i. less amount of water vapour in the air.
ii. warm and dry air.
iii. increase of water vapour in the air.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iii
c. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii
5. Air always blows from one place to another?
a. Mountains obstruct on the way of air
b. Difference between heat and pressure
c. Due to location change of the pressure belt
d. Due to equatorial high and low pressure belts
6. Why do sea breeze and land breeze blow regularly in Bangladesh?
a. Due to larger land areas
b. The location of Himalayas lying on the north of Bangladesh
c. As the Bay of Bengal lies in the south
d. As Bangladesh is a land of rivers
7. The most important characteristics of monsoon wind —
i. Itis a regional wind.
ii. Seasonal wind.
iii. Monsoon wind change it direction in winter and summer.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iii
c. iiandiii d. i, ii and iii
8. Find out the category of global warming risk in Bangladesh.
% a. Certainty of agriculture b. Earthquake
8 c. Increase of temperature d. Desertification

92 Geography and Environment
Creative questions
1.
a. What is atmosphere?
b. Explain the benefits of having higher amount of nitrogen in the atmosphere.
c. Write the characteristics of ‘Q’ layer.
d. Which one between ‘R’ and ‘S’ layer is more important for us? Put
arguments in favour of your answer.
2. a
BE Sy
bn & i > A ll es
I L
LT
f j K
Tropic of Capricorn’ f
toni of Ceprcom ie ne ane a
Equator “™,. \ , 4 FA
aS
Tropic of Concer _ _ -- va ---- S fell excel A
/ \ F G
sora fF Np
0) 4800 Kilometres |
Q R
a. What is Khamsin?
b. Write the Ferrel's law.
c. Explain wind movement of ‘EFGH’ location in the map.
d. Isthe movement of wind same in ‘IJKL’ and ‘PQRS’ places? Analyze your S
opinion.

Chapter Six
Hydrosphere
Our knowledge regarding hydrosphere is limited. Since the number of population all
over the world is increasing day by day at an alarming rate with a decreasing rate of
resources on the land/biosphere, people are attracted towards the hydrosphere rapidly.
The reason behind this is the multidimensional structure of the ocean floor and its
abundant natural resources.
20°, = 2 go?
60° SS La eS go”
LA kh footl TTR Sheps eh NM,
label! YK [44| [71 4 We | \T\ |
| Pacificj Ocean YK fen W iL 4
PERRET UEC AEE AR TT |
P\ \ \ Fi if IndianfOcean ji (“1 j\ s
Qn? TTT TZ
RRMA ll TLE
60° a eee 60°
SSSA 7-23
At the end of this chapter, we will be able to :
e Explain the concept of hydrosphere.
e Describe oceans, seas and bays.
e Describe the topography of ocean floor and marine resources.
e Explain the causes and effects of ocean currents.
e Explain the causes and effects of low and high tide.
eo}
S
N

94 Geography and Environment
Concept of Hydrosphere
‘Hydro’ means water and ‘sphere’ means the portion. It is known to all that water
exists all over the world. This huge volume of water exists in different parts
of the world in different forms —solid (ice), gasious (water vapour) and liquid.
Water exists in the atmosphere as a form of water vapour, on the surface as solid
and liquid and beneath the surface as liquid form. So, hydrosphere indicates the
distribution of the volume of water (Table 1). Oceans hold about 97 percent of total
volume of water (oceans, seas and bays). Rivers, glaciers, ground water, lakes,
soils,atmosphere and biosphere contain only 03 percent of water. The total volume
of water of the earth can be divided into two types, such as salt water and fresh
water. Salt water exists in all the oceans, seas and bays and fresh water in rivers, lakes
and under ground.
Table 1: Distribution of water and its percentages

Name of location Volume Percentage

(ME x 1,00,000) (%)

Atmosphere 0.013 0.001
Ocean, Sea and Bay
The vast and open body of salt water of the hydrosphere is identified as ocean. There
are five oceans in the earth known as Pacific ocean, Atlantic ocean, Indian ocean,
Northern/Arctic ocean and Southern/Antarctic ocean (fig. 6.1). Pacific ocean is the
largest and deepest among the oceans (Table 2). Atlantic ocean is characterized &

Hydrosphere 95
with deep coastline and it creates a number of enclosed seas. Indian ocean is
encircled with Asia and Africa. The Southern ocean is located in between 60B north
latitude and the glaciers of the Antarctica. Antarctica continent is located in the
south of Southern ocean that is covered with ice round the year. Arctic sea is located
in the northern part of north pole and is encircled with land mass.

BOr-»150° 120 )o 9080-3 080” BOO pe Perro rere cree
GC UETE: a ofeegcebe tests be
bn 600249 SA eA )
fy NORTH 24,42,2, NORTHERN HALE) SEAS OE
2 26) OCEAN ODA PEUROBE 0075 2220227052920 4%
wo AMERICA2, 24555 aN Na) AES EN
Mega ggg PRE Dee ASIA. te
0 ba ATLANTIC Mig ROG °
ashy Le x WN A tA, 4 ast
PACIFIC ° it, 02 AFRICA, 27 hw PACIFIC
OCEAN Ae 1, ‘4 04, OCEAN
0°. OLE * & 0
wits ste
ies SEAR ba 4 2
62; SOUTH Let INDIANOCEAN
“ZAMERICA” 6522352, L
a Cee ee, Cees so
235 x 5 o (ba hy tz G—— Dy
YK 3205
a F?
60° 2 1000 2000 Kilometres 60°
SOUTHERN OCEAN _-7 fire isseeagA
Oo tug tet ANTARCTICA (25,0
HYDROSPHERE 129°90° 60° 307/702 Ce geet ta EE VEE
Fig. 6.1 : Location of ocean in the world
Table 2 : Area and average depth of the oceans
Oceans Area (square | Average Depth Location
kilometres) (metres)

16 crore 60 lakh 4,270 Between Asia and America

Atlantic ocean |8 crore 24 lakh 3,932 America, Europe and Africa

Indian ocean |7 crore 36 lakh 3,962 Africa, India and Australia

Southern ocean| 1 crore 47 lakh 149 Between 60° north latitude and

oD
s the glaciers of the Antarctica

96 Geography and Environment

Seas are comparatively small, in volume of water than oceans. Mediterranean sea,

Red sea, Caribbean sea, Japan sea are the notable seas of the world.Water bodies enclosed

by land in three sides but open with a wide mouth in one side is called a Bay.

Examples are Bay of Bengal, Persian bay, Mexican bay etc. Water body surrounded

by land is called a Lake. Such as the Lake Baikal of Russia, the Lake Superior

in between the United States of America and Canada and the Lake Victoria of Africa.

Task : Indicate the location of the oceans in world map with a pointer to your class
mates.

Topography of Ocean Floor and Marine Resources

The ocean floor is as rough as the surface of the earth. The reason behind this is the

presence of volcano, ridges, highlands and trenches beneath the seas. By means of

sound wave the depth of the seas can be measured. This sound wave can be

traveled through water under 1,475 metres deep and come back again. The

instrument named Fathometre is used to measure the depth. The land configuration

of the ocean floor can be divided into five classes (fig. 6.2) such as :

1. Continental shelf

2. Continental slope

3. Deep sea plains

4. Oceanic ridges

5. Oceanic trench

1. Continental shelf : A submerged border of a continent that slopes gradually and

extends to a point of steeper descent to the ocean bottom can be identified as a

continental shelf. The depth of the shelf is generally limited to water shallower

than 150 metres. The general gradient of the shelf is 1°. ~
S
RQ

Hydrosphere 97
The average width of continental shelf is 70 kilometres. The innermost part of
continental shelf is called the Littoral Zone. The width of the continental shelf
varies considerably. It
200. Mai SSsxCantnontal Sha depends on the ruggedness
™\\ ; san of the coast. If the coast
Cyrunental Sop | represents a vast plain then
2,000 to,3,000 Metre _\Continental Rise . it creates a wide continental
severe ees Keke ran shelf. The presence of
ASP 8 000 Motes ----== case nig hills or plateaus make the
Oceanic Trench continental shelf steeper.
Because of the existence of
10,000 Mees, -2-——-V Mariana Trench (10,870 Metres) vast plain at the north of
Europe, the continental shelf
Fig. 6.2 : The submarine relief of Arctic ocean is very wide
(about 1,287 kilometres). But the widest continental shelf is located at the
north-western part of Europe. The second widest northern part of the continental
shelf can be seen at the eastern coast of North America. The western part of the coast
is much narrower than the east.This is only because of the existence of folded Rocky
mountain. Since the major part of the continent of Africa is like a plateau, the eastern
and western continental shelves are very narrow.
The reason behind the formation of continental shelves is the subduction of
continental margins or the variation of sea level. Besides these, wave actions
also help to produce continental shelf.
2. Continental slope : The continental shelf is linked to the ocean floor by a steep
slope known as the continental slope. The slope descends steeply almost to the
bottom of the ocean. The depth of the continental slope starts from 200 metres and
stretches up to 3,000 metres. Because of its steepness this portion of ocean floor is
not wide like the continental shelf. The average width varies from 16 to 32
kilometres. The surface of continental slope is not smooth. Oceanic trenches
produce the rough surface.The deposition of corals and sediments can be found in
gentle sloping areas of continental slope.
Forma-13, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

98 Geography and Environment
3. Deep sea plains : The deep sea plains are broad and almost plain that extend
from the margin of continental slope. The average depth is 5,000 metres. The deep
sea plains are not flat as was formerly thought. This is because of the presence of a
huge number of highland and trenches on the deep sea plains. In certain areas
volcanic peaks rise steeply from these plains, and sometimes reach the surface
as isolated islands. Landforms produced by submarine volcanic activities or by
folding and faulting tend to keep their original form.
4. Oceanic ridges : Volcanoes can be found under water of the seas. Mid- oceanic
Ridges are found in places where the earth’s tectonic plates are in constant
motion. When two adjoining tectonic plates in motion produce a gap the uprising
magma fills the gap, so that new oceanic crust is formed. Mid-Atlantic ridge is a
well known submerged oceanic ridge.
5. Oceanic trench : Narrow topographic depressions can be found in sea floor. This
type of narrow, elongated, v-shaped depression in the ocean floor is known as
oceanic trench. Trenches have formed when two plates come into contact and the
denser of the two sinks below the other plate. The average depth of the trenches is
above 5,400 metres.
Most of the trenches can be found at the western part of the Pacific ocean. Mariana
is the deepest trench which is located 322 kilometres south-west of Guam island
in the western Pacific ocean. The average depth of Mariana trench is 10,870
metres and is the deepest trench of the world. Other notable trench are Puerto
Rico Trench in Atlantic ocean (8,538 metres) and Sunda trench in Indian ocean.
shelf slope plains ridges trench

Hydrosphere 99
Ocean Currents
The regular movement of water from one part of the ocean to another is called
Ocean currents. Ocean currents are mainly caused by the difference of density of
sea water and wind force. A change in density is due to the variations in
FS a” [con Curent ==] fmperature and salinity.
SS BET |wamcurent =z =ae| Ocean currents can be
PeSé LS n % CY, AS DYE sv] based on temperature
Po ON LD SE. Rif Pac] such as: A. Warm
oe Sh LOKYS oes] Cameats and B. Cold
rcant As SARGSSO SEA yy pitiiene, ae fooll:|) A, Warm currents :
° ee = = ay HE eG ng| The temperatures are
a ~~ Ont Euatone, cee | ee higher at the Equator
SAVES Eaiatotig elon KURU ee
acetate Lutter Cimon OR EEL“ oegg| than that of Poles. The
ce IPDODRSODOTIOOOCID NW: ire > GRO ODEEOODEEE °1 water in the ocean near
“WEEE nN Vas the Equatorial region is
vate * Vy, ig rN EEE je | heated more than the
ar emer ey, SS oe spitima! 2
© DES “$ AW -| Polar region. The warm
MY SSS 47’ | waters of the Equatorial
agi ey pa: ea ==> regions are light and
yf “as wee ann Se ae 1 th fi
A bee De Se Be S|} ~move along the surface
Ay On en a re = ==—Antarctic Current “a
= Se Se oo —_~> >
0 ee Oe ea Se 27) towards the Polar
a — —= ee
mt 0 1000 2000 Kiometres _ ME regions which is called
Fig. 6.3 : Warm and cold currents of Atlantic ocean
B. Cold currents : The cold current originates from the Polar region. The cold
water is dense and heavy. It sinks downwards from the surface and moves
slowly towards the Equator is called the Cold currents.
Causes of Ocean Currents
1. Planetary winds : Circulation of planetary winds is the prime cause of ocean
eo current. These winds control the direction and speed of ocean currents. Trade winds,
<
& Westerly’s and Polar winds create the major ocean currents (fig. 6.4).

100 Geography and Environment
2. Rotation of the earth : \ ff Vee \
Earth’s rotation results in the \ Westem Current AN \
Ferrel’s Law which also \ } TERIA
influences ocean currents. This ( : \\ AN
phenomenon causes _ ocean Nort eaustortal \ Venalt
currents in the  Northem \ or) |\ WN \
Hemisphere to bend to the °° Curent_(\\\\WA{\\\NA ni
VC someones ) ANNUAL
tight and in the Southern Current \
Hemisphere to the left. \ KK \
4
3. Variation of ocean water \‘ \ A
temperature : Variations in icetern Garon’ 7’ § \\ \\ \\ \
temperature produce equatorial \ . ITT
warm water and flows toward ; ;
the poles as surface warm Fig. 6.4 : Impact of wind on ocean currents
currents. On the other hand, cold and dense water flow from the poles to the
equatorial region as cold under currents.
4. Melting of polar ice caps : Melting of polar ice caps expands the volume of
water that lessens salt in the water. This less salty water helps to generate ocean
currents.
5. Variation of ocean depth : Temperature of ocean water depends on the variation
of ocean depth. The water volume in shallow depth warms quickly and swells up.
Then the deep sea water cools and go downward. These produce warm and cold
ocean currents. The speed of surface flow is very high. The speed of ocean current
decreases below 100 metres.
6. Density of water caused by salt : Salty water is denser than less salty water; cold
water is denser than warm water. Less dense water tends to rise while denser water
tends to sink.
7. Existence of land mass : The existence of continent, islands and any other
land mass protect, lessen and divert the flow of water. In most of the times
this bifurcates ocean currents.
20
S
N

Hydrosphere 101

Influence of Ocean Currents

The influence of ocean currents is important for different reasons. The direct effects

of ocean currents is much higher on climate and trade in different regions of the earth.

on the surface of the seas and — sinks and produces under-flow
flows direct to the poles from of water.
the equatorial zone. I
water swells and takes the {J takes the space of low
space. pressure areas.

Flowchart : Surface and deep ocean current together produce convection

current that results the movement of water in the oceans.

1. Influence of warm ocean currents: Warm ocean currents increase the

temperature of any area. So, cold regions can be found warmer if warm ocean

current passes through that area. The ports can be usable round the year in those

areas, such as, Norway and the west coast of British islands are free from frost

during winter for warm gulf current. But, the east coast of Canada is covered with ice

having the same latitudinal location.

2. Influence of cold ocean currents : Winds blowing from a cold ocean current bring

down the temperatures in places, which would have been much hotter. The

California (cold) current, which flows along the western coast of USA, makes the

region much cooler than other places in the west coast at the same latitude.

3. Influence on transportation : Boats and ships can easily sail to the direction

of ocean currents.Warm ocean currents helps transportation rather than cold ocean

currents. North Atlantic ocean current help the major transportation routes in the

world. Extreme cold and icebergs is a barrier for movements of ships in cold ocean

currents. Ships sailing with a current gain speed, which helps to save fuel and time.
o Ships moving against a current have less speed. Warm currents keep the Arctic
S regions free from icebergs, which can be dangerous for ships.

102 Geography and Environment
4. Influence on weather : Surface currents are warm which carry water vapour. This
warm current makes heavy rainfall over the coasts. For example, the Gulf Stream
makes the north-west Europe much more temperate than any other regions in the
same latitude and makes heavy rainfall there. On the other hand, cold ocean current
makes the winds moisture free and produces less or no rainfall. For example, this
may create cold desert like Atakama in South America. This desert is due to the
cold Peruvian current.
5. Fog and storms : Variation of temperature can be found in small areas where
warm and cold ocean currents merge. Fog and cyclone can form storms in this area.
The movements of ships and air plane can be difficult. For example, the merging of
cold Labrador current with warm Gulf current in the eastern coastal area of North
America and the merging of cold Kamchatka and Bering current with warm Japan
current make bad weather conditions.
6. Creation of under water plateau : Warm currents melt the iceberg that
results the deposition of existing sands, grains and stones under the water. For a
long time the process makes under water plateau and highlands. Grand Bank of
Newfoundland, Dogger Bank of coastal British islands are the true examples.
7. Influence on commercial fishing : Places where cold and warm currents meet
are ideal breeding grounds for Planktons. These are very small organisms, which are
foods for fishes. These regions support a great number of fishes. They have
developed into major fishing grounds of the world. Newfoundland on the eastern
coast of North America is the meeting point of the Gulf Stream and the Labrador
Current. It is one of the major fishing grounds of the world.
8. Incidence from iceberg : The iceberg that float on the cold ocean currents hamper
the free movement of ships. For example, the famous ship of United Kingdom
‘Titanic’ sunk into the water in its maiden voyage colliding with an icebarg.
Causes of High and Low Tide
There are two prime causes of tides. These are : 1. The gravity of the sun and moon
and 2. Centrifugal force produced from rotation of the earth. S
ES

Hydrosphere 103
1. The gravity of the sun and moon: When the Sun and Moon are aligned with the
Earth, water levels in ocean surfaces fronting them are pulled and subsequently rise.
The Moon, although much smaller than the Sun, is much closer. Now, gravitational
forces decrease rapidly as the distance between two masses widen.Thus, the Moon's
gravity has a larger effect on tides than the Sun. In fact, the Sun's effect is only
about half of the Moon’s.
2. Centrifagal force produced from rotation of the earth : The centrifugal force
produced from the rotation of the earth draws away from the centre of rotation. The
creation of tides also at the opposite of high tides (fig. 6.5).
(TPS A\ GR
COSY :
OS 287 :
Fig. 6.5 : Influence of centrifugal and gravitational force of the earth
High tide: A high tide can be defined as the cyclic rise and fall of sea level
caused by the gravitational pull of the sun and moon. There are usually two high
tides and two low tides in each lunar day.
Low tide : Low tide refers to the movement of the high tide out to the sea. In
other words, it is the time during the tidal period when the high tide is falling.
Effects of Tides
Tides have a vast influence on human life. The following effects can be exerted by
tides on the coastal countries of the world.
1. Tides can bring all the river wastes collected from lands and fall into the oceans.
2. The occurrence of tides twice a day causes no siltation and wastes can be deposited
w in the estuaries.
& 3. Tides can deepen the passage of the rivers through undercutting.

104 Geography and Environment

4. Hydroelectricity can be produced by creating dams on the tidal rivers.

5. Tides facilitate irrigation and ultimately help the agricultural sector.

6. In Polar Regions the salty ocean water enters into the lands through rivers that help
to free the flow of river water.

7. Tides help the free movement of vessels that generate trades. During tides the
estuaries get sufficient water that helps the vessels to enter into the lands. During
tide the vessels can go out from the inland rivers to the ocean. Patenga and
Mongla, the two prime ports of Bangladesh like other coastal river ports, operating
the activities tuning with the tides.

8. During full moon, tidal surge can submerge boats, ships and might be the cause
of the loss of lives and properties.

Marine Resources of the Bay of Bengal

The 716 kilometres long coastal region of Bangladesh along the Bay of Bengal is

full of marine resources. It has 442 near shore fish species, 336 species of Mollusks,

19 species of prawn, crabs, mangrove forest including other marine vegetations.

Nuclear minerals like Zircon, Monazite, IImenite, Magnetite, Reolite and Leucoxene

have been found in the coastal zones of Cox’s Bazar.

Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. What is iceberg?
a. Frozen ice of Antarctica b. Frozen ice of Greenland
c. Large ice mass floats with the ocean current d. Frozen ice of Himalayas
20
=

Hydrosphere 105
2. The depth of oceans related to —

i. temperature.

li. ocean current.

iii. salinity.

Which one of the following is correct?

a. iandii b.  iand iii

c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
Observe the map below and answer the questions 3 and 4 :

2 < fj AST — ~ fone ons
30 Dl i R30

3. Why ocean ships cannot move through the region marked as ‘P’?

a. For the depth of the ocean b. For steeper coastline

c. For warm current d. For the power of ships
4. The merging of ‘Q’ and ‘R’ currents produce —

i. fog.

ii. icecaps.

iii. iceberg.

Which one of the following is correct?

a. iandii b. iand iii

c. ijand iii d. i, ii and iii

Forma-14, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

106 Geography and Environment
Creative questions
Re NA SAO! AGT Lei
Ls INE ANE
a. What is deepest ocean trench?
b. Explain the importance of continental slope.
c. Discuss how the flow of water of the area marked as ‘A’ will influence the
surrounding land mass?
d. Discuss the influence on trade if the water volume does not circulate in the
areas marked as ‘P’ and ‘B’.
2. Tuhin has gone to the sea-beach of Cox’s Bazar for pleasure. One morning he
observed that the ocean water expanded and raised but gone down at evening.
a. What is the cause of Ocean current?
b. Explain the influence of centrifugal force for the creation of low and high tide.
c. Explain the causes of this type of water movement mentioned in the clue.
d. Analyze how the water movement seen by Tuhin will influence the coastal
areas?
oS
S
N

Chapter Seven
Population
The world’s population is growing very rapidly. This is because the number of babies
born each year is greatly exceeding the number of people who are dying. This is
the result of improved health care system, medicine, nutritious food, improved
water and sanitation education and many life saving vaccinations. It has also increased
the longevity of the people and decreased infant mortality rates throughout the
world. Population growth rate in the developed countries has decreased substantially
whereas in the developing countries it is still high. As a result, the population of the
world is growing at a fast rate.
This rapid growth has been called ‘a population explosion’. However, this explosion
is not evenly distributed, as 97 percent of the increase takes place in the three
developing continents of Africa, Asia and Latin America. Natural, economic, political
and geographical factors make different regions of the world into high density and
low density population areas. The following diagram shows the population density of
different regions.
World
ae, os Population
fo SAY 5 Se Foo

At the end of this chapter, we will be able to :

e Explain the world population at present and its changing pattern.

e Factors related to the change of population.

e Explain factors, merits and demerits of migration.

x e Gather knowledge about the merits and demerits of migration and provide
“ information to others about its.

108 Geography and Environment
e Explain the relationship between rate of population and the natural resources.
e Explain the density and distribution of population.
e Discuss the factors of density and distribution of population.
e Explain the growth of population of Bangladesh, its problems and its solution.
e Provide solution to reduce the population growth.
Present Situation of World Population and its Changing Pattern
From the beginning of the Christian era till 1500 A.D. the world population increased
very slowly and later increased gradually. Change of population through time is
known as natural increase.
According to UN Convention, countries of the world has to conduct national census
in every ten years. The modern census was first introduced in 1655 and gradually
majority of the countries of the world have conducted national census. In 1650 total
population of the world was 500 million, in 1850 it increased to 1.2 billion. After
industrial revolution in the 1850’s development of industries and improvement of
agriculture led to the growth of population.Within one hundred years the population
was double. In 1950 total population of the world was 2.53 billion which now
increases to 7.35 billion in 2015. If this rate of increase continues, by 2025 the estimated
population will be more than 8 billion (fig. 7.1).
World Population Change 10
Population growth 2 :
rate (Billion) & .
f
°
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
—» Year
Source : UN, Dept. of Economic and Social Fig, 7.1 : World Population growth trend 1950-2010 &
Affairs, Population Division, 2015 Aq

Population 109
From the table and figure given above the population growth trend can be
classified into three phases.
Initial stage : From the earliest times till 1650 A.D. is known as the initial stage. At
this time total world population increase rate was very low, because both death
rate and birth rate were very high.
Middle stage : The period between 1650 A.D. and 1950 A.D. is known as the middle
stage of population growth. In the middle stage death rate declined but birth rate
was high which resulted in very rapid increase of population. In Africa, Asia and
South America population growth rate was low as the birth and death rate
were very high. At the begining of this stage population growth was slow but at the
end, it grow rapidly.
Recent stage : After 1950-2010 is the recent stage. In the last few decades the
population has increased rapidly in the world, but on the basis of region two trends
have been found.
Recent Stage of Population Growth
Developed Region Developing Region

Developed region or Developed countries : In this region population is stable as
population growth decreased due to low birth and death rate. Displayed population
structure shows that the base of the structure is narrow, middle part is wide and the
top is narrow (fig. 7.2). In developed region male/female population growth is nearly
the same and dependent population is less than that. Number of active population is
high and so the work force is high. Generally, population in the age group of 0-18 years
and over 65 years are considered dependent population. The rest are known as active
population.

Lo)

S

N

110 Geography and Environment
Developed Countries Developing Countries
Year
85+
80 - 84
75-79
65-69
60 - 64
55-59] Male
Male Female 50-54 Female
45-49
40-44
35 -39
30 - 34
25-29
20 - 24
15-19
10-14
5-9
0-4
200 100 0 100 200 «= 300 300. 200—S 100 0 100 200 = 300
Population (Millions) Population (Millions)
Fig. 7.2 : Population structure
Developing region or Population structure : Age specific
Developing countries : In ae 7: :
. male/female distribution shown in a triangular
developing country of the world, . ;
population growth rate is still shape graph is known as population structure.
very high.In the last few decades | The left side of the vertical axis shows the male
in the developing world the | population and right side shows the female
death rate decreased but the | population. Graph that shows the population
birth rate did not decrease as | structure is known as population pyramid.
such. The population structure
of these countries has a very wide base and a narrow top (fig. 7.2).
The number of children and aged population is very high in the total population
andas a result the size of the dependent population is high. Active population is
relatively low and so those countries economies are poor.
Task : Write down the characteristics of population growth in the given table.
Initial stage Middle stage Recent stage
ee ee BS
S
AQ

Population lll
Factors of Population Change
If you observe in your family or in the neighbourhood you will see that in the last
few years some changes in the number of population has taken place. For example,
some babies were born (birth), some died (death) and some went to other places
due to job or marriage (migration).
The three factors of population change birth, death and migration are known as
population dynamics. Population is a very dynamic factor. Birth, death and migration
change population structure of a country which eventually has an impact on
society and economy.
Birth Rate
The birth rate in the number of live babies born in a year for every 1000 people in
the total population. Child bearing capacity/fertility of women ranges between 15-45 or 15-49
years of age.
; Number of children born in a particular year
Birth rate = ——_—_—__—__—____———____——_ x 1000
Number of fertile women in a particular year
Crude Birth Rate
But crude birth rate is a more acceptable method. It is calculated by following formula.
, Total number of children born in a year
Crude birth rate = ———___—____________~_ x 1000
Mid year total population
Fertility of population differs from region to region in the world. Countries have
different types of birth rate. Usually socio-economic condition is the main factor.
Factors responsible for birth rate are given below :
1. Marital characteristics : Age of marriage, polygamy and divorce have influence
on birth rate.
2. Education : General education decreases the fertility and lilliterary increases it
3. Profession : People like doctors, engineers, administrators and managers have low
© birth rate. On the other hand farmers have high fertility rates.
S
nN

112 Geography and Environment
4. Rural-urban residence : In rural areas birth rate is high and in urban area it is
low.
Birth rate variation is a social matter. Society, societal status, geographical
location, economic status, marriage, religious sentiment, education, culture are related
to fertility and the birth rate.
Mortality : The death rate is the number of people in every 1000 who die each year.
Death Rate
Crude death rate : The formula of CDR is given below :
Total number of deaths per year
CDR= — I  & «1000
Mid year total population
Death rate is influenced by the following reasons :
1. Natural disaster : Storm, earthquake, flood, famine are the causes of unnatural
death.
2. War and social violence : War, social violence and riots increase death rate.
Afghanistan, Iraq and people of Palestine have higher death rates.
3. Disease and accidents : Epidemic, accidents increase death rate.
Death rate also varies from country to country. Developing nations have higher death
rate, but it is low in developed countries. Death rate also varies from gender to
gender. Usually women in child bearing age have higher mortality rates in the
developing countries. The developing countries also suffer from high infant mortality
rates.
Migration
Migration is the movement of people from one place to another to live or to
work. Sometimes this movement may only be to the next town or only for a short
period of time. Sometimes the movement may be to a different country and the
move can be permanent. Migration can be classified into two on the basis of
its nature- voluntary and forced migration. Migration are of two types depending on &
the destination international and internal. People who migrate are known as migrants. 8

Population 113
1. Voluntary migration : Voluntary migration is when people choose to move.
This is usually because of the ‘pull’ or attraction of a better quality of life elsewhere,
or of a higher standard of living or greater personal freedom.
2. Forced migration : Forced migration is when people have no choice and are
made to move. They can be ‘pushed’ out of a place because of natural disasters or to
avoid religious and political persecutions. Those people who are forced to migrate
and settle somewhere permanently are known as refugee and those forced migrants
wait to return to their home country after sometime is known as emigre.

Task : Rina Bhowmic’s family, Sadia’s family, Shohag, Robin and many more

went to India in 1971 during the libaration war of Bangladesh. In 1972 Sadia’s

family, Shohag and Robin came back. Now fill in the table below :

1. What type of migration is it?

2. Who are the refugees?

3. Who are the emigre?

4. Who are the migrant?
You will observe that migration is being occured within the terretory of the country
rural to urban or urban to rural. Again, you will see that some people have migrated out
of the country to another country. So, according to spatial view migration can be
divided into two classes.

1. Internal
2. International

Task : Fill up the table (individual work).

Dhaka to Chittagong

Dhaka to USA

Mymensingh to Dhaka

Bogra to Dhaka

Forma-15, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

114 Geography and Environment
Factors of Migration

Pull factors : Better job opportunity, better education, high standard of living etc.
are the pull factors for migration from the place of origin.

Push factors : Natural disaster, unemployment, religious persecution etc. are the
push factors for migration from the place of origin.

Some of the pull and push factors are given below :

Pull factors

1. To live close to relatives and kin.

2. Employment opportunity and better economic prospect.

3. Education, health, housing and social security benefit.

4. Demand of skilled manpower in the market.

5. Personal benefit to get property from marriage.

Push factors

1. Natural disaster related destruction.

2. Population growth related problem.

3. Social and ethnic problem.

4. Economic recession.

5. Loss in Business and trade.

Merits and Demerits of Migration

When educated people voluntarily migrate for better quality of life or personal
freedom the home country losses a good citizen who could contribute to the
country’s economy and development. When a less educated, unskilled or skilled
labour migrates he earns more than he earned in his own country. He can save money
and send that back to his family. The family members have a better quality life than
before. Labour class people bring in money for the country but the educated ones take
away the education and money which he gained from the country. So, less educated
temporary migrants are better citizens for the country.

Migration is important in the distribution of world population. Apart from location
change, due to migration different regions have economic, societal and population &

Population 115
change which is discussed below :
1. Economic impact : People migrate for economic benefit. In the place of
origin and destination property ownership, labour wages, unemployment, living
standard, balance in trade, economic production and development may change. If a
less literate person does not migrate in proper way he may face economic loss. In
the case of international migration people should have proper information about
the destination. Information passed on from other people may not be authentic and
migrants may face problem in destination and lead to deportation from foreign
countries. In the home country the emigrant may have taken loan to go abroad but
due to deportation he has to come back without earning which leads to more loss to
the country and to the individual also.
2. Social impact : Exchange of social behaviour and pattern takes place for migration.
Many types of disease are also spread by migration. Exchange of ideas, views with
various types of people and the migrants takes place. Migrants accept new culture
and way of life which eventually leads to identity crisis of the migrants.
3. Impact on Population : Due to migration population decreases in the place of
origin and increases in the place of destination. Educated young, and professional
people’s migration to the destination bring changes to the population structure. This
leads to the imbalance of male female rates. Sometimes educated young migrants do
not return to the home country which is a loss for the country. Many countries have
low population so they import manpower to utilize their resources properly. These
countries are Saudi Arabia, Malaysia and the United Arab Emirates. Developing countries
send human resources to the labour market and earn foreign exchange.
Government policy on population : In 2012, a national policy was adopted
for the improvement of health, family welfare, and better livelihood of mothers
and children. For making small size family, population control, family planning
programme were taken into consideration for the overall success of social and
national development.
Population Density and Distribution
Population density : Population density is the number of people who live in a given
area. It is calculated for a particular country, using the equation.

= Panilaiondenalig~ Number af people ina particular country
i Size of that country (km*)

116 Geography and Environment
Total population of Bangladesh is
14,97,72,364 and size of the country
1,47,570 kin? . ee, -) Bangladesh
~ Density = 119772364 _, ors ~ 4
.. Density = La7s70 persons SS ee
per km?. ‘ ' - |
. aa Pony ”
If the size of the country is large in es ‘ee ; a
relation to population the density of , oy ee e
Said PS:
opulation is be lower (fig. 7.3). ere ad
pop (fig. 7.3) 7 O° \
Man-land ratio : Arable land divided oe ie Sn
by the size of population is called pA ° ae Fi¥ed
inlet ratio. Formula of man-land x Ro ones :
ratio is : , |
. Total population Population density (persons/kilometres) | |
Man-land ratio= ——P
Arable land 25 100 250 500 1000 .
Optimum population : A country’s Fig. 7.3 : Population density of Bangladesh
balance between total population and man-land ratio is known as the optimum
population. As long
as the natural resources and production of a country can support a certain
number of population it is the optimum population for that period. When the balance
of man-land ratio of a country is unstable it results in over population or under
population.
Over population : When the land resources of a country is relatively low and the
population size is high that is called over population.
Under population : When the land resources of a country is respectively high
and population size is low that is called under population.
Population distribution : Population distribution refers to the arrangement, spread
and density of people in an area.
co
§

Population 117

Factors of Population Density and Distribution

Population is not evenly distributed all over the country. There are some natural,

social and economic reasons for the uneven distribution of population in a

country. Factors that influence the distribution of population are divided into two :

these are physical factors, non- physical factors.

Physical Factors

Physical features : People are naturally attracted to flat low lying lands where

soils are fertile, water supply is plentiful and transport linking to other places

is good. Relief discourages settlement especially in areas which have high

mountains. Dense tropical rain forest have few permanent settlements. In

Chittagong Hill Tracts and Sunderbans area density of population is very low.

Climate : People are discouraged to settle down in areas of extreme climate which

are very cold, very hot or very wet. People prefer to live in mild climate areas.

Soil: Fertile soil is good for agriculture so people are attracted to areas near the river

where plains exist.

Water : Sweet drinking water attracts people. Places along the river is good for

settlement and agriculture which is the reason for high density along the river.

Mineral : Mineral resources also encourage people to settle there.

Non-physical Factors

Society : Where Employment, housing, food,clothing is easily available density

of population is high.

Cultural factor : Education and culture inspire people nowadays to migrate. People

wants to settle where opportunity of education and research facilities are more.

Economic factor : Industrial area where employment opportunity is higher and those

areas where there are economically better off, people tend to concentrate on those

places. Such as Osaka in Japan, Mumbai in India are those places were density of

population is high.

Impact of Excessive Population Pressure on Natural Resources

Increasing population raises pressure on land. When the population of a country

increases in a limited area, more food is needed. For higher population more land is
~ used for food. Land fragmentation and overuse of land are leading to the decrease of
Ss productive lands. Increase of settlement is decreasing open space and water bodies.

118 Geography and Environment
Micro-soil nutrients are destroyed. Vegetation does not grow in polluted soil
which leads to desertification. So, proper land utilization is necessary to keep a
balance between population increase and land resources.
A diagram showing the impact of over population on land resources
Higher crop cultivation — Fertility decrease + Decrease of organism
Higher fertilizer for higher production — Pesticide use — Soil pollution
Deforestation and hill cutting for agriculture Land exposure for erosion
Fragmentation of agricultural land — Land used for settlement
Land division > Establishment of infrastructure and business centres
Transport > Increasing land use for office and administrative purpose
Water is essential for human survival. Population increase also affects the water
resources. Over use of sweet water and its impact is shown below :
Use of water in agriculture for irrigation is depleting the
underground water level.
Overuse of sweet water for drinking is depleting the
underground water level which is harmful.
Water transport is polluting the water by oil spill and waste.
Industrial waste as dye, grease and other chemical substance.
Due to the above mentioned resources marine plants, micro organism and plankton
cannot survive and the food chain of small and big fishes is broken and so the
marine life is decreasing gradually.
Environmental balance is decreasing due to increase of human settlement,
industrial production, hill cutting and deforestation.
Task : Make a chart of your surrounding area by observing the land use, water and forest.
eg
S
AQ

Population 119
Balance between resources and population is very important for a country’s
development. Population and resources are the two factors for national development.
So, population policy is made for proper utilization of resources for the development
of a country.
Contemporary Population of Bangladesht Problems and Solutions
Bangladesh is one of the densely populated country. According to the census report
of 2011, total population is 14.97 crore. Density of population is 1,015 persons per
square kilometres. If the present growth rate continues density of population will
increase in future. Population characteristics of Bangladesh are given below :
Population Characteristics of Bangladesh
e Population is increasing but growth rate decreased.
e Population is high in comparison to land area.
e Number of Male/Female is same.
e Half of the population is dependent.
e Death rate declined more than birth rate.
e Majority of the population live in rural areas.
e Average longevity is less than developed countries.
Population growth rate : Population of Bangladesh is increasing rapidly. In
1991 population growth rate was 2.17 percent, in 2001 1.48 percent and in 2011 it was
1.37 percent. A graph showing the growth rate of population is given below :
Bangladesh Population growth rate Task
Yearly growth rate in percentage 2 130] | | | | |
1981 ei2s{ | | tf
1991 zi2o{ | | tt
200% Shst TTT
2009 giro] [Tt |
2011 elsi[ {tT
aslo} ol al
"lg 85

120 Geography and Environment
Population Distribution According to Age Group
Population characteristic of Bangladesh is greater youthful population. Census
records in different years show that the number of dependent population is
high i.e., children, adolescent and aged population. Population structure of 2005
shows that in the aged population group between 60-90 years is less than 1.5
million and number of females is higher than males. Using the structure complete
the task below :
Population structure 2005
95+
90 - 94
85-89
80-84
75-79
70-74
60 - 64
55 - 59
=, 50-54
B 45-49
o 40-44
2 35-39
30 - 34
25 - 29
20 - 24
15-19
10-14
5-9
0-4
10.000 8.000 6.000 4.000 2.000 0 2.000 4.000 6.000 8.000 10.000
Male (Millions) Female
<+————- Population —-————_»
Task : 1. Which age group has the highest population?
2. Which age group is active?
3. Find out the rate of active and dependent population.
oO
5

Population 121

Population Problem of Bangladesh

In any country, land and natural resource is limited. Population of Bangladesh is

increasing rapidly. However, directly and indirectly population pressure is acting on

land and resources.

e Fragmentation of land = Decrease Production

e Demand for housing, increasing use of land = Decrease of agricultural land

© Decrease of per capita income = Low standard of living

e Rapid population increase, less food production = Food shortage

e High population = Poor health care facilities

e Population increase = Health care facilities is less

e Deforestation, Hill cutting, Slum increase = Environmental pollution

e Low per capita income = low savings, low investment leads to unemployment =
Unemployment increase

e Increase of food import = Decrease of foreign exchange

e Degradation of social values, increase of stealing, mugging for survival = Loss of
security in social life

e¢ Too many students in classes due to fewer schools, admission problem, harmful
educational environment = low literacy rate

Solution of population problem of Bangladesh may lead to economic

development. Modernization of agriculture, industrialization, development of transport

and communication can speed up the economic development of the country.

Population can be moved from high density area to low density area to solve the

population problem. Extension of education and family planning can decrease the

population growth.

Even distribution of national income may increase the standard of living. Skilled

manpower development may decrease population growth. Agriculture, industry,

business development may increase the per capita income which may reduce the

population to some extent but solving population problem is not easy.

Forma-16, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

122 Geography and Environment
Task : Fill in the diagram by using information above.
Solving the Population
Problem of Bangladesh
Measures Taken to Control Population in Bangladesh
Population is one of the major problems of Bangladesh. Government has taken many
family planning programmes. Non-Government organizations are also trying to
increase the awareness of the bad effects of too much population. A joint effort may
lead the population from burden to human resource. Some of the measures to control
population are :
* Increase the age of marriage of the girls/women.
* Build awareness in the population to keep the family size small for better future.
* Create more jobs for women and encourage education of women.
* Provide social security benefit during old age.
* To apply family planning programmes to limit number of children.
* Make recreational facilities for the citizens of the country.
* Fanaticism, dependency on son, and the linkage of the family.
Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. Which is the non-physical factor of population distribution?
a. Economic b. Mineral
oS
c. Soil d. Water g

Population 123
2. Which contribution makes an optimum population?
a. Man-forest resource balance b. Man-land balance
c. Man-mineral resource balance d. Man-industry balance
Answer questions 3 and 4 from the figure below :
88 ry 90° or 92°
oN BANGLADESH x’
f eB =O se 0 32 64 Kilometres |
Ss NDIAT se INDIA 2s
oo iV Oe ee eee
/ q ae a
4° . k \ £ r y 2a
; rs . = rm g INDIA ;
3 ‘ , SS 7 ‘ oh 23
tie
3g" 89° BxcorGrcmmict 90" gi’ _* Sg?
3. The cause of migration from ‘Q’ marked region to ‘R’ marked region in the
map -
i. lack of employment opportunity.
ii. river erosion.
iii. social and religious discrimination.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iii
x% c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
S
N

124 Geography and Environment
4. The cause of the density of population being low in ‘P’ marked region in the
map -
i. undeveloped land.
ii. undeveloped transport.
iii. undeveloped agriculture.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iii
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
Creative questions
1. Recently in neighbouring country of Myanmar the Buddhist community and the
minority Muslim Rohinga community had a communal riot. Rohinga Muslims
had taken shelter in Ukhia in Cox’s Bazar ain order to save their lives.
a. What is migration?
b. What do you understand by emigre? Explain.
c. What type of migration did the Rohingas have when they took shelter in
Ukhia in Cox’s Bazar? Explain.
d. What sort of negative impact on the environment will take place due to
Rohinga migration in that area? Give your explanation.
eS
=

125
2. 0150" 120, )> > y 0 3060” 0 a ee i Ee
. s ee i *
, + © NORTHERN py ce 1.0.72 2% 9
30° 30°
fd ATLANTIC 1°
25- {CRD OSEAN GF Oana o == -203
S
PACIFIC PACIFIC
OCEAN OCEAN
° SY 1 °
Poe
Y g INDIAN OCEAN Y
8g eT E ERR im eR UE EIT —23z
30° 30°
o a
60° 9 1000 2000 Kilometres SOUTHERN OCEAN 60°
a. What is crude birth rate?
b. What do you understand by over population? Explain.
c. Explain the physical reason of high population density in ‘P’ marked region of
the map.
d. Analyze the difference of density of population at ‘Q’ and ‘R’ marked region of
the map.
Lo)
S
N

Chapter Eight
Human Settlements
A settlement is a place where people live. It can be as small as an isolated farm or a
hamlet. The location and growth of a settlement depends on its site and situation.
The site is the actual place where people decide to locate their settlement. The
growth of that settlement then depends on its situation in relation to natural resources
and other settlements.
Settlement varies with the physical features of the region. House types also varies
from rural to urban areas. Human settlement is increasing with the growth of
population in the world.
eh Nghe SMM SN AUG gre he ne a Eh Shag
Rees joi = oe SR Ee ea
Bs 7 a SS gee he gs oe a age eget a
ae pS peer eet ny a ian, ee
ee ae ee as nee

At the end of this chapter, we will be able to :

e Explain the factors of location settlement.

e Discuss the pattern of urban and rural settlement.

e Discuss the pattern and explain type of rural settlement.

e Know about urbanization and types of cities.

e Know the impact of urbanization.

e Know problems due to unplanned urbanization.

e Classify the type and pattern of settlement of our area. Ss

=
e Know the surrounding physical environment and take care of it. &

Human Settlements 127

Factors of Settlement

The sites of settlement determined by the following physical factors.

1. Topography: Topography plays a major role in the formation of a settlement. It is
easy to cultivate in plain land, but in hilly area, it is difficult. So, in a hilly area, for
the sake of easy communication, the settlements are formed near the cultivable
land. In Bangladesh, density of settlements in Chittagong hill tracts is less than
that in plain land.

2. Availability of water: Human beings cannot live without pure water. Therfore,
they establish their settlements around water resources. In the desert and
sub-desert regions, human beings build their settlements in a cluster around well or
natural waterfall. This type of settlement which has grown on the basis of
availability of water is known as Humid Region Settlement.

3. Soil : Settlement grew up both in fertile and unfertile areas. In fertile area, the
densely established settlements are known Agglomerated Settlement and in
unfertile area, scattered settlements are called Dispersed Settlement. Dispersed
Settlements are commonly found in the countries like Germany, Poland, Norway,
and Sweden.

4. Defense: In order to defend themselves human beings used to live in Agglomerated
Settlement in ancient time. In that time, they had to protect themselves from
external enemies and ferocious animals with bare hands.

5. Grazing: Dispersed settlements are seen in grazing areas. Grazing needs vast area.
Therfore, in some regions, people build Dispersed Settlements for their own
advantage.

6. Transport: In ancient time, people built settlements where the physical features
were convenient for transport and communication. For example, Agglomerated
Settlement grew up on plain land and by the river sides for the availability of land
and water transports. The city of Alexandria and the city of Samarkand grew by
the river side of Nile in Egypt and on the plain land in Tajikistan respectively.

oD
S
nN

128 Geography and Environment
Types of Settlement
There are two types of settlement-rural settlement and urban settlement
si Saf eg « Rural settlement : People whose
it nee ms - livelihood is from primary activities
< aigtie B y oo (farming, fishing etc.) living in rural
pa we eS i areas are the inhabitants of rural settlement.
si : 4 <2 ie Rural settlements are classified into
| f scattered and nucleated linear. Using the
is c site and situation factors of the location
_— — 4 i i of settlement, these rural settlements are
a =  atacorner of cropland higher than the
Fig. = 1: Rival serlenient “located surrounding area so that the
homestead is above flood level during normal flooding. Rural settlements have
different types of characteristics on the basis of its design and construction
material (fig. 8.1). Construction materials are usually tin, bamboo and bamboo
mats etc. These dwellings are not strong. It is easily destroyed by a _ big
storm or flood. In Bangladesh the rural settlements have a special design. There is
an open space inside the dwelling for drying the rice crop. Bedroom, crop storage area
and kitchen are all located around the open space. One open space is shared by two or
three families. In the rural areas roads are few. Apart from agricultural activities some
rural areas one specialized in producing hand woven clothes, pottery items and dairy
product and these places are named according to the profession of the dwellers.
Urban settlement : Those people who are engaged in secondary and tertiary
activities (industrial workers and service sectors like banking, teaching etc.) and
live in structured urban areas are known as urban settlements (fig. 8.2). Urban
settlements are characterized by design, structure, construction material and well ce
Rg

Human Settlements 129

defined streets and urban facilities oh

like electricity, water, gas, sewerage 3 : | 4,

etc. Urban settlements usually are |) r aT | pee eo et A

multistoried buildings with 5 ee eas ia

families live in those apartments. Eee ee get ee fm

Urban settlements are strong structure fam Sas cms Ss cashuns le es

made of brick, iron, cement, and @ ot Ley ® =e i aw hai b| ia

sand. Urban settlements are not casily [ageemeS@l = tage na j) a, a

damaged by natural calamity ic., Zim — y ME he.

storms, floods, tornadoes etc. Fig. 8.2 : Urban settlement

Patterns of Rural Settlements

On the basis of location rural settlement can be classified

into three groups :

1. Nucleated settlement : Several dwellings grouped

together for defensive purposes or for social and

economic reasons are known as nucleated settlement. P*/

This type of settlement is found in the Hilly areas : :

of Bangladesh in the north eastern and south eastern ;

part. The dwellings of this type of settlement are close

to one another. Physical features, soil fertility and source

of water supply are some of the causes of nucleated Fig. 8.3 : Nucleated settlement

settlement (fig. 8.3).

2. Dispersed settlement : Dispersed settlement occurs in an area of adverse

physical condition where natural resources are insufficient to support more than

a few people. Dispersed settlement is an isolated, individual dwelling, or a group

of dwellings forming a hamlet/small village and separated from the next group by
Forma-17, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

130 Geography and Environment
two of three kilometres (fig .8.4).
3, Linear settlement ; A linear settlement iz a small to medigm sized settlement
that ig formed around a trangport route, such as 3 read, river and canal (fig, $5),
<_< 7
Task ; Write down the characteristica of rural sctticment in a chart below (group wise task},
Urbanization
The term ‘urbanization’ means the merease in the proportion of the world’s
population who five im cities. The process of urbanization starta after certain
conditions are met such as surplus production of food, specialization of labour etc.
In 5000 BC, most people m the world lived by hunting and gathermg their food
farming. Farming Over the next 3000 years a major transformation occurred due to
the development of allows people to settle in a particular area. The first civilization
started in Mesopotamia in 2500 BC in the fertile farmland between the Tigria and
Euphrates rivers. The Valley of Nile was also a region of carly civilization. By
1200 BC major civilizations have also emerged along the banks of Indus river in
Mohenjodaro and Harsppa in Pakistan, in China in the valleys of Yellow Rivec and
in Greece. Roman civilization apread ‘city idea’ throughout the Meditexranean and
mainland Europe. The fall of Roman Empire in the late Sth century led to the decline =
of urban life. R

Human Settlements 131
Then followed the dark ages from 500-1000 A.D. when urban life and traditions
all disappeared for over 500 years. In 715 A.D. Muslim army conquered most of
Spain, only the mountainous north remained independent. They established cities
in Cordova, Toledo and Seville, which became the centres of learning at that time.
The great urban growth started from 1000 A.D. During 1000-1400 A.D. urban
expansion took place in western and central Europe and also in central Russia with
a marked growth of population. By 1400 A.D. the western and central Europe was
filled with towns and villages. The impact of technology during the period 1600-
1800 A.D. gave great momentum to commerce and exploration. The people of
northern Europe began colonization of North America, Asia and Africa. New cities
like New York, Philadelphia, Boston, Montreal, Goa, Kolkata, Singapore, Jakarta
grew up. During the industrial revolution for extracting coal and iron ore new mining
towns grew up as those raw materials were used in the industries. Manufacturing
towns developed on the basis of secondary activities for selling the manufactured
goods within the country or exporting them outside the country. Tertiary activity
oriented market towns or ports developed. According to the opinion of the experts,
in near future majority of the population of the world will live in the cities.
Urbanization is related with two types of process. (1) Rural Urban migration of
people resulting in higher percentage of population living in the city. (2) Urban
culture is spread easily through transport and communication routes as a result the
culture gap of rural and urban people is greatly reduced.
Task : What is urbanization? Discuss in group and write down the points in a
copy or chart paper.

Classification of Cities
Geographers have classified the cities in different ways, cities differ in size,
structure, population characteristics and functions. Even though there are various
types of categories but the classification on the basis of functions is more important.
Types of cities on the basis of function are as follows:

~ 1. Cities based on military activities : Army and navy establishments like garrisons

S or forts are located at strategic places of a country. Gradually cities grow up around

132 Geography and Environment
these locations. Agra in India, Gibraltar in Spain, Edinburgh in Scotland etc. are the
examples of this type of cities.
2. Administrative cities : Centre of administrative and political activities becomes a
city. For administrative purpose a central city is identified as the capital and then
urban settlement expands in that city. Dhaka in Bangladesh, New Delhi in India,
Islamabad in Pakistan and Canberra in Australia are such cities.
3. Industrial cities : Industrial activitiy is an important factor in urbanization. For the
industrial use of coal, cities grew up in areas of coal mines and in this way many
coal cities grew up around the world. New Castle in UK, Raniganj in India,
Pennsylvania in USA are mining cities.
4. Trading cities : Small service centres expended and became urban settlements.
Since the dawn of civilization exchange of goods in a place starts a trading centre or a
market. The local market grew up at the junction of roads. This factor is still very
important in the growth of towns and cities. In ancient times many trading cities grew
up on continental land routes as Damascus in Syria, Alexandria in Egypt and the city of
Fez in Morocco. Dhaka grew up along the banks of Buriganga river and Chittagong
along Karnaphuli river.
5. Cities based on cultural activities : A city can develop for religious reasons.
Birthplace of a renowned personality, his place of activity or his memorial can
lead to the growth of cities. Mecca, Jerusalem, Goya are religious cities. Some world
famous university or research institution can also play an important role in the
growth of cities. Oxford and Cambridge in England, Nalanda in India are the
university towns. Other cultural activities like fine arts and film industry can also be
the factor of a new city such as Paris for fine arts. Hollywood in USA and Mumbai
in India for film industry.
6. Health resort and recreation centre : To get recreation from the routine activities
of life, people spend time outside their home in seaside or hill resort. These types of
resorts are Cox’s Bazar in Bangladesh, Puri in India and Honolulu in USA where
sea-beach is a great attraction for everybody.

Task : Name five cities of Bangladesh and their origins. x

N

Human Settlements 133
Impact of Urbanization
Processes that influence the urbanization and the urban structure are discussed below:
1. Size and density of the population : Usually cities are densely populated. In
Bangladesh any settlement which has a minimum population of 5000 persons
and density of 1500 persons per square kilometres is called a City. Fertility and
mortally rates are less in the unban areas than therural areas. But due to migration
urban population is gradually increasing.
2. House types: Multistoried buildings are built in urban areas as a large
population live in a small area. Wide roads, parks, artificial lakes increase the
beauty of the cities. All modern amenities like electricity, water supply and gas are
available here.
3. Transport system : As there are well constructed in urban areas, people can move
from one place to another using various types of transport.Cheap and easy transport
is an added attraction of the cities.
4. Family size : Family is the oldest form of social institution. In urban areas
nucleated family is more common. Average family size in the city ranges between
4-6 persons. The city people with various types of occupation have little time for
recreation So they cannot spend much time with their family.
5. Behaviour pattern : Mobility is very high in urban life. As there is scope to
change one's occupation people easily change their professions from time to time.
Here the social status is determined by the earning capacity.People of rural areas are
conservative. They are more respectful towards traditional social values. In the rural
areas, social status is determined by birth right.
6. Food habit and dress : Urban peoples food habit and the way of dressing are
defferent from the rural peoples. Urban people are more fashion conscious and they
follow the latest trend in fashion.
7. Economy : People of the urban areas are engaged in secondary and tertiary
economic activity. Urban profession is very diversified. They are usually engaged in
S non agricultural work like business, education, administration and service sectors.

134 Geography and Environment

8. Services : An urban area is provided with services like electricity, gas, water,

sewerage and roads.

9. Education and Health services : In the urban areas people, get highest benefit

from education and health service facilities.

10. Recreation : In urban areas people have recreation facilities to overcome their

tiredness from very active life. Cinema, theatre and stadiums have profound influence

on urban life of the urban people.

11. Rise of crimes : In urban areas stealing, cheating mugging and brawling are

regular incidents. These incidents are the negative impact of urban life.

12. Political and Social organization : Civil society organizations of the urban

areas are very active. Different types of political activities and programmes are

directed from the cities. Other social organizations arrange cultural and traditional

folk festivals which add pleasure to the urban life.

Task : Write down the advantages and disadvantages related to urbanization that you have

observed.

Problems of Unplanned Urbanization

Unplanned urbanization in different countries of the world created various

types of environmental problems and Bangladesh is one of them. Bangladesh is not

an industrialized nation, but it is in the initial stages of urbanization. Urban processes

are growing rapidly. But all urban centres are not growing equally. Growth rate

of large urban centres is high as industries, government administration and service

sectors are rapidly expanding there.

About 40 percent of the population of the world live in urban areas. Relatively size

of urban population in Bangladesh is small now but it is increasing gradually.

Unplanned urbanization is directly related to environmental problem, such as loss of

agricultural land, drinking water scarcity, drainage problem, waste management,

transport and traffic jam problem, housing problem, increase of slum, pollution of

water, air, land and noise, scarcity of open space and absence of recreational facilities.
eg
S
AQ

Human Settlements 135

In Bangladesh per capita agricultural land is only 0.05 acre. Urban areas usually grow
up in fertile agricultural land and gradually agricultural land is acquired for the
expansion of urban areas. According to the World Health Organization for an
urban area with 10 lakh population, 1,37,36,268 gallons of water is required per
day. Only Dhaka city needs 28.5 crore gallons of water everyday. Wasa can
supply only 18 crore gallon and about 3.5 crore gallon is wasted or misused. So,
the deficit is 15 crore gallon. In dry season water scarcity in the city is high.
According to the World Health Organization, a person requires 7 gallons of water
a day for his survival but in our country urban people get less than its average
daily.
Waste water and river water is collected at Chandighat and then refined and
distributed again. In this case, the use of Meghna and Jamuna river water is important.
Daily on an average 900 tons of waste is generated in Dhaka which is disposed in the
lowlands and open areas. These wastes produce stink and bad smell in the
surrounding areas, and the seepage into the soil pollutes the underground water
lable. People from slum areas use this water for their living. As a result they
suffer from skin disease, cholera, typhoid, malaria and other distases. In other
divisional cities such as Chittagong, Khulna, Rajshahi the situation is same.

The number of transport is increasing in almost all the cities. Fumes combined with
harmful element like sulphur dioxide, nitrous oxide, nickel etc. are in the air. These
pollution cause asthma and various types of allergy.

In unplanned city there is a scarcity of housing. The poorest people and the migrants
from the rural areas live in the densely populated slums are the causes of
environmental pollution. Roads and highways, educational institutions, health centres,
recreation centres, easily available fuel, trade centre and markets are essential part of
urbanization. Due to steady incarease of urban population it is difficult to provide all
these services. Due to this unplanned urbanization building a planned city is really
diffcult.

,
s

136 Geography and Environment
Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. What type of settlement is there in Madhupur?
a. Clustered b. Dispersed
c. Nucleated d. Linear
2. How does a human being begin to adapt himself/herself with the environment?
a. To make a settlement b. Make a family
c. Choose occupation d. Take education
Read the text below and answer the question number 3 and 4.
Sadia lives in such a place from where she can move to anywhere in Bangladesh. At
present, linear settlement has been developed there. As a result, there are wide roads,
electricity, gas, water and sewerage are available.
3. What is the natural features in Sadia’s area?
a. Hilly b. Plains
c. River bank d. Forests
4. What type of advantages are there in Sadia's area?
i. Urban facilities
ii. Education and health facilities
iii. Working facilities
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iii
c. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii
S

Human Settlements 137
Creative questions
1. Badal and Shuvo both of them live in a city. But Shuvo’s city is an

administrative city. The town where Badal lives now was a village once. A few

years ago an EPZ has been established there and now it has beecome a town.

a. Name the civilization which spread the idea of city.

b. How does soil help to establish a settlement?

c. Explain the role of EPZ in the establishment of town in Badal’s area.

d. Shuvo’s town is different in nature from Badal’s town-explain.

Settl v
ettlements r
ane OC
A Ll é
ti) PA
Fig.1 Fig. 2

a. What is rural settlement?

b. How does a settlement grow up? Explain.

c. In figure number 1 explain the reasons of settlement growth.

d. In figure number 2, explain the process of settlement growth.

Forma-18, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

138 Geography and Environment
Chapter Nine
Resources and Economic Activities

Human beings need resources to maintain the daily necessities of life and these are
important for an economy. What types of economic activitics are perfonned
by the people of different countries of the world based on the use of resources?
What are the factors of the industrial development? Why does the imbalance of
export and import happen?

Oe, Ad PST ey

pees! A y gah (ioe rae

BN a aie
rm a es

a Seis lam Be

5D Pt
At the end of this chapter, we will be able to :

«® Describe the concept of resources and classify them.

¢ Explain the ways of conservation of resources,

«® Aware people for conservation of resources.

e Enxplain the economic activities,

* Explain the economic activities of undeveloped, developing and developed

countries, 3

Resources and Economic Activities 139
e Explain the factors of industrial development.
e Explain the classification and analyze the location of industries.
e Explain the export and import trade.
e Analyze the relation between balance of trade and development.
Concept of Resources
The goods which can meet up demand and the supply of the goods are limited then the
demand is called Resources. The goods whose supply is unlimited cannot be regarded
as resources.
Classification of Resources
Resources are divided into three categories primarily :
(1) Natural resources
(2) Human resources
(3) Economic resources
Natural resources : Natural resources are classified into three categories. According
to the scientists, the process of creation of non-renewable resources is very slow and
their supply is limited. There are many resources which are exhausted with the
passage of time such as natural gas, iron ore, coal and petroleum is decreased due to
extraction. All these minerals are known as non-renewable resources as once
extracted is no longer recycled. The renewable resources mean those kinds of
resources which are continuously produced but changeable. Hydroelectricity is an
excellent example of renewable resources. Human resources are the human beings
with proper education and training.
Economic resources : The classic economic resources include the land, labour and
capital. Entrepreneurship is also considered as Economic resource because
individuals are responsible for creating businesses and moving economic
resources in the business environment. These economic resources are also called the
factors of production.
20
Ss
N

140 Geography and Environment
Renewable : Solar power, | | Non-renewable : Petroleum,
wind power, water power. | | natural gas, coal, iron ore.
Task : Give at least two example of various types of resources (individual work).
Conservation of Resources
Conservation of resources means using of natural resources in such a way so that it
can be used for a longer time period for the benefit of many people. The
other names of conservation are education, truthfulness, justice, devotion or love for
nature. According to the economists the resources are not unlimited. Proper
management for utilizing the resources is very essential.
Increasing renewable resources is possible only through proper management.
Environment friendly management is desirable. Non-renewable resources can be
destroyed by burning oil or gas. But the environment is not polluted if the solar
electricity is generated by using renewable solar energy and the hydroelectricity
is generated by using water resources. Various usable things can be turned into
resources by recycling minimizing wastage of resources.
Use of chemical fertilizer increased production in the beginning, but later on, it
decreases the land's fertility. In this regard the idea of using organic fertilizer can
be brought under consideration. The different soil conservation methods can be used
for protecting the cropping soil such as the terrace farming and crop rotation.
Besides the soil of fallow land can be conserved through afforestation. Used
materials can be recycled and produced as a useful resource. All of us should be
careful about protecting the land, water, mineral resources and natural environment
and stop the wastage which will increase the usage of these resources for a
longer period. Conservation of resources through 3R method is necessary. 3R is
known as Reduce, Reuse and Recycle.
has)
Task : How to prevent the wastage of resources (group work)? =

Resources and Economic Activities 141
Economic Activities
Any sort of human behaviour related to the production and exchange is called
Economic activities. Economic activities are classified into three categories.
(1) Primary economic activities
(2) Secondary economic activities
(3) Tertiary economic activities
Primary economic activities : Primary economis activites are those activities where
natural resources are extracted from the earth. Examples of primary activities are
mining, farming and fishing. Natural resources are those resources, which are found
in nature and are of benefit to mankind.
Secondary economic activities : The secondary economic sector deals with the
processing of raw materials into finished goods. Builders and potters are
examples of secondary economic sector workers. Lumber from trees is used to
build houses and clay from earth is used to make pottery.
In the secondary economic activities products that are collected in primary economic
activity are processed by changing their forms and increasing their value. The
extracted iron ore from mines is changed into steel and iron products.
Manufacturing all types of mechanical equipment to cooking all come under
secondary economic activities.
Tertiary economic activities : The tertiary economic sector has to do with
services to businesses and consumers. The activities of whole sellers, hawkers, bankers,
teachers, doctors, nurse, lawyers, barbers and rickshaw pullers, fall into the category
of tertiary economic sector workers. Transportation, banking, tourism and retail
stores are all part of the tertiary economic sector.
Task ; Write down the economic activities of shop keeper, iron monger, teacher,
farmer, business person and nurse in the table below (group work).
Primary activities Secondary activities Tertiary activities
co
Ss
RQ

142 Geography and Environment
The Economic Activities of Undeveloped, Developing and Developed Countries
The different countries of the world are classified into undeveloped, developing and
developed on the basis economic power. Around 50%-80% people of undeveloped
and developing countries are engaged in primary economic activity, such as,
Bangladesh, Myanmar, Bhutan, Nepal, Cambodia, Ethiopia, Kenya and Zambia. People
of these countries are engaged in animal rearing, fishing, wood collecting and in
physical labour. More than 80 percent people of developed countries like USA,
UK, Canada, Japan, China, Italy, Germany, France, Span, Australia and New
Zealand are involved in the secondary and tertiary economic activities. People of
these countries are engaged more as industrial labour, teacher, doctor, engineer, nurse,
business, cultural activity, politics, research and social work. In these countries
literacy rate, standard of living and per capita income are higher than undeveloped and
developing countries.

The Factors of Industrial Development

Industries develop on natural and economic factors. The natural factors are : (1)
Climate, (2) proximity to energy resources, (3) availability of raw materials.
Economic factors are : (4) Capital, (5) supply of labour, (6) proximity to the market,
(7) use of modern technology, (8) good transport system, (9) government investment
policies and (10) political stability.

Natural Factors

(1) Climate : Climate means the average temperature, rainfall, water vapours and
humidity of an area over a long period of time. It is difficult to develop industries in
tropical countries where the workers get tired easily due to high temperature. So, the
temperature is controlled by air conditioner. It increases the price of production. But
in temperate and cold countries industrial workers can work over a longer period of
time without being tired.

In an indirect way the location of industries depends on the climate. In different
types of climate different type of raw material is produced. Such as Jute grows
well in the tropical climate of our country. So a large number of jute industries have
developed in our country. Similarly Khulna newsprint mill has been established to
use the Sundari tree as raw material from Sunderbans.

(2) Proximity to energy resources : The location of industries depends on the .
proximity to energy resources. As energy resources are needed to run the industries. s

Resources and Economic Activities 143
Large industries need energy to run which is produced from coal, petroleum,
natural gas, and hydroelectricity. Basically Industries are developed in those area
where there are abundant supply of energy resources.
(3) Availability of raw materials : Raw materials are required for industries.
So, the industries develop in areas where raw materials are abundant and cheap. In
Bangladesh there is an abundant supply of bamboo and cane in Chandraghona
area, in Rangamati and so Karnaphuli paper mill has been established there.
Economic Factors
(4) Capital : Capital is required to establish an industry. A large amount of
money is necessary for purchasing land, equipment for industries, payment of
laborers and for transportation. The industries are developed in areas where capital
is available.
(5) Supply of labour : Supply of labour is an important factor for the
development of industries. A large number of industries are developed in more
heavily populated countries due to availability of cheap and abundant labour.
(6) Proximity to the market : A proper market is needed to fulfill the demand for
industrial products. If suitable market is not available then the possibility of the
industry to survive is difficult. So, industries are usually established near the
market. Usually there is a heavy demand for industrical products in a densely
populated area.
(7) Good transport system : A good transport system plays an important role for
setting up the industries. In developed countries as there are good roads,
railways, waterways and airways, there are more industries. Dhaka, Chittagong and
Narayanganj has good transport system than the rest of the country which leads to
the location of more industries than other areas of Bangladesh.
(8) Use of modern technology : It is not possible to exist in the free market
economy without applying the modern technologies in industries. The commodities
produced by the modern technologies are in demand in the world.
(9) Government investment policies : The government introduces some policies to
encourage investment by the local and international investors to establish industries in
this country. If the policies are favourable to the investors then more industries will be
x established in the country.
N

144 Geography and Environment
(10) Political stability : Political stability is essential for developing industries by
the local and international investors. Countries where there are democratic system of
government, the number of industries increase and the economy becomes strong.
Classification of Industries
On the basis of natural resources like petroleum, agriculture, animals and forest
resources different kinds of industries grow up. Generally, industries are
classified into three categories. Such as :
(1) Small scale industry
(2) Medium scale industry
(3) Large scale industry
(1) Small scale industry : The industry which needs few laborers and little capital is
called small scale industry. The workers work with little machinery and equipment.
These kinds of industries develop in the village and urban areas as private
enterprise such as dairy farm, handloom industry and bakery.
(2) Medium scale industry : A private enterprise starts functioning with the funding
from a financial institution of 2 crore taka and employs more than 100 workers is
known as the medium scale industry. These industries are : Ready-made garments
and leather processing industries.
(3) Large scale industry : Massive infrastructure, a large number of laborers and
a large quantity of capital is essential for developing these types of industry. Such as
: iron and steel industry, textile industry, motor car industry, shipbuilding industry
etc. These industries contribute to the economic growth, foreign exchange earnings
where thousands of labours are employed and the unemployment problem is
reduced. These industries are located near the cities.
Import and Export Trade
No country in the world is self-sufficient with all sorts of resources. Many countries
import the products according to the demand of people maintaining the international
business protocol and the surplus products are exported to the other counties. It is called
Import and Export trade.

eS
Such as, Japan exports the heavy machineries made by iron and steel, electronic S

Resources and Economic Activities 145
products, motor car, shipbuilding and various industrial products and Japan import
iron and coal from other countries. Bangladesh imports rice, wheat, edible oil,
thread, petroleum goods, electronics machineries and exports garments, agricultural
products, tea, leather, ceramic products, frozen food, raw jute and jute products
etc. In this way a trade relationship is maintained through export and imports.
Trade Balance and Development of Relationship
Trade balance among different countries in the world are not equal, as there is
a great difference between import and export trades. The trade balance of any
country in the world depends on economic ability of a country. The trade
imbalance is often seen among the economically developed countries and the less
developed and developing countries of the world. Bangladesh has trading imbalance
relationship with Indian and China. Bangladesh imports more from these countries
than it exports. This is called trade deficit. Number of export items are : ready-made
garments, shrimps, leather, jute products and tea. Balance of trade between
Bangladesh and USA is positive and so Bangladesh is in a better position.
Bangladesh has a trade surplus with Germany, France and United Kingdom also.
Table 1 : Trading balance report of last five years of Bangladesh
Years Import Export Proportion to export
(In million US dollar) |(In million US dollar) | and import imbalance

2010-11 35,52 22.92 13.60
2011-12 34.81 28.30 10.51
Source : Foreign Exchange Policy Department, Bangladesh Bank

Forma-19, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

146 Geography and Environment
Exercise

Multiple choice questions
1. Which one is an export product of Bangladesh?

a. Edible oil b. Garments

c. Petroleum d. Electronics machineries
2. How to increase the renewable energy?

a. Through proper management b. Conservation

c. Responsible in using d. By making good habits of life
Read the text below and answer questions 3 and 4:
Tuhin works in a industry which has large number of workers, a plenty of capital
and huge infrastructure.
3. In which industry does Tuhin work?

a. Bicycle b. Large scale industry

c. Television industry d. Motor car
4. This kind of industry is located —

i. near the city.

ii. beside the city.

iii. inside the city.

Which one of the following is correct?

a. iandii b.  iand iii

c. iiand iii d. i, ii, and iii

5

Resources and Economic Activities 147

Creative questions

1. Not far from Dhaka, between Demra and Narayanganj, on the banks of
Shityalakha river many industries grew up. Among them the EPZ, jute mills
and cotton mills are mentionable.

a. What type of activity is agriculture?

b. What is meant by trade deficit?

c. Explain the classification of the industries mentioned above.

d. Analyze the natural causes of developing the industries in this regions.

2. Abed and Shahed are two friends. Abed has established a dairy farm with 80
foreign cows. On the other hand, Shahed has established a garment industry at
Ashulia and the demand of garments is great outside the country.

a. How many types of economic activities are there?
b. What is meant by trade balance? Explain.
c. Which activity does include Abed’s farm? Explain.
d. What kind of role does the industry of Shahed play in the economic
development of Bangladesh. Give reasons.
co
=

148 Geography and Environment
Chapter Ten
Geographical Description of Bangladesh
Bangladesh is an independent country of South Asia. The Tropic of Cancer haa
crossed through the middle of the country for its geographical location. There are
various types of physiographic characteristics : rivers, location of the Bay of Bengal,
hilly areas and seasonal climate change brought a diversity in this country.
La. a re # ee . My oF
{ — {a af” J 2 Hl by { 4
CoV ior ART a i aR
CAS ia) ae wie ooh]
Sy Ue eek. Ol
yo “Ue ge +, i Br, oe
Weim a eta > ae SS)
At the end of this chapter, we will be able to ;
e Describe geographical location and physiography of Bangladesh,
® Describe the main rivers, tributaries and distributaries.
« Describe reasons of filling up the rivers and wedland caused by human; their
influence and ways of prevention.
e Create awareness about the harmful influence of filling up the rivers and
wetlands. Pa
e Describe the characteristics of climate, seasonal temperatures, wind and rainfall. 3

Geographical Description of Bangladesh 149
e Describe the characteristics of monsoon climate and norwester.
e Take precaution and safety measures against norwester and lightning and
make other people aware about it.
Location : Bangladesh is located in South Asia in the southern part of the continent
of Asia. Bangladesh is an independent country. This country is situated between
20°34' North latitude and 26°38’ North latitude and between 88° 01' East longitude
and 92°41’ East longitude. The Tropic of Cancer passes through the central part of
Bangladesh.
8° 39° 90° or 9?
BANGLADESH
” Cha a. ADMINISTRATIVE UNITS __.
SDN be maces” sicntomvo
1 anche evoke) og? District Bonndary © ——— District Headquarters 9
Dinalp =Rangpur Ji) 3
wa oats INDIA 3s
(West Bengal) NX Gao oa (Meghalaya)
wd, tan) of eas veal i089
Se . a \ inden hS® so
Lie /em If? om) CG Pp
aan Goan SC CO NGingtye 4
23° {year Lene Nee Sade \S oe 23°
x cp, ) 8, Sees Comilla\, GNDIA \
INDIA poray Faridpur Seger ° \ CBirpura) ‘\ .
(West Bengal) LAWTON Snipa Fuad) \ é\ \ Ga) IDA
Fe fon) Oa SOY Latgmipar a a 4
2e A y 3 rinnteh A\ af mall 22°
\° Nags ei ion eae
WF jo frban® 0
21° wey 1 rae” § Band | au
O q a> ty e
Q YF OS os \
BAY OF BENGAL “\™ “Ny
0 32 64 Kilometres A MYANMAR
\
.
x 88° 89° East of Greenwich 90° a” 5
S Fig. 10.1 : Administrative units of Bangladesh

150 Geography and Environment
Area : The total area of Bangladesh is 1,47,570 square kilometres. According to
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics 1996-97, the area under rivers is 9,405 square
kilometres and that of the forest is 21,657 square kilometres. Territorial waters is
12 nautical miles and exclusive economic zone is 200 nautical miles and the
oceanic boundary is till the end of the continental shelf.
The ocean boundary of Bangladesh was limited within 130 nautical miles due to the
claim of equidistant method by Myanmar and India. In this way, Bangladesh would
get 50,000 square kilometres less. To establish the sea boundary and to have rights on
the sea resources, Bangladesh lodged a case against Myanmar on 14th December 2009
in Sea Law tribunal in Hamburg in Germany and against India in an arbitration
tribunal at Hague in Netherlands. Bangladesh received the historical verdict on
14th March, 2012 against Myanmar from the International Court. Due to this verdict
Bangladesh gained more than 1,00,000 square kilometres of sea boundary. Through this
verdict St Martin’s Island has been made the coastal baseline and from there 12 nautical
miles have been selected as the Territorial sea and 200 nautical miles as the Exclusive
economic zone. Area under the sea is the continental shelf, beyond is in the possession
of Bangladesh and sovereign right to all natural resources has been established.
According to this estimate 350 nautical miles from the coast of Bangladesh in the
continental shelf under the sea is the territory of Bangladesh.
Boundary : Bangladesh is surrounded by India in three sides. In the north is West
Bengal, Meghalaya and Assam, to the east is Assam, Tripura, Mizoram and Myanmar
(Burma), and to the south is the Bay of Bengal and to the west is the State of West
Bengal. The total length of the boundary of Bangladesh is about 4,711 kilometres of
which about 3,715 kilometres exist between Bangladesh and India, and the boundary
between Myanmar and Bangladesh is only 280 kilometres and the coastal boundary
extends to the south of 716 kilometres (fig.10.1). In south-west of Bangladesh
Hariabhanga river and in south-east Naf river demarcates the boundary with India
and Myanmar respectively.
2
R

Geographical Description of Bangladesh 151
Task : Complete the table in a group.
What is the | What is the | What is the | What is the] Whatis the | Up to how
location of | area of extent of | extentof | length of much
Bangladesh | Bangladesh? | exclusive | the coastal depth is the
in Latitude economic | territorial | boundary sea rights
and zone? waters? between on the
Longitude? Bangladesh | continental
and the Bay | shelf?
of Bengal?
Physiography of Bangladesh
The physiography of a country influences agriculture, industry, trade and
commerce, transport and communication system. The influences of physiography
in the economic development of Bangladesh is enormous.
Bangladesh is one of the largest deltas of the world. The Ganges, the Brahmaputra,
and the Meghna flowing from the west, north and south-east respectively have
together formed this huge delta.
Plains are ideal for permanent settlement. Greater part of Bangladesh is an extensive
plain. On the basis of natural features Bangladesh can be classified into three
physiographic divisions. These are :
1. The Hills of the Tertiary period.
2. The Terraces of Pleistocene period, and
3. The Recent Flood Plains.
oD
S
nN

152 Geography and Environment
Description of the natural features are given below in detail (fig. 10.2).
88° 89° 90° 91° 92°
BANGLADESH
h
ee en PHYSIOGRAPHY
SN4 4 (Assam)
‘ LEGEND
. yal 3 Hills of Tertiary Age
Se y EEG Terraces of Pleistocene Age
® \ [1 The Flood Plain of Recent Times
i Weiss pk (Meghalaya)
INDIA pygaia! Fee? ah ce s
2a° Rey RRegiong =) Apeeez | 24°.
° \ ee. INDIA 0
23 S \ _ p ® (Tripura), 23
INDIA i iy Lalmai Hills INDIA
{West Bengal) s \, Wi, < iizoram)
oi ( ye eg Ve
ey hin pasts id
\ oe J 6
21° . o a 21°
@ Qs {)
CS) eo
BAY OF BENGAL %,
q
0 —32_—_—«6 4 Kilometres Ve,
88° 89° fast af Greenwich 90" 1° 92°
Fig. 10.2 : Physiography of Bangladesh
Lo)
~
>
N

Geographical Description of Bangladesh 153
1.The Hills of the Tertiary period : This region covers the hills of the south-east and
north-eastern parts of Bangladesh. These Hills were formed along with the
formation of the Himalayan Mountains, and so, these are called the Hills of Tertiary
period. It is assumed that Lusai of Assam and the Arakan of Myanmar (Burma) are
considered to be of the same age. These hills are formed of the sandstone, shale and
mud. The hills of this region are divided into two, such as : (a) Hills of the South-
East, (b) Hills of the North and North-East.
(a) Hills of the South-East : Rangamati, Bandarban, Khagrachhari, Cox’s Bazar
and the eastern part of Chittagong cover this region. The average height of these
hills is 610 metres. The two highest peaks, of Bangladesh are Keokradong (1,230
metres) and Tajingdong (1,231 metres) located in the south-eastern part of this region
in Bandarban district.
(b) Hills of the North and North-East : The hills in the north of Mymensingh
and Netrokona districts, in the north-east of Sylhet district and the hills of
the south of Moulvibazar and Habiganj are not more than 244 metres in height. The
hills of the north are locally known as Tila. The height of these Tilas varies from 30
to 90 metres.
2. The Terraces of Pleistocene period : The Pleistocene period is over 25,000
years old. The Barind of the north-west, Madhupur and Bhawal Garh of the central
part and the Lalmai hills or highland of Comilla district cover this region. It is thought
that these terraces were formed during the Pleistocene period.The description of these
highlands are given below.
(a) The Barind : The Barind covers an area of 9,320 square kilometres in the north-
western region of the country. The height of this region above the flood plain is about
6 to 12 metres. The colour of the soil is grey and red.
(b) The Madhupur and Bhawal Garh : The Madhupur is situated in Tangail
and Mymensingh districts and the Bhawal Garh is in Gazipur district. The area is
about 4,103 square kilometres. The height of this region above the plain land is
about 30 metres. The colour of the soil is grey and red.

Forma-20, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

154 Geography and Environment
(c) Lalmai Hills : The Lalmai Hills stretch from Lalmai, 8 kilometres to the west of
Comilla town to Mynamati. This region covers an area of 34 square kilometres and
the average height is 21 metres.
3. The Recent Flood Plains : Excepting the hills and the Terraces, the whole of
Bangladesh is a plain land drained by rivers. Innumerable small and big rivers are
found everywhere in Bangladesh. These rivers flow through the plain land causing
floods during rainy seasons. This flood plain has been formed due to the deposition of
the sediments brought down by the rivers for years together. The total area of this
flood plain is 1,24,266 square kilometres.
This plain land slopes towards the coast from the north of Bangladesh. The Sunderban
region stands almost at sea level. The other regions such as Dinajpur stands at a
height of 37.50 metres, Bogra at 20.00 metres, Mymensingh at 18.00 metres,
Narayanganj and Jessore at 8 metres. Innumerable marshy and lowlands are scattered
throughout this region. Some of these are abandoned Ox-bow lakes. Locally, these
are known as beel, jheel or haor. Of these, the Chalan Beel and the haors of Madaripur
and Sylhet are remarkable.These are submerged during the rainy season and turn into
lakes. The layer of the soil of the whole flood plain is very deep and very fertile. The
recent flood plain can be divided into several divisions, viz.
(a) Piedmont Plain of Rangpur and Dinajpur,
(b) The Flood Plain of Dhaka. Tangail, Mymensingh, Jamalpur, Pabna, Comilla,
Noakhali and Sylhet,
(c) The Deltaic Plain comprising of some parts of Dhaka, Khulna, Faridpur, Kushtia
and Jessore,
(d) The Flat Coastal Plain of Chittagong extending from the lower part of Noakhali
and Feni rivers to Cox’s Bazar,
(e) The Tidal Plain or the Mangrove Forest comprising of some part of Khulna,
Patuakhali region and Barguna district. wo
S
N

Geographical Description of Bangladesh 155
These regions are very fertile and remarkable for its agricultural production.

Task : Find out the different physical features in different districts of Bangladesh

in an Atlas and write it down in a copy in a group.
Main Rivers of Bangladesh
Bangladesh has about 700 rivers. Due to the presence of a large number of rivers,
Bangladesh is called a Riverine country. The Rivers influence the life style of the
people of Bangladesh. The Padma, the Brahmaputra, the Jamuna, the Meghna and the
Karnaphuli are the major rivers of Bangladesh. These rivers also have their tributaries
and distributaries. The total length of all the rivers including tributaries and
distributaries is about 22,155 kilometres. The description of the rivers of Bangladesh is
given below (fig. 10.3).
The Padma : The Padma is one of the major rivers of Bangladesh. This has originated
from the Gongotri, glacier. Then it flows to the south-west and then to the south-east
taking the name of the Ganges at Haridwar and enters into the plane lands. From this
point, the Ganges flow through Uttar Pradesh and Bihar State leaving distributary
named Bhagirathi (Hooghly) river at Dhulian of Murshidabad district in West Bengal.
The Bhagirathi falls into the Bay of Bengal. The main flow of the Ganges takes the
name of Padma at the south-western point at Rajshahi district and flows for about
145 kilometres through West Bengal and along the border of Bangladesh. It enters into
Bangladesh through the north-western point of Kushtia district. Then it meets the
Jamuna river at Daulatdia. This combined stream flows towards the south-east as
the Padma and meets the Meghna at Chandpur. Afterwards, the combined flow of
these three rivers fall into the Bay of Bengal as the Meghna. The Padma drains an
area of 34,188 square kilometres. The Kumar, Mathabhanga, Bhairab, Gorai,
Madhumati, Arial khan etc. are the distributaries of the Padma river and the
Mahananda is the main tributary. Punarbhava, Nagor, Pagla, Kulik and Tangan are
the tributaries of Mahananda.
4
S

156 Geography and Environment
88° 89° 90° o1° 92°
5 BANGLADESH
w Ren oa RIVERS
¢ LEGEND
& ape Sy 2 a Main Rives ==
Cae” Distibutary  heghe,
A » i { (Meghalaya)
(West Bengal) | & ™~ :
we “ P: \ Ny a J we
Ss. Seay 5\ i . vb : .
a - e af US RY
Serta ce z a
(West Bengal) 5) e y ° ay y ‘a N ((Mizoram
2° ai AS v Lepr f A ) 21°,
Q , 6s Q . fps \ fo
NE AS 1) \ (
BAY OF BENGAL (ad
0 3264 Kilometres \ ‘%,
it. Martin's Ve
88° 89° xast of Greenwich 90° a _ as
Fig. 10.3 : Rivers of Bangladesh
The Brahmaputra : The Brahmaputra Nad originated from Manas Sarovar near
Kailash peak of the Himalayas and then flows to the east over Tibet and finally passes
through Assam to the west. Thereafter, the Brahmaputra river enters into Bangladesh
near Kurigram. This river takes a turn towards south-east near Dewanganj and then
flowing through the district of Mymensingh falls at Meghna to the south of Bhairab S

Geographical Description of Bangladesh 157
Bazar. Dharla and Tista are the main tributaries and Bangshi and Sitalakhya are the
major distributaries of the Brahmaputra river.
The Jamuna : The main branch of the Brahmaputra near Dewanganj of Mymensingh
district flows towards south as Jamuna to meet the Ganges river near Daulatdia and
flows as Padma. Karotoa and Atrai are the major tributaries of the Jamuna and
Dhaleshwari is its distributary. Whereas Buriganga is the distributary of Dhaleshwari.
The Meghna: The Barak river of Assam originates from Naga-Manipur region and
being divided into two branches as Surma and Kushiyara, enter into Sylhet district
of Bangladesh. Surma, the northern branch, flows towards west by the side of
Sylhet, Chhatak and Sunamganj. The Surma of north Sylhet, the Kushiyara of south
Sylhet, the Kalni of Habiganj meet together near Ajmiriganj. Then the combined
stream of Kalni, the Surma and the Kushiyara after flowing some distance to the
south as Meghna, joins the old Brahmaputra in the south of Bhairab Bazar and after
flowing to the south-west it meets the Padma near Chandpur and ultimately falls into the
Bay of Bengal as Meghna. The Meghna drains an area of about 29,785 square
kilometres. Monu, Baulai, Titas, Gumti, are the tributaries of Meghna.
The Karnaphuli : Two hundred and seventy four kilometres long Karnaphuli
river originated from the Lusai Hills in Assam and flowing through Rangamati and
Chittagong falls into the Bay of Bengal. This is the main river of Chittagong and
Rangamati. The major tributaries of Karnaphuli river are Kassalong, Halda, and
Boalkhali. A hydroelectric project has been constructed at Kaptai on Karnaphuli. The
main sea port of Bangladesh is situated on the south of the Karnaphuli river.
Task: Fill in the table in a group (time-15 minutes).
Name of main} Origin | Location | Course | Distributary | Tributary
river of the falls

a
Bampwal | | |
a Oe Ge

Lo)

[Meza | oT | CT

158 Geography and Environment
Causes of River and Wetlands Filling, its Impact and Prevention
In Bangladesh river and wetland filling have many natural and man-made causes.
Major portion of Bangladesh is made up of alluvial deposits. One characteristic of alluvium
is that it mixes easily with water as it is a soluble matter. During rainy season in the
north eastern side of Bangladesh in the neighbouring countries like China, Nepal,
Myanmar and the Indian states of Assam and Meghalaya have a heavier rainfall.
In the rainy season high velocity mountainous rivers in the upstream bring down
alluvium and causes river bank erosion. In the downstream the velocity of the river
decreases and the alluvium is deposited on the river bed and eventually the depth of
the river is reduced and the navigability. Within the country, on the banks of the
rivers and wetlands, unplanned dams, roads, industries, residential construction,
encroachment and filling up is leading to the destruction of the rivers and
wetlands. Water dispute with the neighbouring country is the cause of withdrawal
of water from the major rivers during dry season decreasing the velocity of river
causing deposition at the mouth of the river.
In rainy season due to filling up of rivers and wetlands water flow is obstructed and
it over flows the banks causing floods. During dry season, as there is not enough
water in the rivers and wetlands which reduce the navigability, fish cultivation and
irrigation.Conservation of water in the reservoir through natural process is gradually
declining and supply of sweet water in the cities is declining resulting in
environmental degradation.To overcome these problems regular dredging to maintain
the navigability of the rivers during rainy season and winter, planned and environment
friendly dam construction and other development projects should be undertaken. We
should stop encroachment of rivers and hill cutting, rescue wetlands from grabbers,
make mandatory effluent treatment plants for the industries. We should resolve water
dispute with India, Nepal and China and get the proper amount of water for the rivers
Ganges, Tista, Brahmaputra and Feni. Environmental law should be enforced and
revised according to the need of the time so that greater environmental disaster can be
avoided. Use of underground water should be reduced and increased and the use
of river water should be encouraged.
:
down ina copy or poster paper. S

Geographical Description of Bangladesh 159

Climate

The climate of Bangladesh is moderate. As the Tropic of Cancer passes through the

centre of the country, the prevailing climate is tropical. The influence of the

Monsoon wind on the climate of this country is so strong that as a whole, the

climate of Bangladesh is known as tropical monsoon climate. In a monsoon

climate of there are different seasons in a year.
oe = a Ba Ba But Bangladesh never
a '

- Sy, Son Teniperstiire:(Juty) | experiences extreme cold
ks : NES, ‘< (CELSIUS) and warm climate. In fact,
es, ii Q 32 6Fkitomenes | hot and humid summer

of NDI may, fw. # otto a *) and dry and comfortable
re | ( ax winter are the remarkable

NN w| characteristics of the

~ ww ¢ ° ar climate of Bangladesh. The
at F Sx 4 fs average annual temperature

2 \, NS a a ‘ wi, © .

; rears) YN is 26.01° Celsius and the
ee rE a . average rainfall is about 203
i $ L a ( r X ‘| centimetres. Due to monsoon,
. \ AN ‘\) 3) § (X » h rainy season extends from
au 4 it NS pox °° =) hin June to October in
OP ol § 5 \ ( | this country (fig. 10.4).
BAY OF BENGAL iS° | The highest rainfall in
\%, Bangladesh occurs at Sylhet.
we ascanoftramnch 9° jt \

Fig. 10.4 : Temperature of Bangladesh (July)

On the basis of monsoon, rainfall and annual temperature, the climate of

Bangladesh is divided into three seasons, viz. (a) Summer season, (b) Rainy season

and (c) Winter season.

(a) Summer season : The summer season in Bangladesh extends from the month of

March to May (Falgun to Jaishtha). The temperature starts increasing in this season, as

8 the sun shines vertically rays over the tropic of cancer during this period The
temperature, wind direction and the rainfall of this season and discussed below :

160 Geography and Environment
Temperature : The summer is the hottest season in Bangladesh. During this

season, the maximum temperature of 34° Celsius and the lowest of 21° Celsius are
recorded. The average temperature of 28° Celsius prevails in the month of April.
April is the hottest month. The temperature increase gradually from the coastal region

to the interior of the country.

Rainfall : The thunderstorm or the Norwester is one of the important characteristics
of summer weather. Kalbaishakhi is the local name of thunderstorm or norwester
which happens with thunder, lightning and hail storm during the months of March
and April in the afternoon. About 20 percent of the annual rainfall of Bangladesh
happens in summer due to Kalbaishakhi storms. During this time the average
rainfall recorded is about 51 centimetres (fig. 10.5).

Wind : A change in air pressure takes place due to the northward movement of the sun

in the northern hemisphere. The hot and humid air coming from the south rises
upward due to high temperature and comes in contact with the cold and dry air
coming from the north causing rainfall with thunderstorms.

(b) Rainy season : The rainy *  RANGLADESH
season extends from June to|,, > » Annual Average Rainfall...
October (Jaishtha to Kartik) in Picereeey ‘ _LEoeNo =}
Bangladesh. The period between es
summer and winter with rain is;* DDB, SAG ND omy 30 Soe mT
known as the rainy season. During POR Se

season starts with the advent of [" ‘oo |S
Temperature : The sun shines - We aaa EE pa -
Bangladesh. As a_ result, the PEEEEL EEE IPED Vasa;
temperature increases. But due to pr i, Bee oe esse) =
cloud cover and heavy downpour, wee aaa

the high temperature is not | *—*—**“™™ BAY OF BENGAL = WB, ©

very uncomfortable. The average - 6 acer ccna er Ki 2
temperature is 27° Celsius. Fig. 10.5 : Annual average rainfall of Bangladesh 8

Geographical Description of Bangladesh 161
Rainfall : During the rainy season, south-west monsoon wind blowing over
Bangladesh brings heavy moisture from the Indian Ocean and the Bay of Bengal.
This moisture causes heavy convectional rainfall. 80 percent of the total annual
rainfall occurs during this time.
Wind: There is change in air pressure due to the location of the sun over Bangladesh
in the month of June. The rainy season begins when the south-west trade wind starts
blowing from the Bay of Bengal. During this time, the south-east trade wind after
crossing the equator, according to Ferrel’s Law, deflect towards right and it becomes
south-west monsoon wind. This water vapour filled air is abstracted by the
Himalayas in the north of Bangladesh which causes heavy rainfall. This is the
beginning of rainy season. After the rainy season is over, cyclone hits Bangladesh
occasionally.
(c) Winter season : The period from the end of November to February (Kartik to
Falgun) is known as winter. The temperature starts declining after September and
October. The lowest temperature is recorded in January (fig. 10.6).
Temperature : The minimum temperature is found in winter in our country. During
this season, the maximum temperature of 29° Celsius and the minimum of 11° Celsius
is recorded. The coldest month is January and the average temperature recorded is
17.7° Celsius. During winter, the temperature decreases from the coast to the north.
In the history of Bangladesh, the lowest temperature recorded was 1° Celsius in
1905 in the district of Dinajpur in the northern region.

Forma-21, Geography and Environment, Class-9-10

162 Geography and Environment

oe w a 3° w Rainfall : During winter,

» begs Terinersture Wenuans . Bangladesh does ‘not normally

r Lay (CELSIUS) experience any rainfall. At this

; ~ oa békomenea i time, the north-east cold monsoon

ey 7, \ wind blows over Bangladesh. A

2° INDIA ** Hf INDIA 25° .

ene [ ie Pedi, little amount of rainfall occurs

ye ( in the coastal and in the

wo } »/ mountainous regions during

ae On } oe ye winter. The rainfall accounts for

Yo S>4 fT not more than 10 centimetres.

INDIA fy Sax \. ©” (joo! Wind : During winter season,

” \ HY Wy» the humidity in the air is less as

{ 3) ? <~ \ v the cold Monsoon wind blows

\ 7 Fi) § (NX ; from the north-east — over

ae fg \ Nike fe ° a Bangladesh. The lowest humidity

ees Py i ae recorded during this time is 36

BAY OF BENGAL . 2, | percent. Sometimes, very cold

% wind blows over the northern

# eel sem 20 x a region and as a result, it

Fig. 10.6 : Temperature of Bangladesh (January) experiences very cold weather.

Monsoon wind : In the beginning of June warm and humid south-west monsoon

wind blowing from Bay of Bengal is obstructed in the hilly areas of east and northern

region of Bangladesh causing rainfall. From June to October rainfall occurs all over

Bangladesh due to monsoon wind and that is the rainy season. Four-fifths of the

annual rainfall takes place during rainy season. Cloudy sky and heavy rainfall

lower the temperature more than summer season. Summer extends from March-

May. April is the hottest month. But the temperature does not vary much till

September. The two seasons can be differentiated on the basis of humidity but not

on temperature. In summer season the temperature of the air increases from the

coastal area towards north in the interior of the country. Norwester or Kalbaishakhi

is a characteristic feature of summer. This storm occurs in great intensity with

thunder and lightning from north western direction during March-April. With high
wind velocity, this storm causes severe damage.Summer rainfall is good for crop 20
production. Rainfall, specially in summer, is very much useful for growing paddy, jute &

Geographical Description of Bangladesh 163
and sugercane. On the other hand, in winter, south-east monsoon causes chill which is
very useful for the growth of wheat and cereals (green crops). These type of crops are
very profitable for the farmers.
Task : Mention the cultivation of crops on the basis of season and environment.
Task : What type of safety and security measures should be taken in case of
thunderstorm and lightning?
Exercise
Multiple choices questions
1. Where is the Lalmai hills located?
a. Gazipur b. Tangail
c. Mymensingh d. Comilla
2. Causes of river deposition in Bangladesh —
i. deposition of soluble matter in the water.
ii. destruction of forest in the coastal area.
iii. construction of planned dam on the river banks.
Which one of the following is correct?
8 a. iandii b. iand iii
S
s c. iiand iii d. i, ji and iii

164 Geography and Environment
Provide answer to the question number 3 and 4 on the information given below.
ee
ee
i
3. Where is the ‘P’ region in Bangladesh?
a. Tangail— Mymensingh b. Moulvibazar — Habiganj
c. Rangpur — Dinajpur d. Noakhali— Comilla
4. The Common feature between ‘Q’ and ‘R’ regions displayed in the table —
i. soil.
ii. characteristics of plants.
iii. latitude and longitude.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iii
c. ii and iii d. i, ii, and iii
5. Where do Padma, Jamuna and Meghna rivers of Bangladesh have joined
together ?
a. Daulatdia b. Chandpur
c. Jessore d. Kushtia
6. What is the average annual temperature of Bangladesh?
a. 26.01° Celsius b. 26.09° Celsius
c. 27.01° Celsius d. 28.09° Celsius
7. What is the warmest month of Bangladesh?
a. July b. June %
c. April d. March §

Geographical Description of Bangladesh 165
Creative questions
1. 88" 39° 90" Be 92°
» §&., BANGLADESH ,.
i WF he 0 32 64Kilomexes
to AN meee,
21° a eee ‘ ee ~ } 2a°.
' BAY OF BENGAL) z {
¥
“%
SN
88° 89° Eas of Greenwich 90° a” ‘ 9°
a. What is the name of highest peak in Bangladesh?
b. Describe the Madhupur Tract.
c. Describe the physiography of ‘P’ marked areas in the Map.
d. Is there any similarity between ‘Q’ and ‘R’ marked places? Explain with
reference to your answer.
2. A group of student went on a study tour to the south-eastern region. There they
saw ariver used for producing energy using its current.
a. The Dhaleshwari is the tributary of which river?
b. Explain the reason of norwester.
c. Describe the river curent seen by the students.
2 d. Analyze the importance of the above mentioned river in the economy of
8 Bangladesh.

Chapter Eleven
Resources and Industries of Bangladesh
The economic and the social development of 2 country depend on resources and
industries. We use the essential products produced by the natural resources
directly or using the resources. The important resources of Bangladesh are
Agricultural and Forest resources, Mineral oil, Natural gas and Coal. The
importance of industries of this country is unlimited‘inbounded as a developing
country. The garments sectors are contributing much in development of the economy
of Bangladesh.
LEM Ss ee a meet :
: \
j wT fee
3 { ] ,
>. ._* ! Sa { - cj | t i
fs S — i as a= a
At the end of this chapter, we will be able to :
e Explain the main agricultural products of Bangladesh and their distribution.
e Explain the importance of different forest regions/areas of Bangladesh.
® Create awareness of preserving the forest resources everywhere.
« Explain the position of Petroleum, Natural gas, Coal and Limestone displaying in
map.
¢ Explain the importance of Petroleum, Natoral gas, Coal on the economy of %
Bangladesh. a

Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 167
e Explain/describe the main industries of Bangladesh and represent it in map.
e Analyze the contribution of Garment Industries to the economy of
Bangladesh.
e Explain the main tourist places of Bangladesh and display on map.
e Explain the importance and prospect of Tourism Industry of Bangladesh.
e Follow the duty of citizen in preserving the favourable environment of
tourism places as tourist.
Agricultural Products
Agriculture plays an important role on the economy of Bangladesh. Profitable,
sustainable and environment friendly agricultural systems are important for the
development of a country. The contribution of total agricultural sectors in G.D.P in
the fiscal year of 2012-13 is about 13 percent (Source: Bangladesh Economic Survey,
2014). About 47.50 percent of total man power of this country are engaged in
agriculture. The main exporting products in agricultural sectors are frozen food, raw
jute, jute goods, tea etc.
chick pea, vegetables, fruits. cotton, tobacco, flowers.
Food Crops
Rice : Rice is the staple food crop of Bangladesh. Aus, Aman, Boro are the varieties
of rice cultivated in this country. Rice is produced in all the districts of Bangaldesh.
Rice is mostly cultivated in Rangpur, Comilla, Sylhet, Jessore, Kishoreganj,
Rajshahi, Barisal, Mymensingh, Bogra, Dinajpur, Dhaka and Noakhali. But Aman
and Boro are produced more in Rangpur and Sylhet (fig. 11.1) respectively.
temperature ranges between 16° to 30°] | for rice cultivation. So, rice is grown
celsius and rainfall ranges between 100 to| | everywhere in Bangladesh.
200 centimetres.

168 Geography and Environment
Wheat : At present wheat cultivation is done in almost all the areas in Bangladesh
where rice is grown due to the demand of food crop. But the northern districts of
Bangladesh are more favourable for cultivating wheat. Wheat growing areas are
Dinajpur, Rangpur, Pabna, Rajshahi, Kushtia, Jessore, Bogra (fig. 11.1).
° 38 39° 90" 9° 92
R BANGLADESH
GPA
a oR jaf; mela PRODUCTION REGION.»
' of Pane galt Ry (Assam) 1 HEGENE
Co NY Lear 2
ies ia Salina e Rice ¥
aver LEK When MS
35° EF fie! INDIA 25°
INDIA Uf Vee eghatayay
(West Bengal) | --.-'Gaibandhg) “7 *S. spe ace a
OF ost: il — ‘ Sylhet fe
pr.ds ee Hos i ) he. ; ee ae a: ok
Krapimbabgin) F. Be & a medina fT oye Sarita if
w Xer goX hee he gS ture’ og G ‘\Moulvibazar(* Py
SR r We Sirajganj »% 79 Ny 4%: = “f
Ng Rajshahi Sirajganj ) & : ; a A yea
oS Natore 5. ‘gf | Tanai rpoeed ~ jf
1 Pana Ye. ae Nantingd rs
oe eee Sy te . ee A echmasara
¥ Cegbant, TRUE PRT Sarayatigaiy “ES INDIA AOA 0
® Gunung RES Mansi _.Comilla, (Tripura). \ \ *
22 i Maguay foe? ReRER ES. ‘ ot le
INDIA Joe oe Sharatpady Fg aah 3
ee * okie , 2 ws, J ‘ ‘ . rs
(West Bengal) a VY Nanit ay Matai re ens \3 \ 4 b 4 INDIA
a aang LAREN feud Ne
x © OY pace ttn oP SO oun ae
\F * \ ed \ banal 29 tA ; oy \
Th iD be Got J po fi %
®. \) te eka t le Hee |) Bandarban yg
BAY OF BENGAL Const a VY
) 6 Wy
\S &
0 32-64 Kilometres \t %
\
St. Martin's ted %
38° 89° East of Greenwich 90° 9? q > ‘-
Fig. 11.1 : Rice and Wheat production regions of Bangladesh
The other important crops are oil-seeds like sesame, mustard, peanut, lentil, mungbean,
xs
gram, garlic, potatoes, fruits and vegetables. &

Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 169
Wheat grows well in temperature ranging from | |The fertile loamy soil of
16° to 22° celsius and rainfall ranging from 50 | |Bangladesh is favourable for
to 75 centimetres. Wheat is grown well during | |cultivating wheat.
rainless winter in Bangladesh through irrigation.

The favourable condition of wheat cultivation

Cash or Commercial Crops

The crops which are cultivated for direct selling is called Cash or Commercial crops.

Jute

Jute is the main cash crop of Bangladesh. There are two kinds of jute cultivated in

Bangladesh named, Deshi and Tosha. Jute is grown well in the districts of Rangpur,

Mymensingh, Faridpur, Comilla, Jessore, Dhaka, Kushtia, Jamalpur, Tangail and Pabna

(fig. 11.2).

Jute grows in warm region. The temperature | | Sandy loam soil is suitable for
ranges from 20° to 35° celsius and needs | | jute cultivation.

plenty of rainfall from 150 to 250 centimetres.

The favourable condition of jute cultivation

Sugarcane

Sugarcane is an important crop for producing sugar and molasses (gurh). Plain

land is required to cultivate sugarcane. The main regions for cultivating sugarcane

are Rajshashi, Rangpur, Dinajpur, Pabna, Kushtia, Faridpur, Dhaka, Jessore,

Mymensingh etc. (fig. 11.2).

The temperature ranges from 19° to 30° | | Sugarcane grows well in light
celsius and the rainfall of at least 150] | dry soil preferably sandy silt.
centimetres is needed to cultivate sugarcane.
The favourable condition for sugarcane cultivation
Forma-22, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

170 Geography and Environment
8s” ae? 90? sf 92°
a BANGLADESH
ae
we 34.68, wow PRODUCTION REGION |,
- Panchagen BA Assam) a LEGEND
Frakurgaiag?? iN aay? \ 5 Jut -e
\ ae u. +, Ratigpuh./ oe {
\cinajpur op = * A mA Tea Vv
on sea: 7 INDIA %
25 NDIA | Aly’! (teghatayay) Sugarcane 28
oe ae ie o eran) ae “ Es { LG
2 poems i Se ata! Da Br fine ote 20
ye : eS ae ket yn |. (Tripura) ) \
INDIA, topo NE BY RN eed
(West Bengal) Az age! GS IRIS) Sb VINDIA
LSS Geen peo RR oe % gizeram)
\ | Pipe @ ) od Th \ ~Rangamate
=) 4% WD Pn E A ee q Bandarba _—
2e Rie CH : 2
° ~ BAY OF BENGAL KT
eden
(e) 32 64 Kilometres \ Se
— a) Ss
%
St Martin's Island %
88° 8X cast of Greenwich 90° of yer
Fig. 11.2 : Jute, Sugarcane and Tea production regions of Bangladesh
Tea
Tea is one of the main cash crops in Bangladesh. Most of the produced tea of the
country is exported abroad. Tea is grown in well drained soils on the slopes of the eo
Ss
hills. Most of the tea gardens are in Moulvibazar, Habiganj, Sylhet. Besides &

Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 171
these, there are tea gardens in Chittagong, Rangamati, Khagrachhari, Bandarban,
Thakurgaon and Panchagarh (fig. 11.2).

Warm and humid climate is required to Tea is grown well in fertile

cultivate tea. Temperatures from 16° to 17° loamy soil rich in iron and

celsius and rainfall of 250 centimetres. organic content.

The favourable condition of tea cultivation
Except the natural indicators of agricultural crops, the indicators named capital,
labour, transportation, market i.e also influence on extension and production.
The agricultural extension is possible combining with the government assistance and
natural environment.
Crop Diversification
In Bangladesh, winter is good for the cultivation of cereals/vegetables. In this period,
cereal crops are cultivated in different areas. As a result, the farmers get less price. If
same kinds of crops are cultivated year after year in the same soil, nutrition of soil
decreases. At the same time, cultivation of various types of crops helps the farmers to
get high price. Various parts of plants mixed with fertilizer increase the fertility of
the soil and check the soil degradation. As a result, much fertilizer is not required
to use. By this way the farmers, by cultivating various types of crops can benefit
themselves and the environment.
Forest of Bangladesh
The resources which are produced or available from the forest in known as forest
resources. Ideally 25 percent of total land area of a country should remain
under as cover to maintain environmental balance and the economic development.
But according to the statistics of 2012-13 the forest area is only about 17 percent
in Bangladesh at present. The forests of Bangladesh are classified into three
co . sas . .
Ss categories due to the variation of soil and climate (fig. 11.3).

172 Geography and Environment
88° 89° 90° 91° 92°
rp. BANGLADESH
ce
par —
we S90) now FOREST AREA “
a XC Assan, LEGEND
; Dinajpur ™~ Tropical Evergreen and Deciduous Forest
Le, (| Tropical Deciduous Forest or Sal Forest
SY a &, \ Mangrove Forest or Sunderban
95° INDIA}. @Q g! INDIA 25°
(West Bengal) 2 ; Nw (Meghalaya)
CONN Rangpur (i Sem gow,
J Se Sy
py _()| Jamatgur 8S
g 7.
2 a fe Moulvibazar
of} 20 x ymnerisinght j
S Is ie)
“4 Cang A re) 8 ‘, & _ “
a Tangail (Rep :
\ Cg meee won ea py
7 Kien . we ~ i”
i Dhaka f a Fs
© WY, f INDIA @e 0
oe ~, Ba, G) \, (Tripura) ee 2
INDIA é ‘S ‘ We
(West Bengal) tL \ Sine INDIA
\ Khulna Sa a Ef cMtizoram)
v 4) 8 i) Q J Rangarkati I-
| Se & ges
\gSunderbany / 0 Chittago i %&
A aH a Mi i
q Ata G0 Bandarbay
APP ALS ery
- ~ BAY OF BENGAL eo NES
0 32-64 KiJomettes Cons Bakr,
4 Y,
4.
6
33° 89° East of Greenwich 90° at” “Sy? “P
Fig. 11.3 : Forest area of Bangladesh
eo
3
N

Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 173
Tropical Evergreen and Deciduous | | Tropical Deciduous forest : The tropical
forest : These forests cover the] | deciduous forest is found in less rainfall
major parts of Khagrachhari,| |areas in the Pleistocene terraces of
Rangamati, and Bandarban and a| | Bangladesh. This forest region is divided
considerable part of Chittagong and] | into two parts. (a) Forest of Mymensingh,
Sylhet region. Evergreen tress have} | Madhupur and Bhawal Garh of Tangail
widespread coverage in the hills due] |and Gazipur. (b) The forest cover of
to heavy rainfall. Barind region found in Dinajpur and
Rangpur District. The leaves of deciduous
forest fall during winter and new leaves
again sprout during summer.
The forest of Bangladesh
Mangrove forest or the Sunderban : This forest covers the districts of Khulna,
Satkhira, and Bagerhat in the north, Bay of Bengal in the south, Haringhata river,
Perojpur and Barisal district in the east and Raimangal and Hariabhanga river which
partially form the boundary with West Bengal, India. This forest occupies 6,000
square kilometres of area in Khulna division. This region is enriched with the tress
because of tides from the sea and salty water and heavy rainfall.
Task : The characteristics of different plants and names are given. Write the names
of the relevant forest on the right hand column.
Plants and Nature The name of forest
1. Sunderi, Garan, Gewa, Dhundal, Keora and
Golpata are usually grown in the tidal
confluence of sweet and salty water.
2. Sal, Gajari, Koroi, Hizal shed their leaves
annually.
3. Chapalish, Moyna, Telsur and Bamboo never
shed their leaves any time.
Importance of forest : Forests play an important role on the economy of the
country. The forest resources of Bangladesh are limited and it is diminishing day by
x day. The importance of forest is unlimited to keep the balance of natural
& environment and the economic development.

174 Geography and Environment
1. Natural importance : The forest plays a significant role in saving
biodiversity, reducing land degradation, decreasing landslides, increasing the amount
of rainfall, keeping the humid weather and in controlling the flood.

2. Prospect of Tourism industry : Sunderban and Chittagong Hill Tracks are the
probable places of tourism industry. The diversity of these places can attract the
tourists which can contribute to the economy of the country.

3. Collection of consumable goods : To meet the daily needs of the people, they
collect wood, bamboo, cane, honey, wax etc. from the forest. The animal hide and
skins and the medicinal herbs are also collected from the forest.

4. Construction material : The people collect wood, bamboo, cane etc. from the
forest so that they can construct their houses and make furniture.

5. Development of Industry : The forest resources are used for the production of
paper, tayon, match, fiber board and the accessories for toys. They have thus
accelerated the development of industries. The Karnaphuli Paper Mill and the
Newsprint Mill of Khulna have been established on the availability of forest
resources.

6. Disaster Reduction Risks : The forests of coastal region play an important
role in reducing the destruction from tidal waves during hurricane or storms.

7. Transport and communication system : The wood collected from the forest is
used to make railway slippers, boats, launches, ships, electricity poles, bridges etc.

8. Source of government revenue : The forest resource is a source of government
revenue. For example the government increases its revenue by selling and by
imposing taxes on such resources.

9. The development of agriculture : Forests keep the climate humid as a result it
causes heavy rainfall which helps to develop agriculture.

10. Foreign currency earnings : Bangladesh earns a huge amount of foreign
currency by exporting the hide and skins of animals, tooth, horns, feather of different
types of animals.

Petroleum, Natural Gas, Coal and Hard Rock of Bangladesh

Petroleum, natural gas, coal and hard rock are important mineral resources
(fig. 11.4). The economic development is possible if a coordination of research,
production and distribution is done. 8

Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 175
88° 89° 90° 91° 92°
h BANGLADESH
fos.
ze NS gsnow —- MINERAL RESOURCES
2 TONY (ASM, LEGEND
; Nard : 2 Coal ra
(Maanyapara — a “e Mineral Oil «
\, Dreiour > “ae nel Natural Gas
° Nis angpur ay); INDIA Hard Rock a °
25° INDIA Bardpukuria Fulbari¢ ! (Meghalaya) 25
(West Bengal) a a eee ;
7 an ae arya
2 (a a 4
pt Bogra \ NN Jal tats ire Se
é Jamaigan| 2 Kailasttilad” iviyang
0% p Fenchugany’.! °
o eS, 9 Noo idpur & Moyet
BN | } Kamta Bakhrabai | Barangn: i
} Weal! fMed We INDIA
a aes we BelabosTitas “i (Tripura)
23° f \ NS v4 ABanpura Nore 23°
oe Wer, “Saldana . \
“ ) Cy ae ow? VA
INDIA. ‘. “BS \ ne 4 OB
(West Bengal) 7 d By AVN 4 \ INDIA
f BO, Becumaan| My Y } izora
N 5) Ber) v4 id Feni a 4
22 { g ie { pa Se Keon yn 2
AN pV ON
& KY WS Bae © ra \
507) UO \ cS eee Kutubgia / Yoyo
ey UM 20 \\i
Od dbs LMR \ |
VP Be SU re, Ja
: BAY OF BENGAL \ ol
0 32 64Kilomet %
ilometres \\ %
\%
88° 89% East of Greenwich 90" 91° Vege?
Fig. 11.4 : Mineral resources of Bangladesh
Petroleum : The experts think that there is petroleum in the coastal regions of
Bangladesh. Oil was found in the seventh well of natural gas in Haripur of
Sylhet district in 1986. Everyday around 600 barrels of crude oil from this well is
S extracted. This crude oil is sent to Chittagong refinery for processing.
N

176 Geography and Environment
Apart from petrol, kerosene, bitumen etc. are produced as by product from this crude
oil. The second oil field of Bangladesh is located at Bramchal of Moulvibazar district.
Around 1,200 barrels of oil produced everyday from this field.

Natural gas : Natural gas is an important fuel resource in Bangladesh. It meets
about 73 percent commercial consumption of the country. The total number of
gas fields so far discovered is 25. These gas fields have approximately 27.04 trillion
cft gas for extaction. Till December, 2012, 10.92 trillion cft gas has been extracted.
Until January 2013, 16.12 trillion ctf gas was left to be extrated. At present gas is
being tapped from 83 wells of 19 gas fields (Source : Bangladesh Economic Survey,
2013).
yet started | postponed discovered

Kailashtila, Rashidpur, Titas,| | Kutubdia. Kamta. Shrikail.

Narsingdi, Meghna, Sangu,

Saldanadi, Jalalabad, Beanibazar,

Fenchuganj, Moulvibazar, Feni,

Bibiyana, Bangura, Shahbajpur,

Semutang.
Coal : Coal is one of the sourcees of energy. It is used to run the machineries,
railways and ships etc. Coal is also used as fuel. Bangladesh is not rich in coal
resources. The expected deposit of five coal fields discovered in the south-western
part of the country is 2,700 million tons. Until February 2012, 3.99 million metric tons
coal have been extracted from the coal fields. Around 3,000 metric tons of coal are being
tapped everyday from the coal field of Barapukuria of Dinajpur district. There are
also coal fields of Khalashpeer at Rangpur, Fulbari and Dighipara of Dinajpur
and at Jamalganj of Bogra (Source : Bangladesh Economic Survey, 2012)
A good amount of low grade peat coal is found in Banghi and Chanda Beel of

Faridpur, Kola Beel of Khulna and a few places of Sylhet. Besides a reserve of
high quality coal of bituminous and lignite variety has been found in Rajshahi,
Bogra, Naogaon and Sylhet. A high quality lignite coal is being tapped out from the .,
Barapukuria coal field of Dinajpur. $

Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 177
Hard rock : Hard rock is used in the construction of railways, roads, houses,
bridges and in flood embankments. Hard rock is available in Ranipukur and
Shyampur of Rangpur district and Madhyapara of Dinajpur district. Arrangement
has been made to extract hard rocks in Ranipukur of Rangpur district with foreign
assistance. Experts think ‘Around 17 lakh of tons hard rock can be extracted every
year from this field of rocks.’ The quantity of extracted rocks of different size at
different times is 1,811 lakh metric tons since the start of extraction of hard rocks
from Madhyapara of Dinajpur district up to February, 2012 (Source : Bangladesh
Economic Survey, 2012).
The Importance of Petroleum, Natural Gas and Coal on the Economy
of Bangladesh
Petroleum is an essential product in this modern civilization. It Electricity,
energy and heat. Gasoline, diesel, gas, kerosene, lubricant, parafin etc. are the by
products of refining petroleum. Petrol and diesel are used to run the railways,
vehicles, ships and aeroplanes. Foreign currency can be saved if the available
amount of oil is extracted from the gas fields. At the same time the dependence on
natural gas could be reduced.
Natural gas is used in mills and factories as raw materials. The natural gas of Haripur
is used in the fertilizer factories of Fenchuganj and in cement factory of Chhatak.
Natural gas of Titas is used in the fertilizer factory of Ghorashal as raw material.
Natural gas is also used to make pesticide, rubber, plastic and artificial fibre. The tea
gardens depend on the natural gas of Rashidpur. The natural gas is used in lieu
of farness oil in some electric plant of Brahmanbaria. Such as the Titas gas is
used to produce the thermal electric plant of Siddhirganj, Ashuganj, and
Ghorashal. The natural gas is also used for domestic and commercial purposes.
_Fenchuganj fertilizer factory {|
_Chhatakcementfactory |
" Ghorashal fertilizer factory =| ~—=SCi=“‘~*“~*~*~“~*~*~*~*~*~*~*d
"Siddhirganj thermal clectricplant | _—~—=S—S
“Ashuganj thermal electric plant | _—=—SSSSSCSCSS
Forma-23, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

178 Geography and Environment
Coal can be used as fuel alternative to gas and firewood. At present around 65
percent extracted coal from Barapukuria is being used for the production of electricity
at the thermal power plant of Barapukuria. The other 35 percent coal is being used in
the brick-field, mills and factories along with other sectors. Coal is playing a
significant role in saving the forest resources. The environmental pollution which is
caused by burning wood and coal does not cause that pollution. Coal helps to
protect the natural environment by protecting the forest resources. These mineral
resources play a great role in developing the agriculture reducing the foreign
exchange spending, government source of earning and creating the employment
opportunities etc. We should be aware and careful of using these resources. We
will not waste these valuable resources.
Main Industry of Bangladesh
Industrialization is the precondition of the economic and social development of a
country. The industrial sector can play a significant role in developing the
socio-economic development and in reducing the poverty. The contribution of
industries is increasing on domestic production day by day. According to
Bangladesh Economic Survey, 2014 in the year 2012-13 the contribution of
industries in GDP is 29 percent. The main industries of Bangladesh are :
Jute Industry
Jute industry is one of the main agro based industries. There are skilled and cheap
labour for jute industry in this country. Above all, the assistance and cooperation of
the government for jute industry is offered. The first jute mill was established
with 1,000 looms at Adamjeenagore of Narayanganj in 1951. At present Adamjee
jute mill has been shutdown. In the private sector, many jute mills have been
established. Total number of jute mills are 205 and the annual production is 6,63,000
metric tons. Table below shows the jute industries, its products and the exporting
countries.
products
Demra, Ghorashal, Narsingdi, | bags, carpet, ropes,|Russia, Poland,
Bhairab Bazar, Gouripur,| sandals, mats, dolls, | Bulgaria, Belgium,
Madaripur, Chandpur, Sirajganj, | show pieces, juton. | Canada, Italy, Germany,
Habiganj. Japan, France. =
N

Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 179
Cotton Textile Industry
The second major industry is the cotton textile industry. Cloth is next to food
among the basic needs. So, the cotton textile industry has great importance.
Bangladesh is not self-sufficient in cotton textile industry. The climate required
for cotton textile industry is favourable. The cotton textile industries of Bangladesh
are located in some regions. Such as :
region Noakhali Khulna region
region
Mirerbagh, Postagola, Faujdarhat, | Durgapur, Rajshahi, Bogra,
Shyampur, Demra, Savar of | North Daulatpur, Sirajganj and
Dhaka district; Kattoli, Halimanagore, | Pabna less of Rajshahi
Narayanganj, Murapara, Sholoshahar, | Arigola, division ; Dinajpur
Kachpur, Dhamgarh, Pachlayish, | Brahmanbaria of Rangpur
Laxmankhola, Fatulla of Jublee road, | and division and
Narayanganj district ; Halishahar, | Banchharampur; | Kushtia, Magura,
Tongi, Joydebpur, Kaliganj | Kalurghat. | Feni and Raipur | Noapara of Jessore
of Gazipur district; of N oakhali district of Khulna
Narsingdi, Madhabdi, region. division .
Baburhat and Ghorashal of
The cotton textile industries of Bangladesh are run by imported cotton and thread
from abroad. In Bangladesh a huge quantity of cotton, textiles and yarns are imported
from Japan, Singapore, Hong Kong, Korea, India and Pakistan every year.
Paper Industry
Paper industry is one of the largest industries of Bangladesh. The first paper
mill was established at Chandraghona in 1953. At present there are six government
paper mills, four board mills and one newsprint paper mill in Bangladesh (fig. 11.5).
There are many paper mills which have been established by the private sectors.
2
Sg

180 Geography and Environment
Paper mills Production raw | Produced
materials paper
Karnaphuli paper mill at Chandraghona, the | Bamboo, softwood, | Writing paper,
North Bengal paper mill at Pakshi in Pabna,|reeds, sugarcane|printing paper,
Sylhet pulp and paper mill at Chhatak, | wastage, jute sticks|packing and
Bashundhara paper mill, Magura and Shahjalal | and raw jute. other papers
paper mills in Narayanganj, Newsprint paper and newsprint.
mill in Khulna, Bangladesh Hard board mills,
Adamjee particle board mills, Kaptai and Tongi
board mills.
Fertilizer Industry
Bangladesh is an agricultural country. The additional food is needed to meet the
demand of food of increasing population. For this we need fertilizer. The first
e e a oe an fertilizer industry was
BANGLADESH established at Fenchuganj in
26° ave a. INDIA MAIN INDUSTRIES 2¢| Sylhet district in 1951.
7S ee eee) LEGEND sa: * :
ao BL a ae ee Fertilizer is being produced
4 - I, an 1g Catton Industry 4 Fertilizer Industry» from seventeen fertilizer
5 "S pinajpur®., A \ . .
2° women NA e FASIOXIES, Amiang venti the
(mest Benga SO Fn Meghalaya) _. main fertilizer factories are
ea a or pe ess, Ghorashal Fertilizer Factory,
‘fs x é: [ ae AY a ee ae aa ; »e| Ashuganj Fertilizer Factory,
sof Rajshahi 230 of Gouripyr ? 5 NON “
Seas PN Secigan esa l aa labor pe Plash Urea Fertilizer Factory,
Saf aed acipur EA) .
an Se oe A AMS achugmi Triple Supper Phosphate
} _ tush AE“ phakés«=/*4 28rahmgnbaria 5 e :
Looe Mae es dd INDIA gaa 2 999] Fertilizer Factory Chittagong,
TSE Mea os CTS a a Urea Fertilizer + Factory,
INDIA 0 SAY oe “Sichandpur_\, CAGE was
(west Berga) ~"Sigssne! Mair eee VAN {INDIA Jumuna Fertilizer Factory and
; Vet lui” ae eae en ON | Fenchuganj Ammonium
22) paucine 4 : sy i Nt a oe Simagong Bus hy 22 ae
wey Sete Aiow, yee SE Sulphate Fertilizer Factory
Lua? CES 1 0) cnanitons. "| (fig. 11.5).
Ob fo ane’ ‘ \t Fertilizer Industry one of the
; . BAY OF BENGAL \ teh largest industries of
2 _92_S# Kilometres \\ % | Bangladesh. We have a great
os vot nnd 4 opportunity to produce huge
° ° " ° AP wae
se SP ast of Greenwin®D <t 2 amount of fertilizer due to &
Fig. 11.5 : Main industries of Bangladesh ™

Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 181
the availability of natural gas. Bangladesh will be able to export fertilizer
after meeting the country’s demand within a few years.
Contribution of Garment Industries to the Economy of Bangladesh
The garment industries of Bangladesh have been developed as an important industry.
Export oriented garments industries started to flourish during the later part of
seventies and during early eighties. Afterwards this industry placed itself at the
top most exporting sector of Bangladesh very rapidly. A number of garments
industries are there in Bangladesh. Among them 75 percent garments industries are
located in Dhaka region. Rest of them are located in Chittagong port city and a few
in Khulna. During 2012-13 fiscal year Bangladesh earned 8090 Million US dollars
which accounts for 41.10 percent of total foreign currency earnings (Source:
Bangladesh Economic Survey, 2013).
Produced garment Exported countries
Trouser, jeans pant, skirt, tops, sweater,| USA, Germany, France, Italy,
jacket, pullover, cardigan, blouse, T-shirt, | Netherlands, Canada, Belgium, Spain,
shirt and pant. and UK.
A favourable environment excites for development of the ready-made industries
in Bangladesh. The availability of manpower at a low salary is one of the major
factors. The garment industry is known as ‘Billion dollar’ industry. Japan, China,
USA, UK, France, Belgium and Canada, have invested in this sector. In
Chittagong and Dhaka export processing zones permission has been granted
to build two central effluent plants. Environmental pollution may be reduced by
setting up these effluent plants.
EPZ : Export Processing Zone.
Tourism Industry of Bangladesh
Bangladesh is a colourful country having different seasons in nature. The natural
beauties of sea-beaches, the depth of forest, hilly areas naturally existed here for
~ ‘(ourism. Tourist attraction sites of Bangladesh make up the prospective sectors of
s development where the longest sandy sea-beach, mangrove forest, coral island, lake,

182 Geography and Environment
river and the beautiful sceneries and the boat light fill the mind with delight. The
hilly land surrounded by evergreen forest is also very attractive. Buddha Vihara and
mounds which are the ruins of ancient civilization are also places of interest. There
are beautiful and attractive natural places like Haor or wetlands, Tea gardens of
Sylhet, and the scenery of sun rising and setting of Kuakata beach. Apart from these
there are many historical, archeological and many Bangalee cultural sites which can
attract local and international tourists to visit those places.
Importance of Tourism Industry of Bangladesh
Tourism industry is an important industry in the modern world. By developing this
industry, it can contribute greatly to the economic development of the country,
social stability and regional development. It can contribute to enhance the relationship
with other countries and provide impetus for environmental development.The tourism
industry can be considered the best for displaying the social and cultural heritage of
Bangladesh to the people of the world.
The national industrial policy of 2005 acknowledged tourism as an industry in
Bangladesh and gave priority to develop this sector. Increased employment
opportunity and national revenue can be achieved through tourism industry. The
beauties of Bangladesh can be presented to the other people raising the tourism
industry. Bangladesh still stays at a primary stage in such a risk less industry. The total
number of tourists who came from the other countries to Bangladesh both in 2006 and
2009 were around 2,00,311 and 2,67,107. Bangladesh has earned around 5530.60
Million in 2006 and 5762.24 Million in 2009 from the tourists (Source :
Bangladesh Tourism Corporations, 2012).
Importance of Tourism Centres of Bangladesh
Bangladesh is naturally beautiful, archeologically and historically enriched country.
So, every place of Bangladesh has the attractive elements for tourism. The name of
regional important tourism places of Bangladesh are mentioned here (fig. 11.6).

S

Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 183
88° 89° 90° 91° 92°
h BANGLADESH
oN
evN ok INDIA TOURISM MAP
26° _Panchabaity % (Assam) 4 LEGEND 26°.
¢ e \ bs oy) Hotels/Motels 2 Historical Area
/apakurgaon Ve tf GP Museum x ——~Picknic Spot
“ey APinajpur 2 ie
CA, Pyr2ratow ed . pal Tea Garden oe Sea-beach
‘ # ene a 2 \ Wildanimal PR Fey (Waterfall
25° INDIA “ay Pemsagar yp / Archaeological Location dM, National Park £ 25°
(West Bengal) srenesitongany’ 9, ~>-INDIA (Meghalaya) _.
cppssepadktonaa| | ene. Been
/ — Naogaon le Se eo
ee i OO i Sylhet 4 we
( |, i” enchilgan
ibgal Be aisnargy Majhira Y, ladhupudGarh ™ jedhaprunda
24° peu “eS ry \? hn § Moulvibazar~" 24°
hcharghat BY? Weoarmu e ay
Citrpa\_ Baghabah/ ‘Tae os
i p = A Nagéenpate Pak o
= XY onargao j
; Meh ss if
‘ Spur ushtia 3 anganjS INDIA Wn
23° Mujibnagar i (Tripura) — <chimbud 2s
j \ SS sro \ pr PPancchary
Gopal ~ ‘ B
INDIAN, ) % Copalgeny SS comila he, (Mw 5 inoia
(West Bengal) | Tunaiparasaderney \y \ [esata (Mizoram)
\ Kae igo fi a pa sie ) eo’ if
2 kan rain ROT VR la\ ‘ f me D
22° } hale” x Wp Pare £ hnagorth | 22°
ponies (\"a , si ‘bs 4 NAY Avs Foyes Lak J
\ . La f > Ay Pike NL Rangainalh
gy aL afasa > ‘i iy , é mal aa aa
SR Of NZ. ity Rh Char PoTenga w
punth san \ ¥ Wie Nijhum Dip &
as Io ee Sonadia Dif dinath AR |
21° % Sr xiagata’ Maheshkhali/, MOY Lama. 94°.
. Himehhari| OR 4)
i?) 32 64 Kilometres G,
—F__ BAY OF BENGAL Tereat\ %
Shah Pati Dip S
é si 4 St Martin's Island oP
88 89 East of Greenwich90 94
Fig. 11.6 : Tourism map of Bangladesh
Tourism places of greater Dhaka : Historically Dhaka is both the capital and main city
of Bangladesh. It is known as the city of mosques. The Satgambuj mosque was built
0
S in the 17th centaury, Tara mosque in the 18th century and Baitul Mukarram Mosque

184 Geography and Environment
was built very recently. They are famous example of tourism places. Dhakeshwari
Temple was built in the 11th century. Lalbagh fort was built by the Mughal
Emperors on the banks of river Buriganga. Bahadurshah park was built in 1857 as a
mark of respect to the last Emperor of Mughal dynasty. There are other places
like Ahsan manjil, Carzon hall, Dhaka university, Memorial of National Poet, National
Museum, Mirpur Intellectual Graveyard, Central Shahid Minar, Martyr Memorial of
Rayerbazar and the museum of the father of the Nation Bangabandhu at Dhamnondi.
Sohrawardy uddan where Bangabandhu delivered the historical proclamation on 7th
March during the great liberation war in 1971 etc. attracts the tourists specially.
Bhawal Garh and Jamindar Bari of Gazipur, the historic Sonargaon and Panam Nagar
of Narayanganj

Tourism places of the Eastern Bengal : Atia Mosque of Tangail, Grave and
Memorial of Politician Maulana Bhasani in Tangail. Bangabandhu Bridges, Madhupur
Tract, Darirampur, Mymensingh, a memorial place bearing the memory of national
poet Kazi Nazrul Islam. Mazar of Hazrat Shahjalal (R) and Hazrat Shahparan
(R), Keene Bridge, Jainta hill at Jaflong, Eco park at Lauachhara, Madhubkunda
waterfall of Moulvibazar etc. Buddist monastery and Shalban Vihara at
Mynamati, War cemetary for the Soldiers of second world war in Comilla.
Bajrashahi mosque, Gandhi Ashram, Hatiya and Nijhum island of Noakhali are the
tourism places in Eastern Bengal.

Tourism places of the Northern Bengal : Borendra museum and Mazar of Shah
Makhdum (R) of Rajshahi, Sona mosque at Shibganj of Chapainawabganj, House of
Rani Bhobani and Rajbari at Dhighapatia (Uttara Gono-bhabon). Buddha Vihara
at Paharpur in Naogaon, Mahasthangarh in Bogra and the Mazar of Shah Sultan
Bolkhi, Kantajee temple of Dinajpur are the tourism places in Northern Bengal.
Tourism places of the Southern Bengal : Memorial and grave of the father of
Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibar Rahman at Tungipara, Gopalganj, Mazar of
Lalonshah and Kuthibari at Shilaydaha, birth place of poet Michael Madhusudhan
Datta at Sagoredari in Jessore,‘Shishu Sargo and Art Gallery’ on the bank of Chitra
river of painter S.M Sultan in Narail, the Memorial at Mujibnagar in Meherpur,
Shat Gambuj Mosque at Bagerhat, Sea-beach at Kuakata in Patuakhali, the natural
Mangrove forest Sunderban located in greater Khulna. are the tourism places of
Northern Bengal. Ss

Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 185
Tourism places of Chittagong Hill Tracts : The Kaptai lake is the main attraction
here (fig. 11.7). The natural beauties surrounded by greenery of hills, deep black
water of the lake is a source of unlimited enjoyment. Buddha Vihara and the house of
Chakma King are the tourist sites. People also enjoy the forest, hills and the natural
water flow of Khagrachhari. There are many attractive tourist places in Bandarban
named Meghla, Nilgiri, Shailopropat and Nilachal (fig. 11.8).
a i = “2a
“Sai ) =U
ie Se Pe i hg ae oa ~ =
ae Ee MINEO GD Se
Fig. 11.7 : Kaptai lake
pf nae
ee eb 6 i ee ae aoe
Fig. 11.8 : Nilachal
Tourism places of Chittagong: The attractive tourism place of Chittagong are
Patenga sea-beach, Mazar of Hazrat Shah Amanat (R), Foy’s lake, DC Hill, Court
building and Hills of Sitakunda.
Forma-24, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

186 Geography and Environment
Touriam places of Cox’s Bazar : The world’s longest sca-beach and charming
scenery of Cox’s Bazar are the attractive tourism sites.
There are hills sloping down to the waters of the Bay of Bengal. Some important
tourist places of Cox's Bazar are Himchhari, Inani beach, Kolatoli beach,
Buddhist templels of Cox’s Bazar and Ranm, Mohbeskhali island, Saint martin’s island
(fig. 11.9) ete.
a al
Fig. 11.9: Sait martin's ialand
Exercise

Multiple choice questions
1, In which region of Bangladesh wheat cultivation has increased?

¢. Sonthem region d. Northem region
2, What type of poil ls good for cultivation of sugarcane?

iL Sandy soil

ii, Muddy soil

Which one of the fellowing is correct?

a iandii b. iandiii 6

ce. iimdiii do iiiandiii ®

Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 187
Observe the map below and answer the question number 3 and 4:
88° 8g" 90° 91° 92°
Al
ae BANGLADESH 26°-
J ras N
f ta . 0 32 64 Kilometres
LL a?
\ i
fo} ‘e bs fo}
aS on ~ RO Hl INDIA: ae)
we BN IS,
1 \ _
o \; : °
24 XG ty \ fa 24 -
~ } Xt ¢ an!
a | Pp pd
3 ef eH —/ [INDIA 3
2 al nd 4
a \ wy \ a & }
¢ \ nq MV) 4 inna
22° \ = Lh, 22°
INDIA} ( 4 ite Vie
{ A } ¥ A} nh) N) \
° SLY & AG ° a°-
21 Wie FS j i
‘ae
BAY OF BENGAL \ MYANMAR
88° 89 rastorcreenven9O” a1 SN g2°
3. What types of forests have developed in ‘T’ area?
a. Tropical evergreen b. Tropical deciduous
c. Mangrove d. Tropical evergreen and deciduous
ie)
S
N

188 Geography and Environment
4. What types of Trees are found above mentioned forest?
i. Chapalish
ii, Sal
iii. Hizal
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii b.  iand iii
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
Creative questions
1. 88° 89° 90° 31° 92°
2° Sy BANGLADESH 26°
ia a S032 64 Kilometres!
Lo wy
28 INDIA ~ iN INDIA 20
meee ef a ant aN
wae qN eS,
; \
24° So ‘ a y ® fi 24°
3 Te (INDIA
a y ~ae fo . is
23 ‘ AR Sa é 4 a 23
es Sd in 4 ;
? «& YS a INDIA
22° mA ot Wi 22
INDIA ‘ A A Ys “< Wi be
i (14. ) Dov
beeen
BAY OF BENGAL iO
_
88° 80 tax cioonncr 90” a1 FN 92°
a. Write down the name of the district where the second longest field is located.
b. Discuss the appropiate climate for wheat cultivation.
c. Describe the reason of production of important crop of ‘X’ areas?
d. The main mineral resources extracted from ‘X’ and ‘Y’ areas and write 9
EY
about the economical importance between “X’ and ‘Y’. &

Resources and Industries of Bangladesh 189
2. The home of Sima is situated in the North-western part of Bangladesh. An
industry has been developed there whose raw materials are imported from abroad.
On the other hand, the home of Poly is situated in the North-eastern part of
Bangladesh where a industry has been developed to play an important role in
increasing the food production.
a. What is industry?
b. Explain the reasons of developing the Jute industry in Bangladesh.
c. Explain the reasons of developing the industry which has been developed
in the areas of Sima.

d. What is your opinion about the possibility of Poly’s industry?

Lo)

S

N

190 Geography and Environment
Chapter Twelve

Transport System and Trade of Bangladesh
Trangport plays a significant role in the economy by transporting passengers
important role m transporting the raw materials, movement of people from one place
to another, marketing of producta and stability of the price of products. Trade iz
influenced by the trangport system. Trade ig an important part of the economy of
the country which keepe balance between agriculture and industry.

Pox eae | i ge

ee A ‘5 geared 2 esa

See SU 8 am : \y ,; ae

Syne EEO
At the end of this chapter, we will be able to:

e Provide description of the roads, the railways, the waterways and the

aitways of Bangladesh
« Analyze the importance of reads, railways, waterways and the airways.
« Try to avoid accidents while travelling by roads, railways, and waterways
and make others aware of it.
« Explain the domestic and foreign trade of Bangladesh. x
* Give an account of the import and export products. FS

Transport System and Trade of Bangladesh 191
Transport System
Passengers and goods moving from one place to other are known as
transportation. Geographical cause have influenced the development of the transport
sector.
Transport system of Bangladesh
Ocean shipping

National highways,| | Metre gauge,

Regional highways| | Broad gauge

and Unpaved roads and Duel gauge
Roads
Distribution of agricultural products, marketing and for rapid transport, roads
are very important. It is not possible to go anywhere by railways. So roads are
necessary for easy transport. The following are some geographical causes which
influence the development of roads.

Favourable Road Unfavourable
Condition oads Condition
The favourable condition of developing the roads
, ,
Plain land Structure of the soil Location of the sea and
industry

The plain land is | If structure of soil is| Ports develop near the coastal

required to develop the | strong and permanent it | area. A large number of roads

road communication. | is not damaged by rain. | are developed centering around

For this reason, most of | Roads built on hard soil | the ports and industries. For

the roads have been | lasts longer. this reason, roads developed

constructed in Dhaka, in Mongla and Chittagong

Khulna, Rajshahi, and other industrial areas

x Chittagong and Sylhet also. Waterways were given
“| areas. priority in this region.

192 Geography and Environment
The unfavourable conditions of road development
Rugged topography | Slope of the land Lowland and riverine
areas
It is very expensive /It is very difficult and|More culverts and bridges
and difficult to built|more expensive to buildj/have to be built on the
roads on the hilly and|roads on the slope. Fuel ues ind menire ae
hs : ..|which costs more. So, few
tugged areas. Due to on +t bar ft is @ barrier roads are built in this areas.
this, the roads are few) to Dutid roads on slopes. IN Tn the haor regions of Sylhet
in the Chittagong Hill Bangladesh the density of and in the southern part of
Tracts. roads is less in north-east | Bangladesh roads are few. River
of the country. Therefore |transport get priority in this
there are few roads in the |region.
north-eastern Bangladesh.
The roads of Bangladesh have been built in an unplanned way on the basis of
settlement pattern. Most of the roads have been built for local area connectivity as
a complimentary to the waterways and railways. Usually unpaved roads are transformed
to paved roads. According to the report of Roads and Highways Department, the
length of different types of roads are given ina table.
Table1: The length of different types of roads under Roads and Highways Department
Year ——s|_——2010 2011 2012
National highway! 3.479 3,492 3,570
(kilometres) |
Regions highway) 4 99g 4,268 4,323
(kilometres ) |
Unpaved road 13,248 13,280 13,678
(kilometres )
20,948 21,040 21,462
Source : Bangladesh Economic Survey, 2013
Task : Fill up the table taking information from above data.
The name of road Decreased Due to
National highway
Regionalhighway | |
Unpaved road Po
N

Transport System and Trade of Bangladesh 193
The unpaved and the regional roads of our country are badly damaged by the rainy
season and flood. As a result, the roads are usually repaired throughout the year.
Besides these, as a riverine country, culvert construction and maintenance cause
a barrier on the road construction.

Internal road transport routes of Bangladesh are based on Dhaka as the centre. The
routes are as follows —

Dhaka «———> Pabna, Rajshahi, Bogra, Rangpur, Dinajpur and Tetulia via Aricha-

Nagorbari.

Dhaka «——— Faridpur, Kushtia, Jessore, Khulna, Barisal via Daulatdia.

Dhaka «——— Tangail, Jamalpur, Netrokona, Mymensingh,

Dhaka «———> Comilla, Noakhali, Feni, Chittagong, Rangamati, Bandarban,

Khagrachhari, Cox’s Bazar, Teknaf.

Dhaka «———> North Bengal via Bangabandhu Bridge.

The roads of Bangladesh have a significant contribution to the economy of
Bangladesh. At present, the Bangabandhu Bridge constructed over the Jamuna
river plays an important role in the development of roads in Bangladesh. The roads
are spread out like a net across the country.

The road has played a great role in the balanced economic growth, agricultural
development and distribution, industrialization, development of trade and
commerce and employment opportunity.

Railways
The railway network of Bangladesh is relatively small but it plays an important
role in transporting heavy goods, industrial and agricultural products and labourers. It
connects the main sea-port, cities, trade and industrial centres (fig. 12.1).

Forma-25 , Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

194 Geography and Environment
The railways of Bangladesh
Bangladesh has 659 Bangladesh has 375 Metre gauge railways
kilometres of broad kilometres of dual on the eastern bank of
gauge railways gauge _ railways the Jamuna river in the
which exits on the from Jamtoil to division of Dhaka,
western side of the Joydebpur. Chittagong and Sylhet
Jamuna river in the which is 1,843
division of Khulna kilometres in length.
and Rajshahi.
Can railways develop everywhere? The development of railways is influenced
by some geographical factors.
88° 389° 90° a 92°
in BANGLADESH
26° aN Oy (assem) RAILWAYS 26°
aa a ON os LEGEND
a AVS \ Metre Gauge HHH Bistrict Boundary =
Mas Eb \ Cae NG 5) Broad Seve —— Capital e
p “fh “ jY Duel Gauge Hearne Division Headquaters =
a Ages DHAKA et.
23 <b SoS Nee 2 NDA, ey 23'
INDIA Ng Ey YP PAG 4 \. 4 \
(westBerga) 77 NS ZG TY \ {INDIA
eS duh Cd Fh ee J el (
aie?) EWR Ue : ; \ 21
Ob eG L9 OY mM
ee BAY OF BENGAL \) Pe \
\ fa, 9
0 32 64 Kilometres \S%,
\ %
%
88° 89East of GreenwictO” 91° \92°
=
Fig.12.1 : Railway Network of Bangladesh gS

Transport System and Trade of Bangladesh 195
The favourable condition of railway development
Plain land Location of the sea
The plain land is perfect to construct the | Ports develop in the coastal areas.
railways. It costs little and is easy to |The railways developed to connect the
construct. Most of the areas of Bangladesh ports even though there are problems
are plain land. The railways developed |. cermin . Tx Uiieeenw dip
everywhere except the hilly areas, forests and m constructing : ong .
wetlands. railway has developed only in the plain
land not in the hilly areas.
The unfavourable condition of railway development
Rugged topography Soil and lowland
It is very difficult and more expensive to | The railways do not develop on the
construct the railways on the rugged | soft soil. Besides it is difficult to
topography. So, railways are hardly seen in| develop railways in riverine areas.
the hilly areas of Bangladesh. So, there is no railways in southern
part of Bangladesh.

One metre wide rail line is known as metre | At present two railways ferries are running}
gauge and 1.68 metre wide rail line is| from Tistamukhghat to Bhahadurabad ghat
known as broad gauge. and from Sirajganj to Jagannathganj.

The Kamalapur rail station of Dhaka is the largest rail station of Bangladesh.
People can travel from Dhaka to almost all important towns of Bangladesh by
railways. There are 443 rail stations in total (Source : Bangladesh Statistical Pocket
Book, 2012/June 2013, Table 8.01).

The railways have been playing an important role in marketing of agricultural and
industrial products, regular movement of raw materials, passengers and
labourers, employment opportunity along with the balanced economic
development and reconstruction of Bangladesh.

The Government of Bangladesh has taken different projects to achieve the
commercial and economic success of railways. If these projects are

x implemented successfully then Bangladesh railways will become a modern
“transport system.

196 Geography and Environment
Task : There are no railways in the regions of Khagrachhari, Rangamati, Bandarban,
Barisal, Patuakhali, Madaripur, Shariatpur, Meherpur, Cox’s Bazar and
Lakshmipur. Find out the geographical causes why there are no railways in
those districts submit it to the teacher explaining the causes in a group.
Waterways : Waterways are divided into two types.
Ocean shipping
River Transport
Bangladesh is a land of rivers where waterways are spread like a net. The
geographical structure of Bangladesh is favourable for the waterways. Geographical
features are the causes of easy development of waterways.
The favourable condition of developing the waterways
Lowland is easily affected by flood. As a] Usually, roads and railways cannot
result, roads and railways cannot develop. | be constructed easily in the riverine
Due to this reason, the waterways are the only | areas. As a result, the waterways are| ~
transport mode to the Haor areas of Sylhet,| mostly used in the southern areas of
and in the southern part of the country in| country.
Faridpur, Madaripur, Bhola and Barisal.
Waterways are the cheapest means of transport in Bangladesh. There are 8,900
kilometres of inland navigable waterways with innumerable rivers, canals and
wetlands. Out of this, 5,400 kilometres remain navigable all the year round. And the
rest 3,000 kilometres are used only during the rainy season. Generally, the river in
the south and in the east are more suitable for inland communication. The overall
condition of inland waterways is given below. x
N

Transport System and Trade of Bangladesh 197
Overall condition Year Earning from inland
waterways (crore taka)
Launch ghat 376 2008-09 171.71
2009-10 200.13
Ferry ghat 34 2010-11 211.98
2011-12 225.99
2012-13 131.75
Source ; Bangladesh Economic Survey, 2013
Task : ‘River transport is cheap. Explain.
River ports : Dhaka, Narayanganj, Munshiganj, Goalondo, Barisal, Khulna, Bhairab
Bazar, Ashuganj, Mohonganj, Chandpur, Jhalakhathi, Aricha, Ajmiriganj, Madaripur
are important river ports of Bangladesh (fig. 12.2).
The inland waterways play a significant role in the economy of Bangladesh, by
providing transport for goods, passengers and trade.
Task : Identify the main river ports of Bangladesh in a map and submit it to the teacher.
Lo)
S
N

198 Geography and Environment
88° 89° 90° 91° 92°
A BANGLADESH
oN,
26° rN GYNOA WATERWAYS — 2
fro, i NS. can LEGEND
( gre a /q International Boundary —-—.-— Division Headquaters m
me 1 See (0/ District Boundary sneemuneunene RIVET AE
5 INDIA” XX ‘RANGPUR) 4 Capital @ = Sea Port @ é
25 (West Bengal) c a! oo? | 25
te: 5 wae y “,
Nn J fis ¥ eet a EPS : gut “ xi
: &., ir a ae — Ae o—
A BN \ hy Mahangang/, SYLH — p)
° Re ae a ee “2h 5 Se, SP eran’ °
24 RAISHANR A ek ee D ism") 74
Ds — o a z : \., 0: Bhaib Baz rAgmirigan| r
os, Cue SU Ya
23° (PARES OSS BE OS INDIA. 0 23°
SL, ee oe VOY
INDIA Lah wis Mae oharidpue Vd
(West Bengal) a KHUENA eden r. fOr N\ \ 5 Ace,
fd wee SS pai eay OY Aad? ! (Mizoram
2 on Yi AERIS FT
22 y Sichuind 2 baredkep ie ree Ne) \U- we
a : ‘ > re i Mey
NN @ iL Det) \
0) Ay (ER GS : dH) f
* Wy) Walaketi Ct oD ‘
21° KAY te (Jo? ; ) ane
\
: BAY OF BENGAL }) Aa \
(ay
0 32 64 Kilometres c 2
4
88° 89 East of GreenwichQO" 91° We2°
Fig. 12.2 : Waterways of Bangladesh
og
3
RQ

Transport System and Trade of Bangladesh 199
Ocean Shipping
The location of a country by the sea is important for the sea ports to develop. Not
only the location of the sea, but there are some geographical characteristics which
should be present to establish the sea port. With the establishment of sea port proper
ocean shipping can develop.
The geographical conditions for the development of ocean shipping
The ships can be | The coast near the | For the | Ice, fog, mists are
saved from | sea port should be | construction of | barrier to the ocean
storms, cyclone | deep enough so that | jetties and | shipping which are
and tidal waves if | all kinds of modern | dockyard for | absent in the coastal
there are | ship can move easily. | ship _ repairing | areas of Bangladesh.
harbours. wide plains is | Asa result, the ocean
needed. shipping has increased.
The waterways along with the river transport and ocean shipping play a great role
in both the internal and international trade and commerce. There are two sea ports in
Bangladesh, in Chittagong and Mongla. About 85 percent of import trade and 80
percent of the export trade are carried out through Chittagong port. From Mongla
port 13 percent of the export trade and 8 percent of the import trade are carried out.
Importance of waterways and ocean shipping is greater than other modes of
transport in the economy.
Airways
The airways have a major role for rapid transfer of mail and perishable commodities.
During war, famine and natural disasters airways play an important role. At present
connectivity with the world without the airways cannot be imagined. The
airways have immense contribution to education, culture and international relations.
The favourable condition for the development of airways
Plain land The place free from smog and
thunderstorm
%6 The sufficient plain land for landing and| Airways need an airport free from
S | taking off. smog and thunderstorm.

200 Geography and Environment
Dhaka is connected with Chittagong, Cox’s Bazar, Sylhet, Jessore, Rajshahi,
Saidpur and Barisal by air (fig. 12.3). Private airline also operates air service in
domestic routes. Hazrat Shahjalal international air port is the main air port of
Bangladesh. Besides these, there are two more international air ports, named
Chittagong Shah Amanat and Sylhet Osmani International Airport.
88° 89° 90° 91° 92°
P&, BANGLADESH
aOR, INDIA
26° a rs i (Assam), AIRWAYS 26°
Too NN ‘, LEGEND
= ie saiapar {4 Intemational Boundary - »-—-— Division Headquaters m
‘S Sea P creo : Rivers e
INOS. \RANGPUR Hy) ela " @ Airport es
25° (West Bengal) CN. uy 25°
f 5 ‘ an a - EN i we ne y)
24° Sy ee NE % ieee oe J 24°
2NSxePabit Fe i ‘ pre
2 Seal Que 2
23° a é Sy i Wer in nN eel ws 23"
swerve 7 oe oO Dok WY ¢ INDIA
YOUN \ a Se CA Se 8 TAGONGYS }
\ Ad ie DN Sk
a Q i is Anat ~ i
2 , wy & ‘ [are
Or dO GS : \i
Pe SUNLA Cox's jazar ‘4
; BAY OF BENGAL {aN
9 32 64Kilometres . &
\\ %
88° 89° csst ot Greenwich 90" 91° i
Fig. 12.3 : Airways of Bangladesh
Trade
Selling and purchasing of goods to meet the demands of the people and the related
activities are known as trade and commerce. The commodities which we need are
not produced or made in one place. As a result, these commodities have to be &

Transport System and Trade of Bangladesh 201

distributed and that is trade and commerce.

Trade is as follows :

Internal Trade

The internal trade of our country is the collection of raw material and food crop from

village or hat/primary market and the distribution of manufactured industrial goods

in the districts, district head quarters, secondary markets and hat. The internal trade

is the balance between the demand, supply and consumption of the country. Transport

plays an important role in the internal trade of Bangladesh. It is easier to market

different types of produced goods through the roads, railways and waterways.

Task : Make a list of different types of products that are brought in different shops
from other areas and the products from your area which are sold to other areas.

Task : Show the link between trade and transport in your locality.
Commodities going from Transport mode Commodities coming to
your area your area

Foreign Trade

At one time the export of raw materials was the characteristics of foreign

trade of Bangladesh. At present around 75 percent of foreign exchange earnings are

coming from the ready-made garments and knitwear and the amount of agricultural

product imports increased whereas the amount of export trade decreased gradually.

In the international trade, we have to increase exports for economic development. In

view of thiswe have to increase production, upgrade the quality of products,

Forma-26, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

202 Geography and Environment
decrease production cost, decrease export tax, improve transport system, and make
advertisement for exportable items is necessary. Bangladesh imports from China,
India, Malaysia, South Korea, Japan, Hong Kong and Taiwan. Bangladesh products
are exported to USA, UK, Germany, France, Netherlands, Canada and Italy
We have natural resources but for lack of capital and technological knowledge the
proper utilization of natural resources is not taking place. As a result, imbalance
between export and import is taking place.

Import and Export Products
In Bangladesh labour intensive export production is gradually increasing. USA is the
largest destination of our exporting products. As the main importer of Bangladeshi
products, USA was placed at the top most position in the fiscal year of 2012-13. The
second biggest importer is Germany, the third is United Kingdom and the fourth is
France.

The main export goods are :

1. Primary goods: Frozen food, agricultural products, raw jute, tea, other primary
goods.

2. Industrial goods : Ready-made garment, knitwear, chemical products, plastic
products, leather, handicrafts, jute and jute goods, home textile, shoes, ceramic
products and engineering products.

Year Export earnings Import expenditure
(in million US dollars) (In million US dollars)
2010-11 22,928.22 33,658
2011-12 24,287.66 35,516
2012-13 12,599.73 16,442

Source : Bangladesh Economic Survey, 2013
In the import sector in Bangladesh, China has the top most position. In the fiscal
year of 2012-13, 18.98 percent of total imports came from China and the next is India
while Malaysia is in the third position.

The main import goods are :

Lo

1. The main primary products : Rice, wheat, oil-seeds, crude petroleum, cotton. S

Transport System and Trade of Bangladesh 203
2. The main industrial goods : Edible oil, fertilizer, staple fiber, thread, clinker
and petroleum products.
3. Capital goods
4. Other goods (Goods which produced at EPZ)
Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. Which district has no railway?
a. Habiganj b. Madaripur
c. Tangail d. Bhairab Bazar
2. To increase the earnings in export trade we have to —
i. reduce the cost of manufactured products.
ii. increase the taxes on industrial products.
iii. increase the quality of production.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii b. i and iii
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
Read the text below and answer the questions number 3 and 4:
Mr. Ryan does computer business. He imports computer from Mumbai every year.
3. How does Mr. Ryan import computer?
a. By Road b. By Railway
5 c. By Airway d. By Ocean shipping

204 Geography and Environment
4. The advantage of carrying the goods in the said transport modes are —
i. to save time.
ii. less transport cost.
iii. the less possibility of damage to the equipments.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iti
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
Creative questions
1. In last winter holiday Saihan went to his aunt’s house in Sylhet from Rajshahi. He
found out a pleasant and comfortable journey at a low cost. Few days later
he went to Khagrachhari via Chittagong to see the tunnel of Alutila.
a. What is the cheapest means of transport?
b. Explain the cause of development of river transport in the southern part of the
country.
c. Inamap, show the route of Saihan to his aunt’s house from Rajshahi.
d. Make a comparative analysis on Saihan’s journey from Sylhet to
Chittagong and from Chittagong to Alutila.
2.
Year Export earnings Import expenditure
(In million US dollars) (In million US dollars)
2010-11 22,928.22 33,658
2011-12 24,287.66 35,516
2012-13 12,599.73 16,442
a. What is import trade?
b. In export trade what is the most suitable way to export the frozen food
and why?
c. According to the given table in which year there is a least balance between
export and import trade. Explain.
d. By analyzing the given table, explain your views about the future of %
economic development. R

Chapter Thirteen
Development Activities of Bangladesh and
Environmental Balance
The elements of the environment depend on one another Plants, insects, animala, man
live in a harmony in the environment. The dependency is interrupted if the
harmony of the environment is altered. Development is very important for any
country. Development depends on the economic activities. The economic activities
of our country is still dependent on the natural resources. So, the sustainability and.
development will have to be ensured through the environmental balance. A
coordinated effort must be initiated for a laating environmental development.
Rae j to! Ste: “a ™ a —— |
j » Ans é. ,
: J be ; *
At the end of this chapter, we will be able to :
e Explain the balance and imbalance of the environment.
* Explain the development activities along with the explanations of some
mentionable development activities of Bangladesh.
« Explain how the environment was polluted and imbalance was created at the
time of implementation of the development activities.
« Analyze the result of environmental mbalance.
» * Analyze how the environmental balance influences the development activities.
8

206 Geography and Environment
e Find out the measures of protecting the environmental balance of
during implementation of the development activities.
e Make ourselves aware of the results of the environmental imbalance and

make others aware of these.
Development Activities and Sustainable Environment
Development is very important for a country. Every man and the country want
development to raise the standard of living. So some internal developments have
to be done for this. These types of development should be conducted in coordination
with the environment. So, the development activities should be conducted in such
a way that it does not harm the environmental balance.
If the road from your house to the school is unpaved or broken, you will see that
sometime later it is repaired so that people can move easily. And if you pay your
attention a little bit to your surroundings, you will notice that the houses made with
tin or wood are being replaced by buildings. When the skill is increased with the
demand it is known as development. If we consider it in a larger perspective, we
can observe the development of a country like the diagram below:

Development
Agriculture Industrial Communication Housing
Sector Sector Sector Sector

Bridges, dams, culvert, industries, roads, railways are to be built in such a
way that cannot affect the natural elements of environment. Bangladesh slopes
gradually from north to south. For increasing the road connection form west to east,
it is essential to build sufficient numbers of bridges with proper drainage system to
avoid flooding. Industrial polutants have polluted the Buriganga river. Industries
and housing have been established on the fill up rivers. So, development should be
initiated in such a way that it does not affect environment and resources . So the
development works should be designed in such that they do not affect environment
and resources.
If a development work around a pond is conducted by cutting the tress around it, it
will result in the destruction of small plants, insects and fish .Gradually the pond %
will be filled up with silt and long term resource gathering will end. 4

Development Activities of Bangladesh and Environmental Balance 207
Some Development Activities of Bangladesh
We have known from the previous discussion that increasing the ability according
to the demand of man is called development. Darkness is removed by lighting a oil
lamp directly. Oil, gas or coal are used to produce the electricity. The electric lights
have more power than oil lamp. This change is called development. Various
developmental sectors are discussed where Bangladesh is doing good.
Development in Agriculture Sector
The economic development mostly depends on the development of agriculture. To
ensure the food security, the development of agriculture sector is required. The amount of
chemical fertilizer used in agriculture is increasing gradually over the years for the
increasing production of food due to the growing demand from the population. The
same land is cultivated round the year. What we do for the development of
agriculture is given below.
To increase agriculture production
Use of underground Use of pesticides Same land is
water for irrigation cultivated many times
Use of fertilizer
Development in Industrial Sector
Rapid industrialization is necessary for the progress of social development. The
tole of industries in the economic development of Bangladesh is very important. The
industry sector can be developed in many ways which are mentioned below.
Industries based on
Production industry exploration of mineral
resources and processing
information and technologies industry
is industries of energy security
Ss
N

208 Geography and Environment
Development in Transport and Communication Sector
The transport and communication accelerates the development of agriculture and
industry. The development of a country depend on transport and communication
sector. Well- organized infrastructure and modern transport system are essential
for development. The socio-economic development of a country depends on the
massive transport development. Information and communication teachnology has
spread over rural areas of Bangladesh. Technology related to internet, mobile phone,
television, radio have extended rapidly.
Construction of highways, bridges, flyovers and ferry terminals have a profound
influence on the development of transport sector.
Development in Housing Sector ——
Development in housing sector depends on e EB sok at ty bs is eo
the development of other sectors of the country. | Bete ye be ee <5
It is an infrastructural development (fig. 13.1). st | gn = Feet = -
Housing sector development indicates a fa Ladera) sa
coordinated development in safe water supply [Li wt Re a
of drinking water, healthy sanitation system and
drainage for sewerage disposal. ‘ is

Fig. 13.1 : Infrastructural development
The housing development means supply of drinking pure water, healthy sanitation
tystem and sewerage disposal infrastructure’
Development Activities in Bangladesh and Environment Pollution
Development is expected by all the countries. The sustainable and environment
friendly development brings well-being for the country. We pollute the environment
for the lack of knowledge or education, information about environment and for
making profit.The main elements of environment are land, water, wind and forest
resources. The way the elements of environment are polluted for development has
been discussed before. It can be understood easily by a schematic diagram.

=
&

Development Activities of Bangladesh and Environmental Balance 209
More crops To prepare land for cultivation
production Use of more fertilizer forests and hills are destroyed

Soil is polluted
Reduction of fertility ai
Soil is exposed for
The decrease of organic matter in erosion
the soil

Result : Insects and micro organism in the soil are affected. The habitat for the

small wild animals are destroyed. The plants cannot grow in the polluted soil. As a

result, soil turns into desert.

More pesticides are
used in agricultural
a The habitat for the aquatic
animals is destroyed due
to polluted water
Oil and waste are spilled
from the transport
Colour, grease, chemical products, warm water are
drained from the industrial units sector
Wastage from the housing, encroachment of the river bank pollute
water and form a barrier to the flow of river

Result : The small aquatic plant named plankton, water hyacinth and moss cannot

grow. The small fishes which eat these aquatic vegetation suffer from food

shortage and this big fishes are in trouble too.
Forma-27, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

210 Geography and Environment
wing |
Smoke from construction materials
Result : These unexpected work increase the amount of carbon dioxide (CO) and
Chlorofluoro carbon (CFC) gas in the air. As a result, it causes greenhouse effect.
It raises the normal temperature. It causes less rainfall indirectly. Soil absorbs more
temperature. As a result, many areas have been treeless or plantless.
Forest Resources
The forest resource is a great factor which maintains the environmental balance of a
country. The total areas of our forest land is around 17 percent. We use wood as fuel
and for making furniture, building constructing and industry. The environment is
being spoiled as a result of this. The forests are being deforested and the soil is
getting exposed. So the soil is eroded rapidly and thus the fertility is decreasing.
The Result of Environmental Imbalance
The over use of each of these three resources- water, forest, land- affect the
balance and environment affected due to the over use of resources. Many aquatic
animals and fishes have been extinct by polluted a aquatic system. Many types of
forests are extinct extinct now and others are in the process of extinction. Many
wild animals have also disappeared.
The habitat of foxes, hares and wild cats were destroyed for deforestation which has
broken down the food chain. This has negative impact on land ecosystem as well as
on society, Over use of natural resources is causing imbalance in the nature.
As a result, temperature increased in summer
: and decreased in winter in the northern areas
mei a... ttle» Lee: tine, Of Bangladesh. Besides frequency of cyclone
. See LP en oN mi and tidal waves have increased. Major parts
Se of Shatkhira, Barisal, Narail and Noakhali
rer, anor eee Se districts will go under water due to green
a = i Al =, » Be ne TS, . ; ;
hed ei << 8 — : house effect. Saline water will enter inland.
CEERI This will hinder the natural growth of plants =
Fig.13.2 : Increase of salinity in coastal region Ss
(fig. 13.2). Landslide is increasing. Resulting in water logging. Indirectly, many “

Development Activities of Bangladesh and Environmental Balance 211
diseases are increasing such as asthma, skin disease and stomach problem and
other infectious diseases. The total environment will be imbalanced if this continues
resulting in disaster. So, a tolerable and sustainable environment is desirable.
We can save the environmental balance through proper management and awareness.
The Techniques of Keeping the Balance of Environment
We use the natural resources from the environment. The environment will exist if the
natural resources are used properly. So, we have to be responsible to maintain the
environmental balance by conservation.

Not to change the location but to L

‘ Stop hill cuttin To free the river banks from
change the river course P g enecbachiien
; A Excavateing
U tiously not to pollute wind, water
ies SS reac is the river bed if filled with
alluvium

The environment is damaged everyday. Who will save it? It is our duty to save. We
should be careful about the environmental element, use it with great care and
compensate the environmental damage. Thus the environment will be preserved.
The forest resources also play a great role in the national economy of the
environmental balance is maintained. A negative impact is being created due to
increasing population, felling the trees for fuel from the forest and deforestation
for agricultural purpose are causing negative impact on the environment. The
environment may be preserved if soil pollution, air pollution and water pollution
are controlled.

Massive afforestation and forest conservation in the

country will cause the scarcity of forest resources.

To ensure the supply of raw materials to wood based > ors development
mills and factories and ensure biodiversity and and conservation
preserve the wild life is the responsibility of the

iS Forest Department for development and conservation.
N

212 Geography and Environment
The measures which should be taken for conservation of the forest are given below :
1. Extend forest areas by afforestation on the deforested hills and on khas lands.
2. In rural areas plant trees in marginal and an uncultivated pices of land.
3. Afforestation should be done on all the embankments especially of roads and
railways.
4. To increase the public awareness for conservation of forest and forest resources.
5. To implement the special projects in preserving the biodiversity.
We have to strengthen our fuel security. We have to invent new techniques for
energy production using renewable sources as solar, wind, bio-gas, sea, animal, and
human energy. To preserve and control the environmental pollution the following
steps should be taken:
1. Control the production and use of polyethylene bags.
2. To build up suitable effluent treatment plant for the industries.
3. To implement the conservation of biodiversity.
4. To build up the social forestation.
5. To control air pollution.
6. Save the river movement.
7. To control the use of wood at brick kiln.
All out effect has been taken to observe.
Bangladesh is a member of United Nation|The different international days about
environment activities (Unicef) and a member} environmental issues declared by UN
country of South Asian Cooperation on] such as world environment days, world
Environmental Organization Programme} desertification day, international ozone day,
(Sacep). world climate day will create public awareness,
To ensure sustainable development and to decrease environmental degradation, a
coordinated policy, development of organizational structure, introduction of sustainable
method to implement the environmental agenda are necessary.
Biodiversity
Normal condition of various types of plant and animal living together in the
same environment is called biodiversity and this, ensures the environmental balance. &
N

Development Activities of Bangladesh and Environmental Balance 213
Conservation of biodiversity
Biodiversity is the main factor to maintain environment and environmental balance.
Natural resources are the source of producing the necessary goods and service for
man. Man is dependent on nature for food, clothing, housing, medicine, recreation
etc. These natural resources are available from forests, rivers, wetlands and oceans.
Due to the short sightedness of man, human activity is gradually decreasing the
biodiversity. If this condition continues, by 2025 about 20-25 percent living things and
plants will be extinct.
Bangladesh has a vast biodiversity and has great prospects. But those are now at a
threat. The habitat for animals are being decreased due to increasing number of
population. They have lost their hunting ground. Once upon a time the Royal
Bengal Tigers were found in many areas of Bangladesh. Now it is found only in
the Sunderban. At the very beginning of nineteenth century, elephants were found
in the forests of Bhawal and Madhupur Garh. Nowadays it is only found in
the hilly areas of Chittagong Hill Tracts, Sylhet and Mymensingh.
In Bangladesh 119 types of mammals, 578 types of birds, 124 types of reptiles and
19 types of amphibians have been identified.‘Red Data Book’ published by
the international Union for Conservation of nature has identified 23 species of
animal of Bangladesh as endangered species. In this list there are Royal Bengal
Tiger, Cheetah, Elephant, Python, Crocodile and Estuarine Crocodile. According
to some other estimation 27 wild animals are endangered and 39 more are at risk.
In the 19th century 19 species became extinct. Among these are 3 types of cows, wild
buffalo, a type of black swan, various types of deer, sweet water crocodile etc.
For conservation of biodiversity strong, immediate and active steps must be
taken. Cooperation and assistance among the different international
organizations, regional organizations, NGOs, private sectors and monitory
institutions, along with United Nation should be strengthen and the activities given
below are to be initiated.
° To survey at the national level to assess the present condition of biodiversity of
S Bangladesh.

214 Geography and Environment
© For conservation of biodiversity and sustainable use of national policy should
be made which will be in coordination with the national development policy.
e Encourage the participation of people in order to use the biodiversity, conservation, and
growth.
® To preserve the natural habitat through identification and introduce restricted
areas. The Forest Directorate of Bangladesh has taken some activities.
e Projects taken in order to develop the production and maintain the ecosystem
by restricting forest areas of Sunderban.
e To stop the illegal wild life trade within the internal boundary of the country and
to take the project in order to preserve, develop and manage the diversity of
different restricted areas.
Very recently as a part of preservation of diversity and natural environment
Sonachor wild life sanctuary, Chandpai wild life sanctuary, Dudu Mukhi wild life
sanctuary and Tangmari wild life sanctuary have been made.
Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. Which districts of Bangladesh will be under water for the Greenhouse effect?
a. Noakhali b. Dinajpur
c. Rangpur d. Bogra
2. To reduce the degradation of environment—
i. coordinated policy.
ii. improvement of organizational structure.
iii. Invention and implementation of environment friendly sustainable techniques
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iand ii b. iand iii
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii Bs
S
N

Development Activities of Bangladesh and Environmental Balance 215
Read the text below and answer the questions 3 and 4:
Sumi went to the house of maternal uncle at Khulna during winter vacation. One day she
going to Sunderban with her maternal uncle and saw many kinds of animals and trees.
She heard from her uncle that many more wild animals and trees were there in the past.
3. What was found in the forest visited by Sumi?
a. Koroi, Gajari b. Garan, Golpata
c. Chapalish, Telsur d. Sal, Segun
4. Ifthe above mentioned forest is destroyed —
i. it will increase the salinity of underground water.
ii. the environment of growing plant will be destroyed.
iii, the amount of destruction will be reduced by tidal-water.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iii
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
Creative questions
1. A group of students went to the Shityalakha River for a journey by boat. They got
surprised to see the unnatural colour of water of the river.
a. What is the name of aquatic and small creatures?
b. How is soil polluted? Explain.
c. Why is the colour of water not natural observed by the students? Explain.
d. What steps should be taken to get back the natural colour of that river?
2. Kanok and Kakon on their way to Savar felt a burning sensation in their eyes after
crossing Amin Bazar. They saw many brick fields on both sides of the road.
a. What is air pollution?
b. What is imbalance of environment? Explain.
c. Explain the burning sensation of eyes of Kanok and Kakon.
d. Explain how does the environment mentioned in stem affect the trees?
=
8

216 Geography and Environment
Chapter Fourteen
Natural Disaster of Bangladesh
Bangladesh is one of the most natural disaster prone countries in the world The
location is one cause for these disasters.

Ne hehe A Se SE ae
$ Yo. aa ate an ay MAAK ?
(2 ae. a ee, a Nee.

Sagi a en > ea
De fe a @ val 7 — a ~4| =
ieee ee =o
Aft the end of this chapter, we will be able to :
* Explain the disaster and hazard.
* Explain the different kinds of natural disasters of Bangladesh.
* Explain the disaster management cycle.
© Explain the divaster management of the natural disaster of coastal areas of
Bangladesh.
° Evaluate the functional and technological use of waming about the Tsunami
and the scale of earthquake.
° Make people aware sbout how to confront natural disaster and what are the ©
measures to mitigate it, q

Natural Disaster of Bangladesh 217
Disaster and Hazard
The people of disaster-prone countries like us should have clear information about
disaster, hazard management etc. Disaster is such a thing which disturbs the normal
activities greatly and it damages lives, properties and environment. It is a very
difficult task for the affected societies to tackle the loss by their own resources after
disaster. As a result, the humanitarian aids or relief are needed from the foreign
countries to tackle the post disaster situation. According to Asian Disaster
Preparedness Centre, Bangkok, ‘A hazard means a threat.’ A future source of danger.
It has the potential to cause harm to :
1. People— death, injury, disease and stress.
2. Human activity— economic, educational.
3. Property— property damage, economic loss.
4. Environment—loss of fauna and flora, pollution loss of amenities. Some
examples of hazard are earthquake, volcanic eruption, floods, cyclones and landslides.
A hazardous event that causes large number of deaths and property damage is a
natural disaster.
Flood
Flood is one of the natural disasters in Bangladesh. Floods are considered harmful to
people of this country when it damages the crops and lives but it plays a
significant role on the economic condition of this country. In the context of
Bangladesh when an area goes under water and human lives and resources are
damaged it is known as flood.
Bangladesh is a rainy and riverine country. The annual rainfall amounts to 2,300
millimetres. There are 700 rivers along with the 57 international rivers which is
spread out across the country like a net in Bangladesh. There are 54 rivers which
originate from India.

Forma-28, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

218 Geography and Environment
Causes of Flood
Physical factor Man-made factor
Heavy rainfall in upstream. A large number of trees are cut along the
Geographical location. river plains.
Influence of Monsoon climate. Farakka bridge constructed over the Ganges.
Less depth of main river. Impact of damps constructed on other rivers.
Tributary rivers are full of alluvium. Unplanned urbanization.
Water flow from melted ice of Himalaya.
High and Low tides of Bay of Bengal.
Earthquake.
Classification of Flood
Flood caused by
Flash flood
[ Wirt General height from
High speed of increase and 10 MEETS
Amount of loss
is high great decrease of water
The slow process of In new moon and full
increase and decrease Usually in hilly area moon flood takes
of water dangerous there
Impact of Flood
The havoc of flood is enormous. A huge amount of crops are damaged due to flood.
People die and normal life is hampered. Life of birds and animals is destroyed
and endangered. Resources are damaged. During the flood of 2000, 1.84 lakh hectors
of crops in 16 districts were damaged. Loss of production amounted to 5.28 lakh
metric tons.
Task : Prepare a bar graph in percentage in the last five years of the flood affected
areas. iS
N

Natural Disaster of Bangladesh 219
Flood has happened in the sloping low-lying plain land of the largest deltaic
Bangladesh in different centuries. Between 1954 and 2004, in 1974, 1978, 1984, 1988,
1998, 2004, the worst hit floods in the last few decades. Among these the duration
of 1998 flood was the longest and many areas were affected. The record of flood
during rainy season is incomparable.

Due to geographical location and climate of Bangladesh flood is a familiar natural
disaster. The natural calamity makes human life terrible.
This can be termed as disaster. The loss must be brought under control. For this
reason, people are undertaking steps to reduce the damage from flood for a long time.
Flood Control Measures
Some of the flood control measures are :
A. General management
1. Construction of easily transferable homestead.
2. To make dense forest by the banks of the rivers.
3. To ensure river reigning system.
4. To develop forecasting of flood and cautionary signal management.
5. To excavate the ponds, the canals, the rivers, and preserving irrigation water.
6. To build up a permanent administrative body for flood management on a yearly
basis.
B. Labour intensive and expensive engineering management
1. To increase water flow of the river through dredging.
2. By constructing water reservoir in the vicinity to fully control the water flow.
3. Tocontrol and drain water flow from India by constructing dam or embankment.
4. To stop entering saline water in the coastal regions.
5. By changing the river course to ensure water flow directly.
C. Easy engineering management
1, To construct dams on both sides of the river bank to check overflow of river
water.
~ 2. To provide afforestation all over the country.
S 3. Tomake planned drainage system while constructing roads.

220 Geography and Environment
4. To make shelters above the highest flood level in flood prone areas.
5. To make urban protection dams.
that to be given priority, make a plan on it.

Flood hinders normal life and development work of the country. So, it can be said
that flood is a great problem for the people of Bangladesh. Many steps have been
undertaken to control this problem and some steps are under planning process. The
origin of three main rivers of Bangladesh are in China, Nepal, India and Bhutan.
Total catchment area of these three rivers are 15,54,000 kilometres of those only 7
percent area is in Bangladesh. More than 80 percent of water of these rivers come
from outside and 90 percent of water responsible for flood is flowing through these
three rivers. So, to control flood and damage, regional and international assistance is
required.
Drought
A drought is a period of unusually dry weather that persists long enough to
cause environmental or economic problems, such as crop damage and water
supply shortages. Humidity of soil decreases due to rainless condition. For this
reason, soil loses normal characteristics of softness and gets rough.
Rainless or Impact of Drought
Agricultural production decreases due to drought in north-east region of

Bangladesh.
+ Famine occurs due to food shortage.
+ Inthe affected area scarcity of water exists.
¢ Outbreak of various types of disease due to high temperature takes place.
¢ Environment becomes rough.
Fire incidents take place very often.
Normal activities of man and wild life are hampered due to rainlessness and
drought. By increasing the forest resources through afforestation and reducing
the consumption of underground water these sorts of natural disaster can be brought
under control. S

Natural Disaster of Bangladesh 221
Cyclone
A cyclone is an atmospheric system characterized by the rapid inward circulation
of air masses about a low pressure centre, usually accompanied by stormy often
destructive weather. Storms that begin in the Southern Pacific and Indian ocean
are called Cyclones. Clockwise in the southern hemisphere and counterclockwise in
the northern hemisphere.
Among the most powerful and dangerous natural disasters, cyclone is one of them.
Cyclones are named after the places of origin. In Bangladesh, this type of cyclone
occurs in the months of March-April and October-November (fig. 14.1). Due to
fumnel shaped coastal area of south Bangladesh more cyclones occurs here.
LORRI cen wel So [ee Ret bee bel otra
PaO cn S ¥ at re asian “611 AM UTC
agence he ane y i ) 11 AM EDT
sane’ ae \ ie |
| ’ Oa (
x { mo 4 ’ a a3
Fig. 14.1 : Cyclone
Task : Make a list of losses excepting the death toll of people from cyclones in
Bangladesh,
Cyclone is a temporary natural disaster. In the last three decades cyclones occurred
more in the Eastern part of Bangladesh. It happened especially in Chittagong, Cox’s
Bazar, Teknaf, Swandip, Hatia, Kutubdia, Urirchar, Char Jabbar, Char Alexandar etc.
Some of the cyclones occurred in the coastal areas of Bangladesh and their years of
occurance and impact is shown is the table below:
NN

222 Geography and Environment
Table 1 : Some of the cyclones occurred in the coastal areas of Bangladesh
Name of the cyclones Number of casualties
12th November, 1970 Tropical cyclone approx 5,00,000 persons
29th November, 1988 Tropical cyclone approx 1,08,000 persons
29th April, 1991 Tropical cyclone approx 5,708 persons
15th November, 2007 approx 3,447 persons
25th May, 2009 approx 330 persons
River Bank Erosion
The erosion of material from the side of a river channel occurs, not only by fluvial
processes, but also by groundwater reduction, surface wash, and slope failure.
Rates of erosion vary with bank composition and moisture content, bank vegetation
and the speed of water-flow rates are the highest on the outer bank of meander
bends.
Task : Mention the names of the river following situation.
Causes of River Bank Erosion
e Climate Change.
e River course and strong current.
e Change of river course.
e Rock content in the river bed.
e Presence of chemical substance.
e Hardness of the transported rock.
e Fault in the river bed.
e Deforestation.
Task : How do the causes influence the river bank erosion effectively? Explain two
reasons dividing into groups.
el
a

Natural Disaster of Bangladesh 223
River bank erosion is a dangerous natural disaster in a small country like Bangladesh.
River erosion takes place more during the rainy season. Particularly, the river
bank erosion is caused more during Pee de
Sometimes, due to drought, cracks #3 gt
develop at the river bank and cause =——
erosion and a chunk of land goes
under water (fig. 14.2). The loss ee
from river bank erosion is irreparable. BES ee re
Besides, theae socio-economic impact is much higher.
Loss from River Bank Erosion
River bank erosion is a common problem in Bangladesh being a riverine country.
The logs caused by river bank erosion tums into a great problem. The river bank
erosion causes in and around 410 rivers, tributaries along with the Padma, the
Jamuna, the Meghna, the Tista. People of this country are more or leas associated
with the river bank erosion. Among them above 1.5 million people are directly
affected by the river bank erosion. Around 3 lakh people take shelter in different
government and non-government educational institutions, roads and embankments,
Bangladesh loses around 200 crore taka every year. Around 8,700 hectors of
land goes under water due to river bank erosion.
The components which is damaged by the river bank erogion are.
Farm Crops
Cultivable land Domestic animals
Disaster shelter Trees
Electricity poles icati H
Family property and other resources Spout uantatioa
Houses
so River bank erosion is a continuous process in Bangladesh. River bank erosion
SN process is caused more or less by the rivers and their tributaries The river bank

224 Geography and Environment
erosion occurs in about 100 upazilas in the country. The land owners are badly
affected by river bank erosion from the excessive rainfall in the monsoon from June
to September. They never can recover the lost land. For this reason, the landless
people migrate. They lose their job and social status. As a result, they become the
object of famine and migrate within the cities as floating people.
Earthquake
Since Bangladesh lies far away from the oceans, this country is not supposed
to be an earthquake prone area. But on the north of Bangladesh in Khasia and Jainta
hill of Assam, foothills of Himalayas, Andaman islands and the ocean floor of
Bay of Bengal are earthquake prone areas. Also structural movement is active in
this area. Overall situation indicates that Bangladesh is becoming more vulnerable to
earthquake (fig. 14.3).
There are some tertiary hills. In the eastern side of Bangladesh The folded mountains
Re i 3 rs al sme running in north-south direction
y fat ha ‘ la ae . <m ~ belongs to the same group of Lusai
ne nage we =i." = $°9%% mountains of Assam and the Arakan
oe Balle’, “ — 6 = : mountains of Myanmar. Due to the
— ; my i, ee c structural nature, these areas are
si a Viet earthquake prone.
res. Gj é i - - The Pleistocene terraces, The Barind
* prem ‘ ay Pa Track, Madhupur and Bhawal Garh
— ——S . and the Lalmai hills are formed from
Fig. 14.3 : Building destroyed by earthquake old rocks. Other areas are newly formed
alluvial plains. So, from the point of geological, structure the northern and eastern side
of Bangladesh is earthquake prone area.
Himalayan terrace and the plateau in the north, Arakan Yoma mountains of
Myanmar in the east and in the north-east the Naga-Disang-Jaflong regions have
made it an earthquake prone area.
From 1548 earthquake records are collected for Bangladesh and its surrounding
regions. In 1993 entire Bangladesh has been divided into three earthquake zones. 5

Natural Disaster of Bangladesh 225
Those are : Zone 1. High risk zone, measuring 7 on Richter scale are the areas of
north and north eastern part of Bangladesh. Zone 2. Medium risk zone, measuring 6
on Richter scale are the areas of middle region. Zone 3. Less risk zone, measuring 5
on Richter scale are the area of south western regions of Bangladesh (fig. 14.4).
Earthquakes occurred in Bangladesh are given in the table below.

Table 2 : Some of the earthquakes occured in Bangladesh

12th June, 1897 8.7 Changing river course of the
river Brahmaputra.
22nd November, Causing little damages in
1997 Chittagong city.
27th April, 2008 5.1 Causing no damages but
created panic.
Source : Banglapedia
What is to be done in earthquake
Electricity line has to be disconnected at | One should stand still holding any materiall
home during earthquake. Gas connection | during earthquake if one is traveling
should be disconnected. One should get | by train or car.
out from house as soon as possible.
Try to get down as quickly as possible | A fearful situation may be caused
during earthquake if you are in a lift. | by the earthquake while in the market,
Try to contact the maintenance officer | cinema hall, and shopping mall etc. Fire
if you are stuck in the lift. may start which is normal. In _ this
situation it is better to sit down or lie
down and when the situation improves
one should leave the place quickly.
Do not stand under large building or structure when you are out of home. Stand in a
open space or playing field.
Forma-28, Geography and Environment, Class 9-10

226 Geography and Environment
Ws. ¢& Bangladesh
L 4 ACh AN to Earthquake Zones
(Thakurgaom,\\ \)
Jou 2\_\\oe 50 0 50 100 km
Pirgany’ "s 5 &-t) ¢ -
KOS [ise Ta Dnani
aa ru
\ aN \ Wal
wy / is 4 AN 3m | vib yr"
= ajihahi | r~S seat [TANGAIL) Sy 4 oe . j y
wre xt & fi Yop ee
> a ordi eno i _¢ Gan er. AN
ee? a Sep ara” FRY
Mee: TIA ~l te Uo f Vv
PN. ae Gane aff OMILLAS vw
Af iN Tir he, Warnes \
i eolane oa atta Ny woot aoe | \
a \ FARIQPUR ua RAMGARH }
Ce | 3 1S.) ktagrachari |
GR ee NERS er
¢ MR ee, 4, VO \
Khulna \ 2) Pe A \wang “Le RAI ATI
PU Ne De:
N > \ Af IZ, A J i a ) at : F
8 ¥ Ve ts af A idl. iy fsknoannany
. te MMS — Wa \SyBichari
, AI ! \
Earthquake Basic Seismic ‘ ; |
Zone Coefficient ! 4
[Sj Zone | 0.08 g ;
[__] Zone Il 0.05 g \
[J Zone Ill 0.04 g es
Fig. 14.4 : Earthquake zones of Bangladesh
Task : Make a list of items which can save you from the earthquake. 20
=
~~)
N

Natural Disaster of Bangladesh 227
In Bangladesh earthquake takes place from ancient times. Due to the structural
cause earthquake happens in our country. As the underground water level is falling
rapidly some places are losing natural balance. Dhaka city is prone to earthquake
due to underground water level depletion. For its growing population it is becoming
more risky.

Essential Measures or Steps to be Taken

1. Massive advertising is needed to make public awareness about the earthquake.

2. Building code and structural code of Building must be mandatory in the
construction of building across the country.

3. The policies for building construction of RAJUK should be amended according
to the present situation.

4. The roads should be widened across the country.

5. The machineries which are used in rescuing after the earthquake should be
handed over enlisted names by to Disaster Management Bureau and preserved
at the district commissioner’s office.

6. In the risky areas a team of voluntary workers has to be organized and trained.

7. In disaster affected areas Police and Navy should use "Dog Squad" for relief work.

8. There should be some field hospitals in affected works.

9. Atomic Energy Centre should have direct communication with meteorology

offices of Dhaka, Chittagong, Rangpur, and Sylhet.
Task : What issues are important after a major earthquake? Discuss.

Tsunami

Tsunami is the large ocean wave created from an earthquake or volcanic eruption.

Tsunami does not happen in Bangladesh. It happened only in the distant past in

2nd April 1762 in Cox's Bazar and its adjoining. In the coastal region of Arakan in

co
S Myanmar a 7.5 Richter scale earthquake was the cause of Tsunami in the Bay of

228 Geography and Environment
bengal. For the Tsunami happened in the Bay of Bengal due to the earthquake in the
sea of Andaman in 1941, the east coast of India was greatly damaged. As a result,
5000 lives were lost. On 26 December 2004, an earthquake struck off the Indonesian
island of simua-lue, triggering a tsunami that killed a huge member of people.
Disaster Management
Disaster management is such kind of practical science which includes the activities of
proper observation and prevention though disaster preparedness and disaster response
and recovery.
The main objectives of disaster management :
(a) To avoid or reduce of the amount of loss of lives, property and environment
which are damaged during the natural disaster.
(b) To distribute the relief materials and to rehabilitate the affected people as early as
possible.
(c) To work after the disaster in order to recover and go back to normaly.
Disaster Management Circle :
Disaster happening and Disaster impact
Preparedness Regpomse
Mitigation REEovely
Prevention Development
co
The main elements of disaster management are disaster prevention, disaster S

Natural Disaster of Bangladesh 229
mitigation and disaster preparedness. We have to take elaborate programme to
face the disaster. The disaster management factors are response, recovery and
development. The other management factors include rescue and development.
Prevention
The prevention activities can bring the success in the case of reduction of damages
in the natural disasters. The structural and the infrastructural facilities are available
to prevent the disasters. Different kinds of structural construction activities were
implemented, such as building embankments, construction of shelters, construction
of pucca and strong houses, river excavation etc. As structural mitigation is very
expensive, poor countries cannot afford it. The infrastructural mitigation which
means training, raising public awareness, preparedness etc is less expersive.
Mitigation
Disaster mitigation means keeping of disasters at bay and the prepOaredness to face
disaster. The disaster mitigation includes construction of pucca and strong building,
crop diversification, formulating policies for using the land properly, economic
development, shifting people to the less risky areas, institutional structure etc. The
government has been working for the construction of embankment, excavation of the
rivers, building shelter, afforestation etc. with its limited resources.
Preparedness
The main elements of disaster management are disaster prevention, disaster
mitigation and disaster preparedness. We have to take elaborate program me to
face the disaster. The disaster managerial elements are response, recovery and
development.
Response
Response is only a part of disaster management. Response is essential after the
- disaster. Response includes the activities of shifting the vulnreralbe people to safe
3
§ placesearching and recovery, estimating the amount of relief and rehabilitation.

230 Geography and Environment
Recovery

Recovery means bringing everything back to normaly through rebuilding of
environmental social and economic ambiance and infrastructure. In this case the
concerned authority needs the assistance and cooperation of public, non-
government voluntary and international organizations to meet the challenge.
Development

The development activities come after recovering the affected areas from disaster
and they should consider the geographical and environmental issues.

Coastal Disaster Management

In the coastal regions of Bangladesh, cyclone and tidal waves are the major disasters.
So, the steps taken for the disaster management are mostly applicable for the
coastal areas of Bangladesh. Usually the other areas of Bangladesh are affected by
tiver erosion, flood and earthquake. The natural disasters like cyclone, tornado,
drought and excessive rainfall are common in Bangladesh.

The major prevention of natural disaster is prior information, through weather
forecast. Bangladesh Weather Directorate providesthe weather forecast regularly.
Sparso is a public organization for space research. Sparso provides the satellite
images of clouds regularly to the metrological department for weather forecast and
signal.

Our armed forces help out in emergency situation by cooperating with the
civil administration in treatment, rescue, distributing relief goods and rehabilitation.
Bangladesh Radio and Television play an important role in providing information and
signal about disaster. In addition to that the The non-government organizations such
as Ox fam, Disaster forum, Care Bangladesh, Caritas, Prosikha, CCDB, BDPC,
[Bangladesh disaster preparation centre] etc. play significant role in disaster ,
mangement. We have to live with the natural disaster. If we can maintain the disaster S

Natural Disaster of Bangladesh 231
management and preparedness programme, we can successfully reduce the sufferings
caused by disaster, and will be able to save lives, property and environment.
However aweneness raising is also very important. We have to campaign at
personal, family, village, union, upazila and district levels for ensuring the appropriate
action of disaster management.
Exercise

Multiple choice questions
1. What is the average annual rainfall in Bangladesh?

a. 2100mm b. 2200 mm

c. 2300mm d. 2400 mm
2. The objective of disaster management is —

i. to reduce the amount of loss.

ii. to ensure the relief and rehabilitation.

iii. to perform the rescue activities properly.

Which one of the following is correct?

a. iandii b. iand iii

c. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii
Read the text below and answer questions 3 and 4:
Recently a cyclone in Shyamnagar upazila caused less of lives and properties.
Rafique and his friends arranged the distribution of dry food among the affected
people. They also arranged for the primary treatment.
3. The activities done by Rafique and his friends are called —

a. Prevention b. Response

oD
s c. Rescue d. Recovery

232 Geography and Environment
4. Reduction of loss from natural disasters is—

i. to build the cyclone shelters.

ii. to arrange training about the disaster.

iii. to increase the mass awareness.

Which one of the following is correct?

a. iandii b. iand iti

c. iiand iii d. i, it and iii

Creative questions

1. The family of Shishir lived on the bank of the river Jamuna. For river erosion they
had to take shelter in a nearby place. There are many other families who can't
get back to their normal lives being affected by the disaster.

a. What type of disaster is earthquake?

b. What do you mean by disaster management?

c. Explain the reasons of natural disaster by which Shishir's family has been
affected.

d. What types of measures should be taken to get Shishir's family back to the
normal life? Give your opinion.

2. Rupom was busy at his reading table in his vallage. Suddinly he felt a jerk and
saw a few suining around them. He also saw people running to and fro outside
his house.

a. What is hazard?
b. What do you understand by mitigation? Explain.
c. What is the reason of Rupom's unusual experience?
d. What would happen if the city of Dhaka had the same experience? Explain.
=
The End §

— MAT eS C1 QIAT
BT A CHA THA OTs Gay
Sop ARA-4 (Gre BF, 28 SET HSA) CHT SPT
EAS HS
TUS:
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh

