Hindu R
ie :
> es yee ee :
{ Send oe Ee ES vere. SK

PON Ele 7 ‘: TW we

ee oa be

2 yr wa . ge | Pa —_
Oc ey B58

- eT = foro 7 aAhy/

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a Textbook for Classes Nine-Ten from the Academic Year 2013.
Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Classes Nine-Ten
Written by
Professor Dr. Paresh Chandra Mandal
Professor Dr. Dulal Kanti Bhowmik
Bishnu Das
Dr. Dhirendra Nath Tarafder
Dr. Shishir Mallik
Shikha Das
Edited by
Professor Niranjan Adhikary
Translated by
Dr. Shishir Mallik
Sukanto Roy
NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka-1000
[All rights reserved by the publisher]
First Publication : December, 2012
Revised Edition : November, 2014
Reprint : September, 2016
Co-ordinators
Pritishkumar Sarkar
Gouranga Lal Sarkar
Cover Design
Sudarshan Bachar
Sujaul Abedeen
Illustrator
Ujjal Ghose
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
Computer Compose
Laser Scan Ltd.
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Government of Bangladesh.
Printed by:

Preface
Education is the pre-requisite for the holistic development in our national life. To cope with the
challenges of the fast changing world and to lead Bangladesh to the doorstep of development
and prosperity, a well educated and skilled population is needed. In order to build up a nation
imbued with the spirit of the Language Movement and our Liberation War, the secondary
education aims at flourishing the talents and prospects inherent in the learners. Besides, the
other aims also include expansion and consolidation of the basic knowledge and skills of the
learners acquired at the primary level in order to make them fit for entry into higher education.
The aims of secondary education further emphasise on developing these learners as skilled
and competent citizens of the country through the process of acquiring knowledge at the
backdrop of socio-economic, cultural and environmental settings.
Keeping the aims and objectives of National Education Policy 2010 ahead, the curriculum at
the secondary level has been revised. In the revised curriculum the national aims, objectives
and contemporary needs have been reflected. Along with these expected learning outcomes
have been determined based on the learner's age, merit and level of acquisition. Besides,
efforts have been made to raise, starting from the level of moral and humanistic values down
to awareness on history and tradition, the spirit of the Liberation War, passion for art-culture
and literature, patriotism, feelings for nature and equal dignity to all irrespective of religions,
caste, creed and sex. Efforts have also been made to apply science in all spheres of our life in
order to build a nation advanced in science. Attempts are also there to make the learner
capable of implementing the goals envisioned in Digital Bangladesh-2021.
In the light of the present curriculum almost all the textbooks at the secondary level have
been introduced. While introducing the textbooks, the capacity, aptitude and prior knowledge
of the learners have been taken into utmost consideration. While selecting the contexts and
their presentation special attention has been given on the expansion of the learner's creative
faculty. Adding learning outcomes at the beginning of each chapter, hints about the
achievable knowledge of the learners have been given. By adding variety of activities,
creative and other questions evaluation has also been made creative.
The textbook Hindu Religion of secondary level under National Education Policy 2010 is
named ‘Hindu Religion and Moral Education’. In every chapter of this textbook,
theoretical subjects are simply presented and religious conception of practical education and
implementations of them are discussed. As a result, by reading this book, students will
realize that theoretical knowledge of religion is not limited within the spiritual discussion
and rituals; rather it is the guideline for building moral character and good human beings in
society.
Considering the challenges and commitments of 21st century and following the revised
curriculum the textbook has been written. Recently, the rational evaluation and tryout
program has been completed to make correction revision of the textbook. I hope the
outcomes of the program will be reflected in this revised edition Any constructive suggestion
for the improvment of the textbook will be welcomed and incorporated in future editions.
We appreciate the endeavours of those who assisted very sincerely with their merit and hard
work in the process of writing, translating, editing, illustration, revision introducing sample
questions and printing of the book. We hope the book will ensure joyful reading and
achievement of expected skills from the learners.
Prof. Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh.

CONTENTS

CHAPTER ONE
CREATOR & CREATION
SECTION ONE: FORM OF CREATOR AND HIS WORSHIP
He who is the Heavenly God, is created by self. He is the origin of all power, and
nobody is superior to him. Heis the ultimate creator, and controller of this universe. He
is considered in many ways in Sanatan or Hindu religion. He is entitled with many
names like Brahama, Supreme soul, Soul, Ishwar, Vagvan etc.
a \ J)
Aye 22
We should remember and worship God with great esteem in our every work to satisfy
Him and get his blessing. In this chapter, we are going to discuss the nature of the
Creator, and His roles in maintaining discipline in His creation. This chapter also
discusses gods and goddesses as the form of God's attributes and power, the concept
and importance of praying to God and a verse or mantra ( sacred hymns) about
worshipping God.
After completing this chapter we will be able to
e explain the nature of the Creator as incorporeal Brahma, Iswar, Bhagovan,
Soul and Avatar.
© scrutinize the relationship between the Creator and His creation and His roles
in establishing regulation among His creations.
e elucidate the concept that gods and goddesses are the representations of
Ishwar or God.
e explain God’s corporeal and incorporial forms, notion of worshipping God and
its importance.
e recite a mantra or verse and explain 1ts meaning and lessons.
e set up firm belief in God and shall be motivated to pray to Him.
e practice worshipping God and recite praying mantra to Him.
Forma-1, Hindu Religion and Moral Education, Class-9-10

2 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Lesson 1 & 2: Characteristics of the Creator- Brahma, Ishwar, Bhagoban and
Avatar:
In accordance with Sanatan religion or Hinduism, the Creator has been named as
Brahma, Ishwar, Bhagoban and Avatar. These names have been ascertained observing
His characteristics.
1.1 Brahma & Ishwara (or Ishwar)
Nature of the Creator as Brahma i
The word 'Brahma' refers to the "most extensive". 'Brihattat
Brahma’ implies that there is none loftier than Him. He is the
creator of everything, everything is dwelling in him and
everything is extincted in him too. Brahma not only creates
nature and universe, but also protects them with His divine
power. Brahma is perpetual, holy, liberal, omniscient,
luminous, incorporeal, omnipresent and almighty by nature.
As Brahma is omnipresent, none can see Him. We know that
Brahma is also named Paramatma (the Supreme Soul). When
He resides in any animate object or living being as soul, Heis
called embodied soul. When soul dwells in Himself, He is
entitled as the Supreme Soul.
Brahma is formless, doesn't have any of the primordial qualities of created beings and
remainsin immobile state. Brahma or the Supreme Soul doesn't have birth or death. He
is self-born, infinite imperishable and eternal. Brahma has been titled as 'Omkar'.
Omkar, in short, isOm and its elaboration isA-U-M. This means Brahmais the creator,
protector and destroyer.
Nature of the Creator as Ishwara
When Brahma rules the universe and living beings, He is named Ishwara or | shwar.
Ishwar ais also called ‘Parameshwara' or the Supreme God. Heis the creator, protector
and destroyer of this earth. He has boundless images. To the wise, He is Brahma; toa
yogi, Heis the Supreme Soul and to a devotee, he is Bhagoban.
In a sloka written in Srimadvagvadgita, it is said about Ishwar which is as follows:
Twmadideva purusha purana-
Stwmashya vishasya param nidhanam.
Bettasi bedyancha parancha dham
Twa totong vishyamangtarup. (11/38) x
>
N

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 3
Meaning: You are the Supreme Being, You are self-born soul, You are like the greatest
shelter of the world, the only Lord. You are the lone worth-knowing and conversant.
You are the only greatest place. Hey, endless form, You are extended in the whole
universe.
This sloka of Shreemadvagavadgita easily expresses the magnitude and power of God.
By characteristic God is eternal, immense, He has no change. He isimmortal. Heis the
initial means of earth. Heis the director. He has no creator. He is autogenously created,
means He is created by his own. Heis ever, holy and supreme inviolate. Heis the main
factor of entire deeds. He is the decider of what we do. He is shapeless. However if
necessary, He can take any shape as his power is eternal. God is present everywhere.
According to Rigbeda, He is the supreme soul. He has thousands of hands, thousands
of eyes and thousands of feet. These words show God's pervasion in all places. He is
second to none. Heis like light, He is presented in all.
1.2. Form of creator: Bhagovan and Avatar
Creator’s Form as Bhagovan
According to the philosophy of Hindu religion wealth, heroism, fame, beauty,
knowledge and stoicism are called Bhaga. Who has the full form of Bhaga is called
Bhagovan. It is told in Vishnupurana that He who knows about the birth and death of
Bhutugana (the material world), existence after death, arrival to this world and who
has complete knowledge about material beings and illusions is Bhagovan. When God
is imaginated and worshipped as the lord of these six qualities, he is called Bhagovan.
(Shreemadvagavad Purana, (6/5/79). By nature Bhagoban is worthy and filled with
endless beauty. Heis witty, pleasant and also gracious. He compassionates his devotees
in different ways. A devotee can get his desire fulfilled in Bhagovan. Bhagovan comes
to a devotee taking any kind of image. He takes body like a creature in time and does
religious austerities, meditation, prayer and enjoys all kinds of joy and sorrows. Again
he delights everyone with His supernatural power by supernatural activities, or
drinking liquid fire, or holding the Gobordhana hillock in one hand or punishing the
miscreants, as well as by showing strict devotion and brings good luck to every one.
Sometimes he assumes a simple body and comes to His devotees responding to their
prayers. If necessary He bears the burden of His devotees. In a word when God
favours the creatures, Heis called Bhagovan.
Creator’s form as Avatar:
In Hindu religion Avatar means when incorporeal God appears to the earth in a life or
figurative image by his own will to perform particular purposes. All these Avatars are
respected by all and filled with unearthly power. Avatar is a Tatsama or Somaskrita
x word which means God's alighting to the earth in a life form to perform some special
% purposes.

4 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
God descends to him earth in different forms to punish the evil, save the gentle and
thus to save Dharma such as Nrisingha, Rama, Shreekrishna etc. are God's Avatars.
For constant exercise of Dharma (religious practices) all theAvatars are very important
and they all have been originated from the supreme soul or God.
It is said in Shreemadvagavada Purana that Lord Vishnu has come to the earth for
many times as Avatar to perform different purposes. Lord Vishnu descended as Avatar
for Nine timesin different era. At the last period of Kali Yuga He will incarnates as the
tenth Avatar in the form of Kalki.
Ten Avatars of Vishnu are @
1. Mathsya Rll or
2. Kurma biz 6 fe £
3. Varaha Yea M4 1 So
vt Nar SUN ir %
4. Nrisingha/Narasima i i \)
5. Vamana a. A \ dh ee
6. Parsurama a ANS | f, 5
7. Rama y ui sy (i, y/
8. Balrama ey Sm fe
9. Buddha = SS
10. Kalki SS
Kalki is the last of all Avatars. As the belief = SS ee—
of Hindu religion, he will appear at the last
Period of Kali Yuga.
Finally we can say that, creator is shapeless, and above any definable qualities. He is
God when he rules the creators and the universe. He is shapeless but if necessary he
can take figure. When God responds to the prayer of His devotees, come close to them,
plays with them, then he is called Bhagoban. Again when God alights to the world to
do good purpose in a form of creature, Heis called Avatar. Brahma, |shwar, Bhagoban
are not different. They are different appearances of the same Almighty creator or
Brahma.
oo
Ss

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 5
Lesson 3: Relation between creature and creator and creator’s role to
establish sequence in creation
We call the creator Brahma, God, Bhagoban, Supreme Lord, Soul, Supreme Soul etc.
Heisthe creator of all animate and inanimate objects of this universe. Everything of the
universe is his creation. He loves his creation, maintains them, saves them from
dangers, creates and destroys in times, and protects his creation from any kind of evil.
He helps his creation drive them in the right path. God loves them who are honest. He
shows them the path of development and always exists in them. He doesn't like
dishonest persons and punishes them but He protects the honest. He stays in his
creations. God exists in various guises inside his creatures. Thus there is inseparable
relation between the creator and creatures. As a creator, God dominates upon everthing
-no matter living or non-living things. As the creatures cannot be imagined without
creator, the creator cannot be realised without his creations.
The following texts discribe the roles of the creator in estabilising discipline among his
creations.
1. The roles of God as a guardian
Nothing is created in this universe without a creator. The Sun, the Moon, the planets -
everything in this universe has a creator. This creator is Vagaban. He is eternal and
absolute. As the creator he is guiding and saving His creations, the birth and death of
His creations are decided by Him.
He rewards His followers for their good deeds and punishes them for evil activities.
Besides, it is God’s act of discipline that prevents the planets from deorbiting. All these
are happening directly by God’s desire. God has three power-form (trinity/trimurti) for
this universe: Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva. God creates through Brahma; preserves and
protects through Vishnu; and destroys through Shiva. This shows that the Creator has
fixed roles to ensure discipline in His creation.
2. The roles of God as an almighty
The unlimited God is a central Superior power with infinite power. He has many
heads, countless eyes, and countless feet. He stays in all animals in the world.
Millions of plants and satellites are rotating in this solar system. All of them — all the
living and non-living elements are confined to this discipline. The cause and effect
theory or logical deduction shows that there is only one God who has been controlling
the universe through unbelievable discipline. Had there been many gods there could
be separate traditions or laws from each of the God and that could create confusions
eo of conflicts. Therefore, it’s obvious that God has been playing his role as the central
S controller of this universe.

6 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
3. The roles of God For restraining the mischievous

Yoda yadahi dharmasya glanirvaboti bharata

Avyutthanomdharmoshya tadatmanang srijammaham || (4/7)
This sloka from the sacred Gita indicates that when religion is neglected in this world
and irreligion increases God descends as a deity or avatar in this world. Then he
subdues the mischievous with an iron hand.
4. The roles of God as an administrator
According to Neyshastro (Book of ethics) the result of good deeds is auspicious and the
result of bad is inauspicious. Good and bad unconsciously stay in one’s heart and an
administrator is needed to direct this consciousness. God is omniscient. He makes good
hearts happy, gives punishment to the mischievous and subdues everything. It is
impossible for any vigorous power without God to direct any soul and to ditermine the
legal and illegal.
God stays in all hearts and conducts everybody. Thus God is superior to all. He’s
omniscient. He is the supreme commander, the causes of the world, as well as_ the
creator and destroyer of everything.
5. The decider of birth and death, and provider of reward
According to Vedanta philosophy all living and non-living objects are created from and
return back to the irresistible power Brahma, or God after death. Thus the Vedanta
philosophy stresses that God is responsible for the birth and death of living beings. The
concept of birth and death is adopted by God with a view to directing all living beings
through certain rules and regulations and maintaining a kind of balance in all. He has
created the heaven, and hell so that human beings are rewarded for their good and evil
deeds respectivel y.
Lesson 4: The attributes and abilites of God: Deities
God is the creator, protector and destroyer of this universe. It means that He
accomplishes three main deeds which are creation, preservatris and destruction. Heis
invisible but in need he appear in a visible form. The deities are the visible forms of
God. God reveals his attributes and abilities through different from-Brahma, Vishnu,
Shiva , Durga, Saraswati etc. They holds God's special attributes or abilities.

Le)
Ss

Hindu Religion and Moral Education i
Bs AVP
MN gO
[hp \ Wo
Ne Ps AS
en Ci as if
They all represent different power of the God. For example, Brahma is the deity of
creation, Vishnu looks after us as a guardian, Saraswati is the deity of knowledge,
Shiva is the deity of destruction, etc. We worship gods and goddesses individually or
offer tributes to them, or pray to them with a view to achieving their qualities or powers
or being blessed by them.
It is said earlier that God or Bhagoban is mainly endowed with six qualities - Majesty,
Heroism, Fame, Beauty, Knowledge and Stoicism.
The deities are not absolute God but they are endowed with different virtues of God
because they are holding one or more qualities or power of God. For this reason
different deities are being adored or worshiped through which the deities are pleased
and grant the desired things to the worshippers.
So 'Brahma' 'Vishnu' ‘Shiva’ 'Durga' and 'Kali’ etc. are the sakara (with some shape)
forms of one God. Some divine qualities and powers of several deities are described
below.
Brahma: God creates thought Brahma. He has ‘ LG2Z
created the universe and every thing of this universe. Vite: te '
Besides ‘Brahma is deity of Drama and 7? | .
architecture. He also does beneficial work. e) ji = va
Vishnu: Heis the deity of creation. Vishnu looks after Sh = AN
everything in this world and protect them. Even if gg my) AV he
any deities fall in danger, Vishnu rescues them. He NOE (
appears in the earth in different forms to control the {je
se wicked and preserve the good heart. If we remember 'Vishnu' we are relieved of
our sins, our heart becomes pure and peace comes in mind.

8 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Shiva or Maheshwara : He is the deity of destruction. He destroys to maintain
equality. Besides, he saves the deities from danger and destroys the devils in need. He
is an expert in art of heeling and dancing. He is called 'Natorajan' for his expertise in
drama and dance.
Devi Durga: Devi Durga is aform of power of God. Divine Mother 'Vahamaya' has
manifested as different deities. For example- Durga, Kali, Jagaddhatri, Kattayani, etc.
Devi Durga is the source of immense power that is related to creating the universe and
preserving it from destruction. Devi Durga is worshipped for being a great power of
this universe.
Devi Kali: Devi Kali is the source of eternal power and strength. As she destroyes the
evil and injustice, she gives us fulfill ment of desire and assurance of safety in the form
of an affectionate mother.
Lakshmi: Lakshmi is the goddess of good luck, riches, wealth, and beauty. She gives
us assets.
Saraswati: Saraswati is the goddess of knowledge, art and culture. By worshipping
Saraswati, we can achieve the power of knowledge.
Ganesha: He is the deity of prosperity and fruitfulness. Ganesha is worshiped as
‘Siddhidata 'in any auspicious work or in the sector of trade and commerce.
Kartika: Kartika is the deity of war. He is the commander of deities. He teaches us to
become aware against injustice, outrage and evil. Kartika is worshiped for gaining
ideal and beautiful child.
Shitala: She is the goddess of disease-prevention and peace. She is also called the
goddess of hygiene and cleanliness. By worshipping Shitala, we become aware of
hygiene and cleanliness. She prevents epidemics and saves the animal world from
diseases.
Lesson 5: Prayer
Concept of prayer
Bhagoban is at the root of Hindu Religion. ‘Dharamamulo hi Bhagoban,
Sarababadomoyo Hari.' God exists. Heis the one and only. He exists in the soul of all
creatures. He creates everything. So God is the main source of religion. God has
created us. He brings us up. He is almighty. Our well and woe depend on Him. So we
pray to God for our fortune. We admire Him. The process of admiring God is called
upasana or prayer. The literal meaning of prayer is staying close to God.
io}
S
N

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 9

<y. SYS | a
inde EN ee S a a
The heart of a real religious minded person always aspires for God’s benovelence or
closeness. There are many ways to get it. According to Hindu religion, getting close to
God_ isthe only way to gain great satisfaction and Salvation. In the sacred scripture of
Veda, there are many ways to have vicinity of God. Prayer is one of those ways.
Types of prayer:
There are two kinds of prayer. They are —

a. Sakara upasana or prayer with an image

b. Nirakara upasana or prayaer without any image
Prayer with an image: This type of prayer is offered for the idols of deities (Brahma,
Visnu, Saraswati, Lakshmi, Manasa etc.). Prayer with an image or form is known as
Saguna upasona or Bhaktiyoga. Here God is present with his excellence in some form.
Here he is present in the form of an idol.
Formless prayer: The word formless means having no figure or form. Actually this
kind of prayer is done through meditation. Gyanyoga is akind of formless prayer. This
prayer is not done at any image of God. Formless God remains invisible but he can be
felt and worshipped.
Some followers of Hindu religion worship God with form, and some without any form.
Regarding this, Lord Krishna has mentioned in the Srimadbhagavad Gita:

“Je jatha mang, prapadyonte tang stathaiba bhajamjmaham.
Momo bartanubartante manushya partha Sarbasho.” (4/11)

Forma-2, Hindu Religion and Moral Education, Class-9-10

10 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
It means, | become compassionate to them depending on the way they worship me.
Humans follow my path in different means. The deities are various forms of one God.
So, in Hindu religion assembly of many in one or evolution of one in many has
occured.

Methods of prayer

There are many methods of prayer. Among them Yogasadhana, Tantrasadhana are
notable. Moreover, reciting Vedic hymns, prayer recitation, offering flowers in
devotion, devotional songs, and glorification of God or deties are methods of prayer
too. Internal devotion, obedience, love to God are expressed through these apparent
activities. For prayer and worship there are many hymns or Slokasin scriptures. Prayer
toor worshipping of God is done by reciting them.

Necessities of prayer

1. To purify heart: The prayer of God purifies our heart and creates sweet feelings.

2. To enhance strength of mind: Prayer increases strength of mind, refines
emotions, elevates and controls them.

3. To create the presence of God in the hearts of devotees: Prayer
makes the opportunity for devotees to stay close to God and creates strong
perception about religious matters.

4. To develop mental state: Prayer improves our mental state, removes
crookedness of mind. Refining our mind leads to the path of the truth.
Prayer dispels appetite, thirst,egoism, or malice of mind.

5. To get devotee and God face to face: Through prayer a devotee feels his
God and observes him with his own eyes with deep love.

6. To have Moksha (pronounced as Mokkha) : Moksha means eternal
emancipation. Soul migrates from one body to another. But by means of virtue,
transmigration stops. Then soul does not go to another body. Soul
merges with the Supreme Soul. Then, there is no re-birth . It is called Moksha,
or gaining Moksha. The main pursuit of prayer is to get connected with God
and finally to have Moksha.

Lesson 6: A hymn or sloka of prayer to God, its meaning, and teaching a
hymn of prayer:
Jasmat porong naparmasti kinchid
Jasmannanio na jayohasti kinchit.
Brikkha iba stabdho dibi tishthatyek
Stenedang purnang purushen sarbam // (Shwetashwatar Upanishad 3/9)
io}
Ss
AN

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 11
Explanation: This universe is surrounded by Him. Compared to Him nobody or noth-
ing can be better or more mischievous. Nobody or nothing is larger or smaller than
Him. He is the ultimate soul and is vivacious in own magnificence like an unmovable
tree.
Learning from this prayer
What we can learn from this sloka is - nothing is better than Brahma. He creates
everything and He stays in His creation in this universe by His own competency. There
is none second to Him in this world. It implies that God is one and only one. We should
always pray in the name of God, recite mantra or sloka meant for Him everyday so that
God's greatfulness always lies in our mind.
Prayer Mantra:

Keshaba klesharana Narayana Janardana.

Govinda Paramananda Mang Samuddhar Madhava |/
Meaning: Hey Keshaba, hey remover of sorrows, hey Narayana, hey Janardana, hey
Govinda- Paramananda, hey Madhava please save me.
Learning from this Mantra:
Shree Krishna represents Lord Vishnu. He has many grace for the welfare of mankind
and this universe. He subdues the wicket to established justice, religion and peace. He
has many names- Keshoba, Narayana, Janardana, Govinda, Madhova etc. He is
always delightful; he is never carried away during the time of pleasure or sadness. This
iswhy heis Paramananda. Hetakes away miseries fron our life. It means-he removes
our sadness. We the human beings, consciously or unconsciously commit mistakes by
which wecommit sin. So we should pray to him for saving us by forgiving our past. We
can also learn from this mantra that human beings have to pray to God to get relief
from their sin.
Exercise

Multiple choice questions:
01. Which Avatar will come at the end of Koliyuga?

a) Kurmo b) Boraho

c) Bamon d) Kolki
02. Who arethe bodily representation of God?

co a) Muni-Rishi b) Deities
S c) Yogi-Sannasi d) Sadhok-Sadhika

12 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
03. Who is the deity to prevent diseases?
a) Lakshmi b) Durga
c) Kali d) Shitala
04. Supreme soul (Poromatma) never dies, because supreme soul is-
1) everlasting
ii) imperisible, eternal.
iii) is not born from any source.
Which one is correct?
a) i, ii b) i, iii
C) il, iii d) i, ii, tit
Read the passage given below and answer questions no 5 and 6.
Mrs. Sumita remains absorbed in meditation every day in the morning and in the
evening leaving the hope of result of her work. This is how she prays to God. She does
this for salvation.
05. Which kind of worship does Mrs. Sumita do?
a) Sakara or corporeal b) Nirakara or incorporeal
c) Lustful d) Assembled
06. For praying everyday Mrs. Sumita’s
i) mind will be fresh and innocent.
ii) strengths of mind will increase.
iii) desire to get the close to the God will come true.
Which one is correct?
a) b) iti
c) li, ili d) i, ii, iii,
Creative Question:
A conversation between Shuvro and his mother:
Shuvro: Mom, why does night come after day and days come after night? Why
did my grandfather die? =

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 13
Mother: It is a rule of this universe. And there is a creator behind this rule.
We say him God.

Shuvro: Mom, who is God? Brahma, Shiva on Vishnu?

Mother: All these are different forms of God and they are the reflection of
God's corporeal from, which we call deities. Thisis why, we adore
different deities.

Questions:-

a) Which is the last avatar of Vishnu?
b) What do you mean by ‘prayer’?
c) Which role of God is indicated by the reply of Shuvro’s mother to Shuvoro’s
question in the given passage? Explain it according to your reading text?
d) Explain the last comment of Shurbo's mother-*’They are the reflections of
God's corporeal from"
S

CHAPTER ONE

SECTION TWO: CREATOR, CREATION AND SERVICE
The previous lesson discussed briefly the form of
Creator and the ways of His prayer. This chapter
focuses Creator, His creation and service towards ad
humanity. God has created everything. He is the ri F\ |
controller of everything. He is one and only. He has Ak AN t
no beginning, no end. He can't be seen with our plain @ i) ON
eyes. He is incorporeal. He stays in the creatures ma \) ed [ 4 iy |
soul. That's why, by serving the creature, we can |} Wal | ah
serve God. In this chapter, we will discuss precisely po gy “i M m fi
about God, who is the root cause of all creatures and sllabmeaaaiaa
the existence of God in the creatures as soul along
with a verse and a poem related to this. The chapter hy
also discusses how to serve creatures as God. ce A _ c
At the end of this chapter we will be able to = : | : 4
¢ explain Godis the root of all creation. A — met
e how God stays in all creatures as soul. NA 4 4
¢ explain the meaning and learning point of a verse “* eS

from scriptures about the existence of God in all

creatures and universe.
e explain what to learn from a lyric which is oe

related to the existence of God as the root of all ay

creatures. A
e describe the importance of serving creatures as Ao
e perceive the existence of God in all creatures and PS Voz

nature and will be motivated to serve the creature ES hy S| \\

and proteet the environment. viii )_ =

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 15
Lesson 1: GOD IS THE ROOT OF ALL CREATURES:
This universe is the combination of the deep y
blue sky, earth and nature. The moon, the sun,
planets and the stars are shining in the endless 7] WY
eternal sky. There are seas, oceans, rivers, trees, ( \ SSo—
light, air and animals in this eath that \ “ERAS ZS:
altogether make this universe. At the beginning it hls NA ,
there was no existence of this univeise. It was 2A. =n ss NF ae
all dark then. Gradually light, and water were 3 i
created, the earth was created. Eventually came ayepy = _
the vegetati on, small creatures, ani mal world, rae theme
mankind etc. one after another. God isin theroot mat metiiea os
of all creatures. The Gita says that He is the @““*S@*Me ties =
supreme soul and theonly shelter. God is in
the root of creating all creatures in this universe. Again, He lies in the animal body in
the form of soul and controls us. He is the life in life, in the living being, everlasting
nucleous of the living word or ceeation. The life which is in the body of the creature is
a part of the supreme soul. The body of the creature is immovable and dead without
soul. Heis the reason of the birth and death of all creatures. Let the matter be explained.
When God enters into the animal body in the form of soul, animal body gets
consciousness then and becomes movable and active. The number of days God stays in
the body of creature in the form of soul that is his span of life or it can be suid that the
creature lives for that period. When God leaves the body of the creature, it comes to an
end through death. That's why it is said that only God is the cause of our birth and
death. He is the controller of our thought, sensibility and all endeavors.
God has created the earth and nature which is filled with endless beauty and wealth.
There shines varities of flowers, and fruits in this nature. The beauty of nature is the
beauty of God. God is also the root of creating such beauty.
Lésson 2: GOD AS THE SOUL
God or Creator is the almighty. Hindus call the Him Brahma, Ishwara and Vagobana.
God is Brahma to the sage, Supreme Soul to the ascetic and Vagbana to the devotees.
God stays in the creature in the form of soul. When the Supreme Soul/God stays in the
creature, he bears the form of animal soul. Soul is everlasting and incorporeal. Soul has
no birth and death. One Supreme Soul stays in the body of many creature in the form
of soul. Animal body has destruction but soul has no destruction because living soul is
apart of the Supreme Soul. There exist all qualities of the Supreme Soul in the living
soul. That's why the Soul of the creature is birthless, deathless, and eternal. Vagoban
S Shree Krishna has said in Srimadvagabad Gita that ‘Soul has no birth and it does not
die.'

16 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Soul exists forever. It is free from birth and death. It is constant, perpetual and etcrnal.
When the body loses its existence. Soul does not get destroyed (Gita- 2/20).
It is written in the Shreemadbhagobad Gita -
“Basangsi jirnani jotha bihay
Nobani grihnati noroh poroni,
Totha shorirani bihay jirna nonnani
songjati nobani dehi.” (Gita 2/22)
That means, as man leaves old clothes and wears new clothes, soul also leaves old body
and enters into a new body. This alteration of Soul’s abode is called birth and death.
Thereis a close tie between body and soul. Soul's expedition starts with the body where
it takes shelter. Again, having soul, body is gets reffeshened. Without body soul is
inactive and without soul body is inert. As there is no soul in inert substance, it is
motionless, lifeless and inactive. Soul is free from birth and death. It is known from the
statements of Sree Krishna in the Gita- soul is devoid of birth and death, it is eternal
and ever fresh though it is old.
Lesson: 3 : A spiritual mantra (sloka) regarding God’s staying as Soul in life
and Poet Rajanikanta Sen’s lyric poem about God’s presence:
It is said in the Shreemadbhagobad Gita -
“Ahamatma gurakesh sorbobhutashoysthito:
Ahamadischo modhoncho bhutanomonto ebo cho.” (10/20)

Explanation: Hey Arjuna! | am the soul situated at everyone's heart and | stay at the
beginning -middle-end of all spirit.
Educative Value: Here ‘beginning’ means the origin of living world, ‘middle
indicates the maintenance of life and ‘end’ refers to the death of life. God is residing in
life in the form of soul. Realizing these words, we should believe in God and should
love and take care of creatures as a part of God. We can learn a precept through the
mentioned mantra (sloka):

Acho anala oniley cario navonile

Bhudhar salile gahone

Acho bitopo lotay jalader gayey

Shoshi tarokay tapone
Explanation: Thisis apart of Rajanikanta Sen's lyric poem. It is about God's presence
at the root of everything. God resides in His creation and beauty. In this lyric's part,
Rajanikanta Sen has expressed that universal spirit and formless God is in fire, wind
and everlasting blue sky. This means -the power of burning belongs to God. Wind is
also God's creation. God's power isin the root of its motion. God also resides as blue S
beauty in the sky over our head. In the same way, God's existence canbe foundinthe ©

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 17
solidity, height and silence of earth supporting mountains. God exists in the deep down
of water. God exists in creepers, in the moon, in the sun and in the clouds too. They all
are His creation. He exists in His creation. Rajanikanta Sen's expression in this poem is
that the existence of God is at the root of everything. He created His creatures with His
majesty and beauty. Everything is pretty because of God's beauty. Everything is
powerful with His power.
Lesson 5 : Serving Life in the Sense of God
In general words, ‘service’ means nursing. For example, service towards guests,
service towards living beings, and service towards God etc. The benevolent work
which is done by the help of body and soul for the satisfaction of others is called
service. Service towards living being means the nursing, preserving and multiplying
of life. Besides with intellect, giving advice, showing sympathy and standing beside
are also some ways of service. Why shall we serve life? We know, God exists in life as
embodied soul. So serving any living being is serving God.
Service toward living being is considered as an important part of Hindu Religion.
‘Jatro Jiba: Tatro Shiva’ It means - where there is life, there is Shiva. Here Shiva
indicates God.
Swami Vivekananda said,

“Where are you seeking for God leaving different forms in front?

The man, who loves living beings, serves God.”
The significance of this is that God exists in front of
us in different forms especially in life-forms. So there
is no need of seeking for God. The man, who loves ; (A, b fli sl
life, serves God by serving life. For that, in Hindu T iii al i Ms: Ati |
religion life is said to be served in the sense of God I | | | ) 1" ‘il Hill
or Brahma because serving life means serving God. —/ ' <a Vy, q Ns
So, serving life in the sense of God is one of the ~/ J Sy ES 5
characteristics and moral side of Hindu Religion. In Ly rile
Hindu Religion, tree is a life. God exists in tree as 5 el Wit =
soul. That is why, offering service toward a tree tig Sig
and taking care of it is given more importance in Hindu Religion from the remote past.
When we finish eating, we leave a certain portion of our food. This is done for other
animals. This is also a kind of serving others.
There are many service centers and welfare trust established among the believers of
Hindi religion to serve people. They are offering service in different ways.
God exists in all living beings as prana (life). So, we will serve all living beings
without any discrimination.
Forma-3, Hindu Religion and Moral Education, Class-9-10

18 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Exercise
Multiple choices:
01. “Atma is unborn and undead, inspite of being old it is ever new ”—who told?
a) Shree Chitannya Dev b) Shree Bijoy Krishna
c) Shree Krishna d) Shree Ramakrishna
02. Which name is common for God to the devotees?
a) Brahma b) Vishnu
c) God d) Paramatma
03. The main reason to love living beings is -
i) Where is Jib (creatures) there is Shiva _1i) God is satisfied
iii) it brings worldly benefit
Which question is right?
a) iand il b) i, iii
C) ii, iti d) i, ii, and iii
Read the passage and answer the question number 4 and 5.
Everyday Mr. Atindro gives some rice to his pet dog in the lunch. As a result,
it becomes his fan.
4. In the behavior of Mr. Atindro, which feature of Hindui religion is represented ?
a) Love to animals b) Welfare
c) Irresponsibility d) Giving food
5. It is possible for, Mr. Atindro to love God, because he belives in God.
i) God isthe root of all creations ii) God is the controller of the universe
iii) God lives inside living things as atma or soul
Which question is right?
a) iand ii b) i and iii
c) ii and iii d) i, ii, and iti
5

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 19
Creative question:

Maumita's grandmother died when her sister was seven days old. After losing her

favorite grandmother, she became alone. She shared her sorrows to her mother and

her mother made her understand about the teachings of soul in living being from

Hindu religious books. After realization, Moumita bows her head towards God

with deep respect.

a. What is originated from Brahma?

b. Why is God called the ancient power?

c. In the above passage Moumita’s mother explained the teachings of religion
from Sacred Scripture’s. What book was that? Explain it from your own
understanding.

d. Describe the realization of Moumita from your studied subject.

=
S

SECOND CHAPTER
FAITH, ORIGIN AND MANIFESTATION OF HINDUISM
SECTION ONE: FAITH IN HINDUISM
Hinduism is a combination of deep belief and scriptural rites. Among beliefs, belief in
God is unique belief, God is Almighty, knows all, present everywhere, indifferent and
supreme spirit, He has no shape but he forms a shape whenever it is needed. For exam-
ples: incarnations of God.
li Ss SY 0 Wea £3 LF, | Le
/ an IY wr) SZ

To show respect to God, puja is arranged. It is known that when God exposes any of
His quality or power it is called deities. But all the deities and incarnations are
expressive of the Supreme Lord's power. Through worshipping the deities, the  dev-
otees get grace from God. Because the arrival of the deities are the exhibition of God's
power and as incarnations God Himself comes down to earth, this is why all the incar-
nations and deities are the shapes of Brahma or God.
To make one's life successful, Hinduism talks about four stages of life. These are
Brhmacharja, Garhasthaya, Banaprasthya and Sannyasha, Karmayoga, Gyanayoga and
Bhaktiyoga are the ways of austerities Man can get salvation by practicing one of
these; Hindu people can make their life successful by Knowing and practicing the
stages.
In this passage monotheism, incarnation, yoga and work, knowledge and Bhakti
(devotion) are discussed as belief of Hinduism.
After completing this chapter we will be able to

e Explain the concept of monotheism as unique belief.

e Explain the concept of incarnation.

e Differentiate incarnation, deities etc. which are the forms of Brahma or God,

Hinduism is mainly monotheism which can be explained.
e Explain the four stages of life (Brahmacharja, Garhasthya, Banaprasthya %
and Sannyasha). ES

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 21
e Explain the concept of yoga.
e Explain work, knowledge and bhakti in yoga’s conception.
e Realise the sense of religion and be encouraged of behaving religiously.
Lesson 1 : Monotheism:-
Hinduism occasion and modes have concept of monotheism as well as adoration of
different deities and incarnation .Hinduism also shows us how to pray to deities. By
observing the circumstances apparently it could be seemed to do the Hindu people
believe monotheism or not. Sacred scriptures of Hinduism have the answer.
- ne els
=~ Ne,
(KS 2
Fpl} YY Sas | F OA . ¥ }
z eau) ( ult ee Wels =, TAS win —
3 ANZ id Fg per Cal ge eo
Wve WZ “EE > —e5 eM Zz we eal
PANOANE Zaid SE Cer ~<a ie Ue
mS t i A 0102 A
In Veda and Upanishad it is stated that God is only one. Heis not more than one. This
belief in one God is called monothism. one of the specific side of Hinduisn is the
adoration of deities. But after all the deities are the expressions of God's power.
In Rigveda, Indra, Agni, Bayu, Usha etc. deities are adored. Although they bear
different kinds of power, all these are centered to God. After realizing these, monks
have stated in Rigveda that the truth is one, the supremacy is expressed in different
ways.
So, truth is one, scholars describe it in different ways. Brahmmo is sole and unique.
se There is none but Ishwar in this Universe. There is a creator to preserve and to give
shelter to universe.

22 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
So, Avatar and deities are expressed by supreme Ishwar with His different Virtue and
power. Here is a fact whatever the devotees acquire success though worship is a figure
out of Inhalers blending. There are a combination sprit of Brama and washing of
deicing in Tagove Sree Ram Krishna multi deviational devotion. Figured Kali is as
same as unfigured Bramna. Who is Kali, is Bramma.

We can see, though many deities are worshiped in Hindus religion, basically Suprime
sole Ishwar is worshiped through these religious activities. So, Avatar and deities are
the same as Ishwara is sole and unique. The belief is said "Absorbed" So, Absorbed is
a belief of Hindu Religion and Hindus are the follower of "Absorbed"

Lesson- 2 & 3 Avatarbad :-

One of the features of Hindu religion is the belief of Avatarbad. Avatar means to
descend from up to bottom or arrival. Creator suggests practicing religion to protect
His creations. Religion has a great quality. One who serves religion, religion serves
him, "Dharmo Rakhati Rakhitto".

But every now and then the negligence on religion is observed in human society. The
pious are worst sufferer of it. The injustice and offence of miscreants make life pollut-
ed. Then Bhagaban Himself comes in the world in the from of human being to protect
His creations. This is called Avatar. And the philosophical thought on Avatar is familiar
with Avatarbad. The objectives of Avatar are to kill the miscreants, remove the suffer-
ings of saints and followers and reestablish the Religion. ThisAvatarbadis originated
in Pouranik era (Ancient Age). Most powerful Creator comes out in this earth by the
shape of creatures. Does this arrival of Supreme |shwar mark any — misperception on
Him? Obviously I shwar is an existence of consciousness. Heis like a cognizant. He can
stay both boundless and bound. So, though Avatar comes holding the figure of bound,
spiritual power remains in Him. Because Bramha is one and being figured is a loving
play of Him.

There are three kinds of Avatar. Such as Gunavatar, Ex

Lilavatar, Abeshavatar. Supreme Ishwar Bramma, \ a /
Vishnu, Maheshwar these three deities come out to i? a
generate, operate and destroy. They are the Gunavatar re

of Supreme Ishwar and He comes out as Mashwa. See : i
Kurma, Boraha in this world and their activities are hy! RR vi
called Lilavatar. Shree Chaitanna and Shree Rama a i i Hi f P
Krishna are in the knowledge power of supreme SS tod) fo Cv)
Ishwar. These great saints are Aboshvatar. Ten avatar (7 7s | Ai

are described in Shree Vishnu. They are Mashaw, f Gg ~ BY Hf

Kurma , Barahaw, Nrishingha, Baman, Porusuram, yy P| GF S| 30
Ram (Shree Ram Chandra) Boloram, Bhuddo and 7/7 ‘ ES

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 23
Kalki. It is known from the story of Pouranic (ancient) ,Veda was saved by Bhagaban
Vishnu when it was drown into sea. Then Bhagaban as Kurma saved the universe
holding it in His back. When it was flooded. Bhagaban as Boraha held the universe
with His teeth when it was flooded again. He killed oppressor.
Hironnakoshipur as mammoth figured and saved His devotee Proholad. Bhagaban
destroyed the pride of Raja Boli as Bamon figured. Being mistreated by Khatrio
(secondary cast of Hindusm) , Bhagaban makes the universe Kshatrio less 21 times as
Porusuram figured. Shree Ram Chandra avatar killed the oppressor Raja Ravana, The
plough holder Boloram makes the universe ever peaceful through contraction. At the
same time, He removed the injustice also. In Buddha figured He inspired all on
non-violence, equality, friendship and respect. At the end of koli yoga when
non-religion and false-hood will be spread all over the world, Shree Vishnu will come
out as Kalki avatar to restore religion and truth. It is quite incredible to count avatars. It
is said in Srimadvagvad Purana, Avatars are innumerable. Ten Avatars are told here
predominantly. Bhagoban Shree Krishna is out of these ten Avatars. He is Bhagaban
Himself. So, He is considered a great Supreme avatar, His power has been spread out
through these ten avatars. In the epic "Gitgobinda" by the poet Joydeb said in the
Krishna proshosti-
You recollected the Veda, . ff a \*
Hold the weight of the universe he , A. oe | f
rA\S py
the then kept with you ten head, W6k Se c
freed it from the injustice or Daitta | aa * ; v j
destroyed the pride or Boli ee a
save the world from the oppressive Kshatria ® 4
, Mj
conjured the unconquered ten handed | /
Beautification of the world through tightening \S
provided love in open heart
you will in ten figured Krishna, “I offer my salute to you”. reo i)
So fish, turtle, Baman etc are portion of Bhagoban 's avatar. Shree Krishnais Bhagoban
'sintegral avatar. Bhagoban is appeared by Himself in this world in the form of Shree
Krishna. That's why in Srimadvagabat Gita there is a line, "Krishnastha Bhagoban
Swayang "- Shree Krishna is God Himself.
Lo}
S
N

24 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
The full appearance of God is out of human imagination. But people can get some idea
from Bhagoban 's avatar. God is almighty, omniscient, He is everywhere. Through
avatar He gets a body and holds the form of vast, endless, and limitless. That's why to
the Hindus avatar is God's clear appearance. And for this Hindus shows respect and
honour to avatar as it bears Vagabat-strength.
So, it is seen, different avatars and deities are appearance of the same Brammha or God.
That's why we can say, Hinduism is mainly Monotheism.
jan CSS ASS GER S
ae] PN eee AZ GN Net Pasi a
eV, BA q AE yi) Wiig VAS \\ Sco
ute _ne A LL yw
Wee Fe ia (ley (Cla we
_ HE We € +
Lesson 4 & 5: Four Phases of life:-
Hinduism has two aspects, worldly and spiritual. There is an aim of spiritual improve-
ment through worldly life. In purpose of giving definition of religion it is said in the
scripture that from which we can get worldly development and spiritual development
is called religion. So it is understood from this, the saints of Hinduism were conscious
to make human life developed and successful .
Normally, human age is considered 100 years. This 100 years life was divided in 4
phases. Every division's avarage time is 25 years. First 25 years is called
Brammhacharya Ashrama. Second 25 years is called Garhasthya Ashrama. Third 25
years is called Banprasthya Ashrama and last 25 years is called Sannyash Ashrama. S
N

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 25
1. Brammhacharya Ashrama:
In every Ashrama there are definite duties and responsibilities. A man after 5 years he
has to go to preceptor's home to start Brammhacharya life. He has to get education from
the preceptor, has to study under preceptor. This is Brahmacharya Ashrama. In this
Ashrama disciple has to study many scripture, has to lead a self-restrained, industrious
and active life by the direction of his preceptor. Brahmacharya Ashrama is the
foundation of the four Ashrams. If this foundation is strong, the spiritual aspect of life
automatically arises. In Hinduism, BrahmacharyaA shrama is given the highest priority
and without it, human life is incomplete and vain. Brahmacharya Ashrama designates
the conservation of sexual energy before starting marital life.
After finishing education he returns his home by the order of preceptor and enters
Garhasthya life.
2. Garhasthya Ashrama: wy)
In Garhasthya Ashrama, it is a part of religion to be | | Pr | |
parents. Having children through marriage and {if Il hy ean ea\ |
aking care oO em in tam. y iie, live types 0 | Hi Peli) iG Wb | |
Yaggya have to be practiced. These are: | i! : \ cil) Vee |
Pitriyaggya, Deboyaggya, Vutoyaggya, Nriyaggya \|||||\}f WARE Wy hu
and Rishiyaggya. People come in this world | / AS | | |
through their parents. Under the care of parents ||| (C : ag =(0)) =
they grow up. Showing respect, devotion towards M™™4\ <= —- Sa ™
parents and taking care of them appears as duty
of children. By doing these duties, a child SS
completes Pitriyaggya. aaa
To lead life man has to accept Nature's gift. The source of these gifts is God Himself.
God's greatress is expressed through the Nature. So, Consuming this nature given
things, man represents these things towards God with thankful mind. This work is
called Deboyaggya. Taking care of many animals with birds is called Vutoyaggya.
Taking care of guests is called Nriyaggya. Technically, achieving knowledge and
morality by studying different kinds of books with Veda is called Rishiyaggya. This
knowledge has to be achieved from the saints and that's why its name is Rishiyoggya.
Manisasocial being. Hehas to collect many necessary things from the society. He gets
his necessary things such as-foods, cloths, and treatment from different types of people
in society. For the purpose of social needs man has established shrine, Mandir, schools
and hospitals etc. and by this he practices the religion of serving. Through these works
he completes his duties towards society. This is the work of Garhasthya Ashrama.
Forma-4, Hindu Religion and Moral Education, Class-9-10

26 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Leading a family life after completing Brammhacharya Ashrama is followed by
Garhasthya A shrama.
3. Banoprashto Ashrama:
The third stage is called Banoprashto Ashrama. In this stage of life, people lead alife
of relaxation. Husband and wife can live together but there should be purity and
chastity. There is a rule to go to forest during Banoprashto Ashrama but in modem
world it is not possible. However people can engage themselves in social work and
religious work during this time.
4. Sannyasha:
Sannyasaha come in the fourth stage of ashrama life. The direction of scripture is to
live the age between seventy five to one hundred. The word Sannyasha means
complete renunciation. A sannyasha lives alone coming in this ashrama. His wife will
not be with him. A sannyasha will meditate on God only leaving all worldly activities.
He will collect lunch only from society. Another two times he will collect and take a
little milk, fruist etc. He can take rest for a while in temple. His clothes will be very
ordinary. He will be absorbed in meditation of Ishwara living all the memories of
pastlife. It is known from scriptures 'Dandagrahanamatren naro Narayano Vabeton' It
means, aman turns into God or Narayana as soon as he embraces sannyasha. But the
main theme of sannyasha is the leaving of the desire of result of a work and its
consumption. In Shreemadbhagavad Gita.
Onashritoh karmofalong karjong karmo karoti jho

Sa sannyashicha jogicha na nirognirno cakriyoh (6/1).
It means, he, who discards the desire of the result of a work, is called Sannyashi, He is
yogi. Only leaving domestic activities is not Sannyasha.
According to scriptures, present erais Kali Yoga, Brahmacarya, Gahasthya, Banopro-
shto and Sannysha these four kinds of practice is not possible. At present Brahmacha-
rya and Banoproshtho ashrama are almost absent. Now, Brahmacarya is resolved into
student life. Garhas to and Sannysha is noticed. But in garhasto life sannasha is not
encouraged leaving wife, son, daughter, mother, and father. So in the era of Koli it is
better live in Gashasthya Ashrama. In this way human life become successful and
bountiful.
Lesson 6, 7, 8 & 9: Concept of Yoga
Practicing yogais a particular way to attain salvation. Generally yoga denotes to create
link. But in the spiritual field yoga is more meaningful and deeper. The union of x
embodied soul and the supreme soul is known as yoga. In Srimadbhagobad Gita, yoga &

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 27
indicates the control of senses. Self-realization is the foremost need for attaining
salvation. For self-realization, a pure and tranquil mind or mental tranquility is needed.
Karma yoga:
Salvation is the highest triumph of human life. The Rishes (saint) directed three
expedients as the way of this salvation. Karma yoga, Gayan yoga, Bhakti yoga, among
these expedient systems, a saint can get salvation by practicing anyone of these yoga's
constantly.
What is done that is called "Karma" (work). The works we do for our livelihood every
time is "Karma" (work).Karma (work) is two in type selfish work/Karma. and
unselfish work/karma. When the karma (work) is done for special desire then it is
called selfish work. So it is a work and full of desire. In this Karma (work), the man
who does the work has mastership of pride, desire, and fells that | am doing the work,
| am the performer, and | will enjoy the result. But unselfish work is different type.
Here the person who does any work without desiring any result. He thinks, heis not the
performer, the result of work is not his, and the result of unselfish work does not touch
the performer. This unselfish work is known as karma yoga in regard of yoga sadhona,
selfish work has a chair. On the other hand, salvation is possible by unselfish work. The
desired salvation is possible by turning work into yoga.
In the Vedic age, work's highest achievement is about knowing the heaven. After
enjoying the reward of piety everyone has to come from heaven to take birth on earth
again. "Kheena punne Martyalokong bishonti" (Gita)- Man has to born again on
earth when the virtue finishes. In this situation, the salvation of human life is not
possible. So the Rishes (saint) of Upanishad advised us to take Sannyasha by leaving
works. By following their speech, we can get result of our works. To enjoy the result of
work, performer has to be bound in the circle of re-birth. To rescue from this taking
redemtion is essential. This is the message of Rishes (saints).
In the Dapor era, Lord Shree Krishna explained the thoughts of Sannyasha and said
that no need to give up work for salvation. It isimpossible for creatures to give up work
quietly. Those who give up material work for desiring salvation; they have been also
practicing spiritual work. o practice self- discipline, rules, posture etc. eight part yoga.
For getting bramhagyan hearing, though, posture etc works have been continuing. So,
freedom desired Sannyasha cannot give up work totally.
Work is life. Everyone has to work for living. Man cannot get salvation by this
compulsory work. Work has to be turned into expedient or unselfish. You have to think
that, the universe is great work field of Ishwar. In this work field Ishwar 's works are
being done always. And God has appointed creatures for this work. But it is not for the
x desire. Have to do work as the appointed of God. This abandoned desirous work is
S known as Karma yoga. Add the result of the work to Ishwar.

28 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
In Srimadvagobad Gita, Lord Shree Krishna said,
“Karmanyabadhikaorste ma faleshu kadachan,
Ma karmafatheturvurma te sangohstukarmani.” (2/47)
It means, you have the right in work, not in the result; leave the addiction of result,
work is not leavcable.
The directions of karma yoga are-
1. The man who does the work has to sacrifice the result of works to Ishwar. I am
doing this feeling will not be granted.
2. Everybody of course has to complete his own work.
3. Have to do work without any desire.
4. In this work, the man who does it gets holy pleasure.
Lesson- 10 : Gayan yoga:-
Gayan yoga is one of the ways of getting Moksha (salvation). To practice Gayan yoga
one can reach the highest state. According to Religious Book, the knowledge
(| gap NT eller esp Wt Ye Pg
PO Do A)  GG | pee A LN
Wi, Ae fo) i)
Oe P| A
ml: ( A (es Le
Of Atmatatto (self) and Paramarthotatto (Supremacy) is called Gayan. The way to
realize God through the knowledge is called Gayan yoga. He realizes that in himself
and in of All the creations of world stand in one sensation. God is the existence of all
the things of the universe and they are full of sense and knowledge by that Supreme
sensation. This God is Atma (soul) or jibatma (individual soul).
The wise also realizes that, there is ajibatma (individual soul) in all creatures and that <
is called Paramatma (supreme soul). In the views of the wise, the presence of &

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 29

Paramatma (supreme soul) is captured in whole universe. But common people don't

capture this ultimate presence when illusion power removes the creature becomes

acquainted with the nature of the soul and gets knowledge of fed. In this way

intelligence grows in their mind, wishes become good, and bitterness in his behavior.

Helping his boss, pure in mind, eager to learn and Forgiveness reflects in his mind.

Knowledge shows twenty symptoms according 5 i

to the holy Shreemadvagobad Gita in the forth Les (

chapter. Knowledge understands his duty. So pe Siiatige)

his work has no platonic. In Gayan yoga LSe ioe |

chapter of Srimodvagobad Gita, Three things oot, | Wa Wo

are discussed about Karmatatya (Theory Of | EOF HK ay

work). They are work, bad work an non-work. AS *2°/ f | ;

Those are told as work which is according to SANG, gf i ~

sacred scripture. That is bad work which is’ £ Dy (ww)

being banded by sacred scripture. That is called ~~, ipl 3B,

anon-work where there is no performance like Why t Ser e

a large forest. It is said for whom who are /, ES E sg"

interested to recognize knowledge: \ Sw og a

‘Srodhabam lovotay Ganyang totpor songitendro —

Gaynang Lobdha porang shantimochirenathigochhoti. (4/39)

That means who respectful, a worshipper and selfrestraired, he can learn knowledge.

Self-Knowledge grows early in his mind and he gets deep peace.

In shortcut the results of Ganyan Yoga:

1. Knowledge is pure. All kinds of impurities remember the knowledge.

2. Sin removes from the wiser. Ignorance removes because of knowledge.

3. The wise has no duty bond. So he lives in great peace in order to acquiring

knowledge.

Lesson 11 : Bhakti yoga:-

Worshiping Ishwar with Bhakti (devotion) is called Bhakti Yoga. Bhakti has its

ultimate strength, Freedom is in Bhakti. It is a great virtue of human heart. Narodiya

Vokti Sutra says- A lot of love for Bhagaban means Bhakti. Loving felling for

Bhagaban means also Bhakti. Shandilla Sutra says about Bhakti that who remains in

Bhagabad Path (Way to Ishwar) is called Bhakti. The twelfth chapter of
so Shrimadvogobad Gita is Bhakti yoga. In beginning there rises a question in Arjun's
& mind that which are the best ways- formless, indiscriminate, and worshipping. But

30 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
worshipping formful Ishwar is easier than formless Ishwar. Those who worship by
following devotion is Bhakta. It is said that the man, who is leaves addiction, fear, and
anger and remembers Ishwar, gets the feeling of Bhagabad path. He has no sin and
fear. By devotion of a devotee gets the help of Bhagaban.
In Sreemavagabad Gita, Lord Krishna says-
Je Jotha mang propodante tanthaiba vajamaham
Momo Bortanta Monusha partha sarboshah”. (4/11)
- Hey partho (companion), the man who devotes me in that way | give the fruit by that
way. The human beings follow the blessing of mine. That means, human beings follow
any way but the entire wag end to me.
In Bhakti yoga, Bhakti means to have a lot of respect and believe. With this belief, a
Bhakta (devotee) believes that Bhagoban is only his livelihood. This felling isthe main
felling of voktimarg, that means self-surrender is the main theme of Bhakti yoga.
Exercise

Multiple choice questions:
1. What is the connection between Jib Atma (Individual soul) and Paramatma
(Supreme soul)?

a. Yoga sastra b. Yoga darsan

c. Yoga Shadana d. Yoganga
2. What do you mean by Sannyasha?

(i) Completely leaving the home (1i)Leaving work

(i) Leaving room (iv) Leaving the result of work
3. Why is Garasthya Ashrama the best in Koli era?

i) people perform their social responsibilities from here.

ii) people can only think of God from here.

iii) people lives become successful.
Read the following passage and answer the question no: 4, 5 & 6:
Gavinda Babu is a general householder. He tries to work sacrificing its result in all
sectors besides bearing children and earning money in family. It's the main motto of his
life. But sometimes he hesitates thinking that if his issues will take the duty of S
maintaining him or not. nN

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 31
4. What was the main motto of Gavinda Babu in sacrificing the result of work to [shwar?
(a) Knowledge (b) Bhakti (devotion)
(c) Moksha (salvation) (d) Karma (work)
5. To achieve the motto of Gavindha Babu has to do-
(i) selfish-work
(ii) un-selfish-work
(iii) Compulsory work.
Which is the correct answer in bellow?
(a) @ (b) Gi)
(c) @) & (ai) (d) (it) Gait)
6. What is reason behind the failure to get the desired goal of Gabinda Babu?
(a) sujectvity (b) fondness for the children
(c) anxiety for future security (d) lack of attentiveness towards God
Creative Question :
Dijendranath is a pious man. He is 75 years old. Heis observing strict continence
in spite of living in family. He remains absorbed in concentration of Ishwar in
temples sacrificing all duties of family in son's hand. In spite of these, he hasn't
achieved self-satisfaction, so he decided to renounce family for achieving the
final achievement of life.
a. What is Akishwarbad (Monotheism)?
b. What do you mean by Pattyahar (denying)?
c. In which stage of life does Digendranath stay now? Describe according to
your text.
d. “The decision of Digendranath is understandably to achieve the salvation of
life”- show the logic of you.
Lo}
S
N

CHAPATER-TWO
SECTION TWO : THE ORIGIN AND EVOLUTION OF HINDU
RELIGION

Hinduism is one of the most ancient religious tenets among popular fallacies in the
world. Its ancient name was "sanatan religion" or "sanatanism". We can't recognize
anyone to be the founder of this very religion 'sanatanism’. God Himself is in the root
of this religion. As soon as the creation of this universe, this religion, has been bring
practiced. But this rdigion might have started its footstep in the much forgotten past in
the mind of any former people. Getting the sense of religious feelings in his heart and
that of Hindu religion. Various ideas and ways are assembled here.
As the development of human a a a aN
civilization this religion has now 4 haa. Se,
more extended and amplified. ( Abn/ ~~ . w)
The outsider people like ‘Aryan’ AY ee \ Vex awe,
community religious’ trends and ORS Nee EY)
with the synthetic process of BRS xe 1 op. KZ EX
“prak-areya” is the main origin and ae —— -~e a PN
emolument of Hindusm. In the thoughts of Hinduism we can be introduced with
‘Monothism' 'Avatarism' pray and workshop duties as the attribution of God. As
considering religious scriptures 'vedas' Upanished! (Vedanta), ‘Purana! 'Gita’, "Vaghvat'
are luring extended and can notice different philosophical terms. As the perspective of
Bangladesh we can see diversion of renovation of this religion. 'Raja Ram Maahan'’.
Takur Sree Ramkrishan, Swami Vivekenanda, Prava Jogatbondhoo, Thakur Anaakul
Chandra, Baba Looknath, Swami Swarupananda, Swami Pronobananda, Horichand
Thakur, A.C. Vakti Vedanta, Swami Provupad etc. Religious priests are on the
contribution of these religious priests to rise up on the sphere to develop Hinduism in
new outlooks. About the total contribution of these holy priests this religion has been
spread in different countries.
In this content the facts of the origin and development of Hinduism has been discussed
in short and in Bangladesh the propagation, renovation and amplification and also the
importance of different religious institution has been comprehended.
After finishing this content we will be to —

1. Describe the origin and evolution of Hinduism can be briefly described.

2. Explain Hindusim or ‘sanatansim’ extension, renovation and

amplification of various religious institution and there Importance. 20
3. Evaluate the enriched Hinduism and introduce it all over the world. 5

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 33
Lesson: 1

The origin and evaluation of Hinduism: The another name of ‘Hinduism’ is
‘Sanatanism’. Now in this modem world among the current religions this 'sanatanism'
as ‘Hinduism’ is only and only ancient and new. It can be recognized ancient because
the 'Sanatanism' has carried on its past heritage.On the contrary it can be recognized
new asit is continuing its past 'Sanatan' heritage to cope with the upcoming obstacles.
We could not recognize any single person as the path finder of Hinduism. Because God
Himself isin the root of this religion. From the ancient time this theory of religion was
identified. In time long journey keeping the main theory and taking new thoughts of
religion this religion has been detailed and is being amplified. The Aryans are the
foregin community. When they first accessed in India they had there own religion and
culture By undergoing 'indus civilisation in Mohemjodara and in Horroppa civilisation
there are afew introduction and identity of this religion. With the passage of time it was
established asAryan civilization and Aryan religion. There is aslight collision between
ancient religion and Aryan civilization and as a result there happened the combination
of Aryan rituals and Sanatanism. In this way Hinduism mixing with

Aryas religion scriptures it forms a new out door. By passing through time the Aryans
started living by the banks of the river Sindhu. In its historical face aground the location
of Hinduism has turned a new style. The Aryan in ancient time on the bank of the
Sindhu were attracted to lived their livelihood. Outcomer Afgan and persian
community used to pronounce Sindhu river as Hindu river. In their pronounciation 'S'
was turned into'H' and Sindhu was being pronounced as Hindu. So, according to many
researchers the word Hindu was originated from the word Sindhu and the religion of
the people living on the bark of the Sindhu is described as Hindu religion. Sanatanism
has gradually been introduced as Hinduism. But with the advancement of time novelty
is added to the thought and sensibility of Sanatanism as the context of the gradual
development of human civilization. Blooming characteristic of this Hinduism can be
arranged in three stages- Vedic era, Ancient era and Modem era. The principles ofved
are mysterious.

Era of Vedic

Ved is the ancient scripture of Hindu Religion. There are four sections of these
scriptures:

Samahita, Brahmmhan, Arayanak and Upanishad. Ved's activities are with the sections
of Samahita and Brahmmhan. Again, Ved's part of knowledge is with Aranyak and
Upanishad.

Forma-5, Hindu Religion and Moral Education, Class-9-10

34 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
. a a
According to general knowledge the a / 3 —~
comprehensive amplification of it is not seen, /~ ware “ "
{ G 2 &
But the Aryans through their devotion f, =| /
along with their practice towards duties they ay" es -
intuited two particles. Those two things are AY x? ” es
splendour and intellect. ‘Splendour’ means ap Na Ny [pesca on
wealth, force, ralor, gary etc. different terrestrial 5 OD peel ibe
ttl a Mite G AOE
decrements. On the country, Intellect means gee Cite © tips eae
knowledge and wisdom. Again there are some different principles of under related
knowledge. Illumination of intellect, through this two sides the main theory of
Hinduism is detailed. In the description of Hinduism we could know that through,
which we could absolve mundane welfare and theological welfare blessings is called
religion. It is the base of Sanatan likely Hinduism.
The objective of the saint of Vedic era was to acquire both earthy and absolute welfare.
They were seeker of happiness and practical. it is aid in "Bajsonayo Sanghita"
“Tejohosi Tejo Moyi Dhehi Birjomoshi Birzong Moyidenil
Bolomoshi Bolong Moji Dhehi, Ojo hsfsojo Moyi Dehi
Monnuroshi Moyi Dehi, Sohhos; Soho Moyi Dehi”
Therefore, you are like vigor, give me vigor, and make me vigorous. You are like
prowess, make me porowssrous, you are like power, make me powerful. You are like
force, make me forceful. You are manyo (mutinous against guilt), make me mutinous.
You arelike patience, make me patient. Prosperity in life, love for animals and hope for
peace of world are seen in the prayer of Vedic era. By these prayers, prayers have done
to the almighty God. It is called polytheism. Here, it is noted that the form of religious
activities in Vedic era was Yogga, man's binding to family are not helpful to acquire
‘moksha’.
If the work of Yogga is performed properly, the performe acquires the desirable result
and even he gains heaven. But if virtue declines, man has to be born again leaving the
heaven. The greatest objective of a man's life is to acquire "Moksha". The knowledge
was dominant in vedic ear. Coming to the state of unpunished and philoshoping think-
ing, the vedic saints realized that to acquire moksha is the objective of life and to
acquire this, we have to take asceticism leaving our daily work. Here new realization
has come to 'Sanatan! religion. Asceticism takes the place of 'Moksha' helpful religious
thinking. In this state, the guide to become free, many Upanishads arewritten. Still now
more than 200 Upanishads are written. Kousistoki, chandoggo, Eash, ken cott etc.12 &

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 35
Upanishads are called main Upanishads. Among these, there are mutual disagreements.
To make accessible the path of gaining Brahma. Morshi Bad rayon Bedbash tried to
make harmony in his Brahma sutra" book. It is called Veda philosophy. Here, it is
noted, the monotheism special monotheism, vedobad, avdobad, vedavedbad etc. about
brahmasutra rises and hindu philosophy rich era. In Vedic eras relation thinking,
desirable work are not helpful to acquire moksha. So, the Brahma thinking of Veda has
made a great change in the thinking of Hindu religion. Thus two parts of Hindu religion
become dominant- Karma Margo and gyan Margo.
Lesson 2:- Smritishastro or Religion Scripture.
The lesson of Veda's work and knowledge by adding these two opiruons, Sritishastro is
created. Here it is known that, to acquire ' moksha, work and knowledge is necessary.
It is known from the "Ashram division" of Hindu religion that, 1st 25 years education
and patience are teacher in the 'Brshmacharze Ashram" Next 25 years, religion related
many deeds serve manner are asses in 'Garhosto Ashram’. The constriction pursuit staff
and leaving work in sonnas Ashram’ absorbed in Brahma thinking. Here Karmajog is
found in 1st two 'Ashrams' and 'Gayanjog' is found in last two Ashram. In smritisastro,
the rules and regulations of Hindu society are added.
Thus earthy and absolute thinking are developed in Hindu religion.
Legendary era:
In legendary era, the domination of devotion is seen in the thinking of Hindu religion.
The world of devotion is noted in Veda and Upanishad. It has pained a special feature.
And because of the domination of devotion, there is a change occurred. By resorting
devoting and to come absolutely theory, different religious community started to
expose that Deba's are many and so among them about the place of Brahma.different
devotees and different deva-devis. There is seen a disagreement. Thus Baisnob, shakto
etc. communities are risen. and different puran and upopuran are created about the
avatar and their contribution. Bisnu puran, Shiva Puran, Kurma puran, Motsho puran,
Lingo puran, Vagvad puran and some more upo puran are also written. Bishnu or Shree
Krishana is worshipped as God Again, like the Buisnob view, another dominant
religion view is Shaibo view, In their view. Shivais the orator of 'Agamshastro’.

=

&

36 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Le SS
gg WS.
4 » Sp
(2 N aos}
Ss BOS WAS oo
Cerca
|) OS x ee be i
‘6| il wt eine Va a) 4 Baw Sy
Again, everywhere in this world, there is exposure of power. When a Brahma Badtu is
thought as active, the thinking of power has come, because the power is exposed is
work. Power and powerful are as like as fire and this burning power. Without burning
power, fire cannot be imagined. Similarly, without power, powerful has no work power.
So, power should also be worshiped.
Here thus Baisnob, Shaibo, Shakto communities are noted. Every of them confessed
God, the proat of world and the nobility of devotion from Vedic Karma bad, laundry
religion different can be seen. Its is known that Bisnu, Rudro, are debis of power all of
them are exposure and development of one "Ekong sod bipra bohudha bodonti" the
noted persons called one Brtahna in different name and views.
Devotion has tried a special change is sanatana as religious behavior. In this regard we
can remind about the theme of Srimadbhagobad Gita. There is a special call for Ishwar
in the way of devotion. This blood is acombination or Darma, Ghan, Vogti. Here com-
bination of sensibility is descrived of Hinduism by the genarous call of Lord Shree
Krisna.
In Gita, we see devotional theme in different stages. Here the call of Bhagaban is that
-"Always reminds me and be attentive to me” Worship me, leave all works in me and
get shelter in me etc.We can get the advice of devotional Lord. The sequences of Bhakti
had developed in Srimadbhatgita.
oo
Ss

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 37

Lesson 3:- Era of modern reformation of Religion

In the nineteenth century, a special change is VN

noticed in thinking of Hindu religion. People fond ff = \

of science have started thinking about adoring and in & (i

thinking of Hindu religion. They think to change LY "

some social rules and regulations which have no |

idea in religion. “Juktihinbincharana dharmahani |

Projaayata”- Among the religious reformer the j |

name of Raja Rammohan Roy is remembered specially. 2 Uy L

Raja Rammohan Roy saw that the Hindus became XX l 4 LP

narrow minded by adoring different idols. Hindus Mw So,

are becoming forgetful that all the idols are the ~ = a ae <=

reflection of Brahmo. At that time, he presented his one God theory. In this way, he told

the Hindus to adore one Barhma. He built 'Brahma-society’. He told to worship only the

Brahma. Hindus are Monotheist.

Though this change gets reputation in wise-persons but general people cannot leave

their bereave on adoring. Their emotions are strengthend by the adoring of Shree

Ramakrishna and his win of adoring of formed mother. Tagore Ramkrisna gives an

advice with a culmination of Monotheist and Polytheist is that, "Joto mat, toto path"

(So many faiths so many paths)" Jottro jib, Totre shiba" etc.

In 1886, the Ramkrisna Math was founded for preaching the speech of Thakur

Ramakrishna. Then, in 1897, Ramkrisna Mission was founded by Swami Vivekananda.

These two organizations Ramakrishna Math and Ramakrishna Mission jointly brought

about a revolution. The speech of Swami Vivekananda is that, " Bibad Noy, Sahayata,

Binas Noy, parash-porer vab grohon, Mottobirod Noy, Shomonnoy and shanti." This

idea is not only for the Hindu religion in Bangladesh but also for the universal

brotherhood equally.

In 1812, Shree Shree Horichand Tagour appeared and delivered his speech to the

people of all religion and colour to intrrrelate with Horiram Only- Matua religion is

originated from his religious believe. The main idea of this religion is to interrelate with

‘Horinam' leaving all religion and colour. 'Horinam' was able to create bless, peace and

welfare.

Here it is notable that Sree Chaitannya Mahapravu's prembhakti is able to contribute

specially for developing Hinduism. To promote revolution Chaitannya M ahaprovu was
co able to reduce the argument between different worshippers and the customs of colour
& distinction. By giving fulfilled love of Bhakti we can get param vaghaban. Brahman,

38 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Abrahman, female and male all has same right in religious behaviour. By following the
prembhakti of Chaitannya Mahapravu, Jogodbandhoo Sundar appeared people of all
religions with the messege that and colour are interrelate with Horinam only.
In 1866, Sril.A.C. Bhaktibedanta Swami Pravupadh founded (ISKON) for spreading
the prembhakti religion created by Shree Chaitannya. He is a patronizer of Bhaishnab
religion. He published the English version of Srimadbhagvatgita,

ee NS VS SS ee

= spe if 4 \

SS.

Srimadbhagvat,Shreechaitannya Charitamrita etc are religious books. The renunciation
follower Prabhupad was able to dispel! different types of evil works from social life. He
brought salvation to the creatures.
Thakur Anukul Chandra was born in 1888 in the village named Himayetpur in Pabna.
He established a religious organization named. Sathsangha. The idle of sathsangha is
that religion is not a miracle matter but science related lifestyle. Love is precious by
which peace can be brought. The five moral rules of Shatshanga are Jajon, Jazan,
Eastobrithi Sashatayani and Sadachar. And Education, Agriculture, Art and Good
marriage are being cultured as the main pillars of this organization. Thus the ideal of
the Shatshanga is to build life by Uniting religion and science. His quotes, poems,
prayer, sing and religions songs have earned special fame. Sathsangha wants ideal man,
ideal home, and ideal preacher. In his eyes, the union of different religions is being
praised.
In every part of spreading Hindu religion, the new form of practising religion has been
exposed. In this matter, the contribution of Akhandamandali is memorable. Their
organization is named asAyacakaAshram' Swami Sharupanada Param Hanso was born
in 1893 in the town Chandpur in Bangladesh who is the establisher of this Ashrama. sx
Special properties are noticed in the name of Azachok Ashrama. The ideal of this S

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 39
organization is not to claim money from any person or institution. The main purpose of
this organization is to work for the betterment of the society being self- reliant. The
special properties of Azachok Ashrama is to build character in collected prayer
irrespective of religion or cast, society prejudice, Bhramhacharza, self-relation and be
appointed to the good of the world. The building up of character movement was started
on the 1st January in 1914 to make true the ideal of Swami Sarupananda. Its main
prayer, "I will be a good man and help other to be good. The building up of character
movement of ‘1st January has been praised by the wise men with the help of world
religion and cultural Faculty of Dhaka University. Many books, songs of Swami
Sarupananda are being capable of contributing to the prosperity of the society.
We learn from the life idealism of Swami Sarupanando that we should love all equally.
His propitious life thinking was good for all.
The ideal of nursing of Swami Pranabananda (1896-1941) is driving Hindu society in
the path of welfare. In 1921 he nursed the famine hazarded people. He used to tell to
establish unity in the society by erasing unsociability. He established a Sebashrama
named 'Bharat Sebashrama Sango’ to nurse the people.
Baba Laknath Bhrawmachari had come forward to common people preaches education
or service even after getting siddi in sadhana. He nursed people by establishing
Ashrama in Bardi in present Narayangarj. His moral ideal was honesty, devotion,
self-discipline, equity and nursing. He didn't play a role for spiritual guide but
performed a role of a teacher. Those who have mixed with him have considered him to
be a spiritual guide. Laknath temple has been established in different places abroad
including Bangladesh and India. The governing committee of Laknath templein Bardi,
the Laknath Nursing committee in Swamibagh etc. is serving people surrounding Baba
Laknath. Like this organization, many religious institutions are playing a strong rolein
preaching and spreading Hindu religion. Different sayings and paths are found in
religious thoughts of Hindu religion. But a great link is noticed in the realm of this
variety. Though Hindu religion is prejudiced supporter it is preserving sanaton
thoughts. The main pillar of Hindu religion is to get greater welfare in spiritual life.
With practical prosperity in human life. It is bearing unique thoughts in the realm of
expressing variety of thoughts era. Great hinduism prides "in realizing the unity "in the
variety of hindu religion.
Exercise

Multiple choice questions:
1) How many stages are there in revolution of Hinduism?

co (a) One (b) Two

Ss (c) Three (d) Four

40 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
2) Who contributes Shree Shree Pravu Jagodbondu to take birth improving the
spirit of Hinduism through following their devotion of love?
(a) Thakur Anukul Chandra (b) Dr. Mahanambrata Bhramchari
(c) Shree Chaitanna Mahapravu (d) Shree Shree Harichad Thakur
3) What do you mean by Smritisatra?
i) Gradual development worldly and spiritual thinking
ii) Combination of knowledge, devotion and rajyoga
iii) Built the relation between karma (work) and knowledge
Which one is correct?
(a)i (b) 1
(c) iii (d)i & iii
Read the following passage and answer the questions number 3 & 4;
Nripendranath Mukarjee is a generous minded man. He arranges a Ostoprohor nam
yagga on the death anniversary of his father. There he invites some bless people
irrespective class and section. Everybody enjoys in that program.
4) Which of the great saint’s idealism is expressed in the character of Nripendranath?
(a) Shree Shree Swami Sarupananda (b) Thakur Anukul Chandra
(c) Shree Shree Harichad Thakur (d) Shree Chaitannadeb
5) What is expressed from the greatest saints?
(a) Vaktibad (b) Matuabad
(c) Ajachok Ashrama (d) Sat-sangha
Creative question:
Sankar has completed his university education but he is frustrated because of being
unable to manage a job. At this crucial moment one of his friends named Durjoy took
him to an Ashrama. In this Ashrama subscription or donation is not taken from
anybody. They manage their own monetary affairs. Being inspired by the teaching of
this Ashrama, Sankar has devoted himself to social welfare work.
(a) What do you mean by Avatarbad?
(b) What do mean by monotheism?
(c) By who is Sankar motivated? co
(d) Evaluate the importance of teaching of self-reliance in our family and social life. Ss

CHAPTER THREE
RELIGIOUS CUSTOMS AND CEREMONIES
The customs and ceremonies which make our life
nice and successful, are Religious customs. There are
also social customs. There are directions of propitious ( f SS)

Wk air ¥ iy
work in these customs. On the other hand there are Mp i ih | | Vi t 4 :
directions of worship and must maintainable different i os why jit K/
ceremonies. Really religious customs and religious iN hs NT, mW lh.
ceremonies are woven in the same niddle. Religious + -o eee

. PSE

ceremony is not possible without rituals. On the other ( oe LG, ov"
hand to celebrate religious ceremony, religious ZX pa os
customs is a must duty. a
Sangkranti festival, house entering, Jamai sashthi,
rakhi bandhon, bhai phota, dewali, hatekhari, novanna mee
etc religious customs besides doljatra, rathjatra, num- FE ad “tS i =
yagga etc religious festivals are also our culture. . Les | |
At the end of this chapter we- eee 7 =

. Dy lhe fale

e Will be able to explain religious ceremony and .— i Wea Ay i
religious customs this two concepts aw 4° Ly aca

e Will be able to explain the main religious =! fi “t alt a
customs . =e \ Ay = :

e Will be able to explain the religious between ne
religious ceremony, religious customs and
Worshipping customs.

e Will be able to analyse the importance of oo
religious customs in social and family life . i) 1\ f

ae. p\

* Will be able to describe doljatra, Rathjatra, num- jee
yaggya as religious ceremony and, and BeacessG) |)
analyse the influence of these . 4 tal ‘ ein Wf 4

e Will be able to analyse the influence of religious eo f j Were}
customs in family and religious life . 2 a I) Ne )

¢ Will be able to explain the importance of visiting ~ pe rl
the Holy stream. SS

Forma-6, Hindu Religion and Moral Education, Class-9-10

42 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Lesson 1 : Ritual and Religious Festivals
The Hindus observe various festivals all the year round. It is said, there are thirteen
festivals twelve months. Some of these are religious festivals. And some are general
customs. Actually the endevour is for keeping life bountiful, happy and peaceful
perpetually. The behaviors and activities which make our life beautiful and bountiful
are recognized as rituals. These are called general practice (Lokacar) also. But
medications of wel-fare activities exist in it. Again in scripture there is the indication of
various festivals including Puja. These are Religious festivals. There is a close tie
between rituals and religious festivals. Religious festival is needed for religious
festivals. Here some rituals and religious festivals are described including Samkranti,
Barshabaran, Doljatra, Rothjatra.
Relation between religious behavior, religious festivals and mode of prayer:
From birth to death, the festival and behavior related to religion are called religious
behaviors. On the other hand to praise is religious festival. Religious festival religious
behaviors are permitted by religious rules and regulation. A religious festival is
observed in religious behavior. Praying is a kind of religious festival .
Lesson 2 & 3 : Several Religious Rites:
Shankranti:
Last day of Bangli month is Shankranti, Different festival are observed on different
Shankranti.
Grihaprobesh: | T ih
To enter into the new house is called | p il i) Wiha | ji | MI} i
Grihaprobesh. In this fastival we pray to il el i i 1 II A\ Il

1 Fi HE TATA de NB)
lord of Land. i WMT \ !
Jamaishashti \ \ | Hi | | | pl \|

| Wi |
Jamaishashti is observed in the sixth i ‘ape, A”? \ |
lunar day (Sasthi Tithe) of full moon i ‘Zap WA ‘ ii
(Shuklapaksha) in the month of | Ul PP ie if
Jaishthya. It is a very delightful festival. | We yr ve g “Fe A
In this day son-in low is invited in in- \ ) Fa a 2° ip
laws house. Special food items are Weg Zp fH” a Y) f) 7
arranged. Son-in law is given new clothes. a
Son-in law also gives clothes to his in-laws as much as he can do. Shasthi puja is also
observed in this day. Goddess of Shasthi is worshipped in hope of having children and ,,
for their wel-fare. 5

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 43
Rakhibandhan:
The word ‘Rakhi’ has come from 'Rakkha’. Rakhibandhan is one of the festivals of
Hindu religion. On this day, the sister ties a pure suta (thread) on the hand of the brother
which symbolises the lifetime bond between brother and sister. Rakhi can be tied on the
hand of brothers having or not having blood relationship. And on this day, a sweet
relationship is created between brother and sister. As this festival is observed on the
occassion of full moon of Shrabon month, this day is also known as Rakhi Pumima.
Bhratriditiya:
This festival is observed in the month of Kartik . The day is extremely holy. In Puran it
is said that on this day Yamuna Devi started for the betterment of his brother Yama.
Sisters accordingly pray to God for the lifetime welfare of their brothers.
Ne,
hpri x
A/a ee
NW

Wy) a lu

7g

‘ é gn

\ i A
Borshoboron: aaa
On the first day of Bangla year this festival is is observed. This festival has received
unanimity along with religious custom on this day prayings, sweet and hilsha pantha
are served and other festivals like halkhata takes place in different shapes
AVE a au
KA. i | eae Ged Wit “hs
al 4 Y NaH | BIG. 2,
y ZI ine SUMAN EG a
off YS —ae ‘
BS vo Oe A \

44 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Depabali (Dewali)

Depabali festival is arranged in the night of worshiping of the goddess Kali or Shama.
Light are kindled to remove dark i.e. remove ignorance of affection by kindling the
light of consciousness.

Through its all ignorance and darkness is burned to enlighten the Universe. That is why
it is arranged. It is also known as Diwali, Dipannita, Sukhratri (the night of happiness),
and Sukhsuptika.

Hatekhari:

On the day of worshiping of the goddess Saraswati, it is a very important chapter for
the festival Hatekhari for child who starts education session. This process is governed
by the votary who helps children to write on banana leaf or write on stone to start their
academic life.

Nabanna:

This is non communal and traditional festival of Bangle. Nabanna= Nava + onno; that
is mean "new rice" thisis one of twelve festivals of Bengali people.

During late autumn many types of food item are prepared to observe the Nabanna
festival. It is season based festival. In this day people pray the holy goddess "Shree
Laxmi Devi".

Lesson 4: Spiritual occasion

Doljatra

During lunar ecliptic time of the first half of soring people pray for the Holy God and
goddess Radha and Krishna" through splashing color on them. Everyone enjoy the day
through each other.Before this day a symbolic worship is observed by burning "burir
ghor" (the old women house).

Sometimes attuned and said .. aaj amader mera pora, kaal amader dol, pumimate bolo
shobai bolo horibol"

It is specially aVVaishnava(called who follows the God Shree Vishnu). On that day Lord
Sree Krishna plays with color with Shree Radhika and his mates. Form that time it is
being observed. This is also be called spring festival.

On that day, various types of fair are arranged in different places. People of all classes
enjoy the day with lots of enthusiasms and spontaneity. Beyond Bengal region it is
mostly familiar as "Holy festival”

Rathjatra

This one of the remarkable spiritual occasion of Hindus. Although rathjatrais spiritual &
for Hindus but now it is celebrated by all. During the first month of rainy season the S

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 45
rathjatrais celebrated. This rathjatrais mostly familiar as Shree Shree Jagannath <lever
Rathajatra. Temple of Jagannath is established at Purni in Urisha.
Rath means a four wheeled vehicle. Here two a ;
gods and one goddess are present. Devotees are ny £ by
pulled from the one temple to another temple AA Te rm
by using rope. In nineth days it turned back to Gx. Legg ooy ||
the temple where it started its journey. The PERA Re e) Ahll_
P a J y. 5 Peal a0 on

turn back season is termed as ultorathjatra or iy Ae =
Shree Shree Jagannath deber ponorrathjatra. _' HPP coues

/ / ; Ar IDS
Different kind of fair and festival are arranged = Ugg, Ny i i
for nine days. It is observed in various parts of the See LA =
region in our country. But most famous and ===—=a\f ti i \ sles
well known Rathajatra is arranged at = A ay
Dhamrai in Dhaka district. SS
The importance of rathyatra
During rathyatra the God comes closer to his devotee. Every one pulls the rope at a
time. Here is no discrimination or comrnunalism. That why it teaches us the
sovereignty. It has both economic and recreational value.
Lesson 5: Religious festivals and Impotance of Religious festivals and
Rituals in family and social life.
Numjogga :
Through the occasion devotees pray to God Sree A
Krishna and Sree Ramchandra. This Numjogga ry [ \ l\
festival are arranged on the basis of location, time and Dc ‘ hae WN
the quantity of arrangement. For this festival temple Pe \ ys
is sacred totally. Many devotees come from distance § cet ll (ee WW |
place. The Hindus believe if they can hear the 5 eS,
name of Shree Hari, He can bless them and can ae |
remove from various woe and unhappiness. From ————___ re Lb
that belief people participate in spiritual ~
occasion ‘’namjogga”’.
Once work: Give a description about Doljatra or Rothjatra or Numjogga religion

S function which is celebrated in your are.

46 Hindu Religion and Moral Education

Importancce of Ritual and Religious Festivals:

In family and social life religion is very important to individual family and for whole

society. It makes people polite. Religion instructs us to follow these human values.

Religion embodied family and society strangle. If we want to direct our family, society,

well, we should follow the values of Religion and religious festival.

Lesson 6 : Holy places of Bangladesh:

In Bangladesh there are many holy places for Hindu religion such as Shitakundu in

Chittagong, Adinath temple in Mohes-khali, Orakandi in Gopalgonj, resting place of

Ramthakur, Lahagora in Jessore, Hemayetpur in Pabna, Tahirpur in Sunamgorj,

Jugoltila in Srihotto and etc.

Importance of visiting in holy place

Holy place is called Pumyatirtho. It was called historical place. Effect of partition in

our life and society. Pumyatirtho is located in Sunamgonj.

Ponatirtho and its influence on family and social life :

A Ponatirtho is locatedin Sunamgonj district in ww Apr

Taherpur __ village. Srimat Addiaty wot S

was the follower Mohaprovhu Shree a ie {% -

Choitonna.He was born in Tagerpur gathered in RR a 2
ominTagerpurgatheed i rg oom Me

the month of Choitro for ‘Barunisnan’. It is ee’ Wh) chewy I /

located in Laurtilla. Mother of Aditya Provhu ‘; bs HH x ‘ ae ye heii fat" ‘

named “Lavadebi” wished for gongasnan ENS. QA (ii ee

but for her poor health condition she didn’t ae ak [ h \ \p Wee =

do that. Aditya Provhu for fulfilling his 3% 0 Ne f a), 7S ‘

mother's wish gather sacred water of all hol PN ae ae Calg pS

places in a river by practice of yoga. This lake - > ~- phe I

is the old Renuka river. At present this river is Lh Ne i A ae °

flowing as Jadukata. Many people gather on OP ge Fee

the bank of this river of Tahirpur Thana in

Sunamgang every year in Panatirtho in

Baruni shower.

New word: Enter of home, Jamaisosthi, Rakhibondhon, Dipaboli, Hatekhori, %

Baruni, and Ponatirtho. q

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 47
in brief.
Exercise
Multiple choice questions:
1. Which deity is worshiped in Nabanna Utshab?
(a) Saraswati (b) Laksmi
(b) Durga (d) Manasha
2. Which one is the prime festival of Chattra Shankaranti?
(a) Jamaishasti (b) Doljatra
(c) Diwali (d) Shib Puja
Read the following passage and answer question no. 3 and 4-
Ayon , astudent of class nine, celebrates Phahela Baishak by prayer with the people of
the village. This program is a big festival for him.
3. Which program does Ayon participate in ?
(a) Shakranti (b) Grihaprobesh
(c) Borshobaron (d) Nabanna
4. Why is Borshaboron important?
(i) It is universal
(ii) It is non-communal
(iii) It related to religion and moral teaching.
Which one is correct?
(a)i (b) ii
(c) iti (d) i, ii & ii
Creative Question
1. Every year Kanok prays for her brother's long life by giving holy sign on her brother
eg Ssoubome's forehead in the day of Sukla Dittyaon the month of Kattik. She believes this
S will help her brother get relief from all sorrows and sufferings

48 Hindu Religion and Moral Education

(a) What is the name of Bangla month?

(b) What do you mean by Religious right?

(c) What does Kanok observe?

(d) What is the importance of her ritual?
2. Gabinda went to Langolband Sann (holy deep) in Chattra. He bathes in the river.
After bathing he came to know about Langolband history.

(a) What do you mean by Holy place?

(b) What is the importance of visiting Holy places?

(c) What is the relation between Gabinda’s pilgrimage and that of the text?

(d) What is the impact of visiting Holy place in Gabinda’s life?

S

CHAPTER FOUR
REFORMS IN HINDUISM
To make our earthly life beautiful and beneficent, the ancient sages advised for
religious customs and manners and propitious rites. For this reason, they have
composed 'Manusonghita’ Jaggobalkasemghita’ 'Porashorsonghita’ etc. Law book
means famous holy books of Hinduism rites. Various propitious ceremonies are
celebrated in whole life in Hindu people by taking adoption of rites of these holy
books. The rites of completing obsequins and deceased ceremonies purpose or corpse,
are described in Hinduism holy- books.
PAN | lit! AWM POV Ns AAA |)
ANU ZO iy co ly
DN 4 Sipe dit) \i il (hd am ie
1) ass Se H| LON dete
After finishing this unit we will be able to
e Explain religious reforms
e Explain usual amendments and mention the names of various reforms.
e Explain the importance of religious reforms in family and social life.
¢ Describe continuously various division of Hinduism marriage function.
e Explain the easy meaning of marriage to steps and the knowledge of verse.
e Analyze — ‘Hinduism marriage is steady binding between husband and wife.
e Analyze the importance of marriage in social and family life.
e Explain the reason of ‘Dowry system the impiety’.
e Explain the concept and system of obsequies.
e Explain the easy meaning of the vanes of the time in evolving around corpse of obsequies.
e Analyze the importance of obsequies
e Explain the profane concept.
e Explain the system and importance of profane
e Explain the concept of sraddha and rites of Addo sraddha.
e Explain the importance of Addosraddho in social and family life.
e Explain the importance of ritual and ritualism of Hindu Society.
Forma-7, Hindu Religion and Moral Education, Class-9-10

50 Hindu Religion and Moral Education

Lesson 1 : Idea and type of religious:

According to traction which propitious celebration are held in total life of the Hindus

are called right of hinduism. There are ten in 'Smirity sastra’. Such as - 1. Gorvadhan,

2. Pungsobon, 3. Shemontounnoyn, 4. Jatkorma, 5. Namkoron, 6. Annaprashon, 7.

Churakoron, 8. Somaborton, 9. Uponoyon, and 10. Bibaha.

Here, some popular reforms are mentioned fi \

below in short: On \ | (iy H

Jatkorma: Father spells Mantra and touch il i 3} | se)

his son’s tongue with job, josthi modhu and __|/I[Rea\ F-NIIh Y~ aN

Gee after born. It is called jatkormo. | | Ne g | 3) |
2 ¥ A ||| || i

Namkoron/Naming:Namkoron is necessary _, ( », Zi [ wie ZN

in 10th, 11th, 12th, and 100th days after the \| ps ee > (pry f

child/baby is born, ‘{ ‘ E71 we |

Annopration: The first annovojon, with puja '

and propitious celebration in the 6th month of aS Ee

boys and 5th, 8th, or 10th month of girls are En H

called Anna ration. OSES)

Somaborton: After completing studies when student returns home from the house of

guru a celebration was held in ancient called somaborton.

Bibaha: The beginning of bridegroom and the bride with bed and pitripuj a, Hom etc.

by spelling Mantra in youth is called Bibaho.

Now-a-days Gorvadhan, pungsobonand shimonto-unnoyn etc are extineted from rites

of Hinduism.

Lesson 2 : Bibaho

Bibaho is practice of religious life in Hindu society. Woman is man's wife, so, avoiding

wife, any religious work cannot be successful for man. So, the word Bibaha means to

man is to take the responsibilities to meet his wife's all demands and protect her

honour. DEOL Re

Kinds of Bibaha: og a

There are eighth kinds of Bibanho that are mentioned in ey a @:

famous  Smritisastro, | 'Manusong  hita) = Such Va wy 6 iil hn ‘3

as- Bramho. Daibo Aryo, praja patho, Asur, Gandrba, ¢ f “VN 4

Rakhos and paishach, Bramiho, Daibo, Arya and prejapbtto 9] {\\ ape) ie

are popular kinds of Bibaho. Now-adays prajapatto G A Wee

Bibaho is popular in society. The bride is covered with ) EE a4 %

clothes and is dressed with jewelry and learned and upright 74 RD OS

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 51
bridegrooms are invited for going bride that is called prajapatto Bibaha. Gandhorbo
Bihaho is also popular in society. The Bibaha that is held with exchanging garland
between man and women and taking promise is called Gandhorba Bibaha The Bibaha
of Dushsanta and Sakuntala in the Mahavarat is a great example of Gandhorbo Bibaha.
The best Mantra of Bihaha:
Yadetat hridoyong tabo, tadasthu hridoyong mamo
yadidong hridoyong mamo, tadastu hridyong tabo
(Chandoggo Brahmon).
Simple mearing: Tomar hridoy amar hok, amar hridoy hok tomar.
The relation between husband and wife is turned into very intimate relationship by
means of this Mantra. Life becomes a container of all energy. They promise to live
together in well and woe till death. And start a new way of life.
Importance of Bibaha:
According to Hindusastra, Bibaha is the best among ten propitious celebrations in our
total life. Man achieves paternity by being children's father and woman achieve
maternity by being children's mother. A happy family is built with father, mother son,
daughter, all together and love and affection tenderness etc. The gentle nature of aman
is unfolded by the centre of a happy family. In this way marriage becomes the
institution for building up ideal men.
Lesson 3&4:
Different phases of Marriage/Bibaha:
The rules of Hindu Bibaha some are customs and some are formal tradition. The Hindu
Bibaha is not only a connection, but also the best moment of life. Bibaha is held with
spelling Mantra, Ulithian, and shonkhodhoni in front of Narayan, Aging, guru, priest,
kins and invited people. The celebration of Bibaha is ended by joggo and some
formalities.
Ashirbad
There are many parts of marriage ceremony. These are Ashirbad, Odhibash,
Bridhishradho, Gaye Halud (Gatro Horidra), Reception of bridegroom (Bar-baron),
Shuvodrishti, garland exchange, Sampradan, Jagganushthan and Saatpaake bandha,
marital sign on forehead, Saptapadigaman, basi biye, Astamangala etc. Of them some
parts are related to scripture and some are general practice various from regions to
regions.
=
&

52 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Bridhisradho
On the day of marriage or the previous day, both parties pay tribute to their ancestors.
This is called bridhisradho.
Gaye Holud (Gatro Horidra)
Gaye holud is an important part of Hindu marriage ceremony. The formalities of
marriage ceremony start with gaye holud. It is performed in the respective house of the
bride and the bridegroom. The bride or the bridegroom is seated on a mat. The edders
bless them with rice and grass and the younger ones say nomskar, and apply turmeric
on the cheeks, forehead, and hand. They are also given sweetmeat to eat.
Thisis actually a process of making the body pure. Methi, sundha, mustard, sandal etc.
is mixed with raw turmeric. All of these are symbols of good luck. The main objective
of this ceremony is to wish the new couple happiness, peace and a strong mortal life.
Individual Work: Why Bridhisradho and Gaye Holud ceremony is performed
before the marriage? State the reasons.
Garland Exchange
The bridegroom places his garland around the bride's neck and the bride places hers
around the bridegroom's neck. The garland is exchanged three times way this.
Somprodan
Somprodan ceremony is the main ceremony of marriage. The bride and bridegroom are
seated in the marriage seat facing each other, wearing the marriage costume. The bride
faces west and the bridegroom faces east. The one to submits the bride, sits facing
north. The bridegroom's right hand is placed on a pitcher filled with water from the
Ganges, decorated with mango leaves and with dolls drawn over it. Then the right hand
of the bride is placed on the bridegroom's right hand. Then five fruits and kushpatra,
are tied to the hands with a red piece of cloth
and garland. The bride is given away by iy : ante
mentioning the names of Somprodankorta by Wi BS Op
making sounds with tongue and shells. Pe. & {V |
Worship Ceremony and Tying with Seven Rounds
After the Somprodan ceremony a square worship stage is made. By reciting mantras
from the veda, all pride, anger, jealousy, hatred etc. have to be dumped in fire
symbolized by a mango leaf soaked with ghee. Then the fire has to be circled seven
times. By this way the couple enters a new life tied to each other by seven rounds
(Saatpakey badha). By this ceremony the bride and bridegroom is tied to each other for &

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 53

the rest of their life. In some places the marriage stage is surrounded by banana trees,

is circled by the couple. The bridegroom holds the right hand of the bride with his left

hand like a hook and circles seven times. Apart from this the comers of both of their

cloths is also tied together.

Individual Work: Describe the rationality of Suvodristi and Worship
Ceremony in marriage.

Marital Sign on Forehead

After Somprodan and Worship ceremony, the bridegroom applies vermilion on the

forehead of the bridegroom. This is the most important event of a Hindu woman's life.

From this moment on the bride may wear vermilion on her forehead as long as her

husband is alive. In our country this is performed on the day of gaye holud or Bashi

marriage. Bashi marriage means the day after marriage.

Dowry customs is sin:

If the bridegrooms parts are given prompt money or property for the marriages of the

bride it is dowry. The custom of dowry isa social disease. It harms us alot. Giving and

receiving of dowry is an equal crime. The root of this is illiteracy, carelessness, father

centered and controlled social system.

Dowry in present social system is condemnable. It is absent in many cases. We should

come forward to saving the society from these criminal activities. Change in our

outlook, social obstruction make woman literate and make them aware of their rightful

honors is needed to remove this bad custom. With mental broadness and life like teach-

ing can remove this customs easily. Overall strict law should be enforced against

dowry.

Lesson 5: Funerals (Anthesthyakria)

The world 'Antasti' comes from ‘Anta’ and ‘Isti'Antha means last and Isti means

oblation of fire. So the word Anthasti means the last oblation of fire or the sacrifice of

body to the fire.

Death means the outgoing of soul. When the soul gets out from body it becomes a

lifeless immovable matter and starts to be rotten. So in the scripture the funeral

obsequies of dead body is given this reverence is known as Anthasticria.

After death the body is covered with cloth and decorated with garland and scandle and

taken to the samsan. There the head of the dead body is placed towards south and heis
x laid on the reed. Then the person who has the right of burning baths and make the dead
S body to booth plastering oil and turmeric.

54 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
After that the dead body is worn new cloth, garland and decorated with sandal. Then
two eyes two hear. The hole of two rose and mouth this seven holes are are covered
with gold or copper. Then the offering of a funeral cake is given.
After this the elate is made with mango wood or sandalwood. Then the body is placed
on chi ta (pyre). It doesn't harm if sandal wood is not available. Conflagration
(Dahokarjo) has to be done by any wood available in that particular area. At present
cremation is done even in electric furnace.
The spell of Antasthicria: The fire is applied to the head. In general rule at first the
elder son does it. In the absence of him who will do there is alist about it in the sritisas-
tra. Before giving fire to the dead body it is circeeabuated for three or seven times and
the following spell is careened.

om kritna tu dushkritam karma jatona - bapyajamta.

mrtyukalavasham prapyo naram panchatwamagatam.

dharmadharmasamayuktam lovamohasamavritam.

daheyam sarvagatrani divyan lokan sa gachhatu.
It means by knowing or not Krowing he has commited sin. Now he has gained the five
matters of certain because of death. He is filled with sin-unsin, greed and moha. Bum
his total body. He may go to the heaven.
After burning the dead bodies the person should put out the fire of the chita with water
and clear the place. All cremation friends will take bath and will be clean.
The importance of funeral:
When soul departs from a body it becomes a non-living particle and naturally it begins
to rotten. When it lies deem on earth it pollutes the environment. So in scriptures, these
dead bodies have been hold to cremate, so funeral of dead bodies is a redigious
regulation. It has not only a religious value, but also it has a social value. When
anybody dies the neighbors, with and his friends come to see the dead man's family
ancestors observe 'oshocho' to show him honors. Doing these people strengthen social
bonds. xerses purify our soul. An attitude of fellow feeling arises in everyone's mind. A
social value is developed in a person.
Lesson:- 6 ‘Osoucho’:
"Soucho' means purity. 'Osoucho' means lack of purity. When parents or ancestors die,
we observe 'osoucho' because the death of our beloved ones makes us sorrowful. Our
mind becomes unable to perform religious duties. Then we observe 'Osoucho’.
After the death of parents, during 'osoucho' children take various kind of fruits which
can be called 'hobissnno' During this time people have it follow hard restrictions to be x
eligible to observe 'sraddha’ . ES

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 55
During 'Osoucho' a fossil plant has to be planted in the yard where water and milk has
to he offered in the name of the dead man.
After the death of parents in the fourth and tenth day meal has to be offered. This
offering is called purok pindo. A total of ten prod pints have to be offered after osoucho
curling all the hair of head now dress has to be warned. On the second day after
‘Osoucho' Sridhar is observed. Observing method of 'Osoucho' differs from caste to
caste. The people of lower caste have to observe it for more days than higher caste
people. The role of observing Osoucho is ten days for Brahahaman, twelve days for
Kshatriya, fifteen days for Baishya and thirty days for Shudhra. But now a day's people
of every caste observe ten days of osoucho and observe sradhyain 11th, 13th day.
‘Osoucho' differs from birth to death. If we observe osorcho due to the birth of a child
it is called 'Jananasucho' and if we do that for death it is called 'Moronasoucho'
Importance of observing ‘Osoucho’:
‘Osoucho' observing is not only areligious regulation; if also has alot of value socially.
During parents lifetime, wherever we come back home after all days hard work, their
touch makes us a lot happy. This sudden loss of dear ones makes children unstable.
Even the death of our kith and kin saddens us. So we have to prepare ourselves for
wishing the peace of their soul. But with unstable mind we cannot concentrate on God.
For this we require peace full mind. So, we med time. And to prepare ourselves
observing 'Osoucho'is a must. This makes our mind steady and brings peace. Besides,
the family of the dead man, his ancestors honors him by observing ‘osoucho’.
Lesson:- 7 & 8 Addysradhya:
Sorddha means to offer something with honor. So, Where there no connection with
honor, there 'sraddha’ cannot be observed, even if they spend alot of money. The firsts
‘sraddha’ after the death of a person is called adya sraddha. It is observed the day after
osoucho ends. As far as we know 'Nini' started this 'sraddha’, there is regulation of sin,
eight or sixteen etc offering this 'Sddyasraddha. People to their ability. In
addyasraddha ‘Geeta! and a massive parba of the mahavarat is recited. In some regions
"Kothopanishada' is also recited.

Lo}

s

56 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
i Ss i am ihe
Sr Tas
1 llega Esl)
| mi HM | i al
The full name of Addyasradha is 'addya akodista sraddha’. This sradddho is observed in
the name of one man so it is called 'akoddista sraddho’. |.e. offering in the name of one's
mind with honors.
In the beginning of the 'Addo Ekoddishto Shradho' light is to be burnt. Then we have
to worship the 'Bastupeereesh joggers, and Bhushami'. Then the 'Shradho' of the late
person is to be done. At that time seat, umbrella, shoes, clothes, 'onno’, water, tambul ,
wreath, bed etc is to be dedicated with sacred speech for the late person. Then
‘Pindodan' is done and thus 'Addo Ekoddisto Shradho' is finished. Even women
perform 'Osouchs' and 'Choturthi' ceremony.
Importance of Addoshradho in filial and social life:
Addoshardho is not only important in religious sector, but also it has enough
significance in thefilial and social sector as well. When someone passes away from the
world, his neighbors and other relatives not only come to see the dead body, but also
show respect for his soul and become one with his family and other kith and kin. In this
process, social and filial bonds become much stronger. Everyone feels equal pain.
Alongside relatives can meet each other. In this process, love and respect for each other
are enhanced. Social seeds are being germinated inside the future generation.
Person work: What are the things to be rendered during Addoshradho
Importance of same rules:
No discriminatory line has to be drawn between the several castes of Hindu religious
society when they attend religious festivals. Again, importance has been seen in terms sx
of maintaining some rules between several castes. Asit is said in" Srimodvogobotgite" &

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 57
that caste division is done not on, rather it is done on the basic of work. That means,
one's caste is defined according to his profession. In 'Gita’ Lord Frishna has said that
"CHATURBARNANG MOYA SRISHTONG GUNKORMO-BIVA GOSH". That
means | have created four castes on the basic of talent and work.
It’s not all that one will be called 'Bramhan' it only he is a'Bramhan' child. The child of
asudracan also be called 'Bramhan' if he is inspired by the quality of tatal purity. Again
if aBramhan child is inspired by vanity he will known as a'Sudra’ child. So it can he
said that, also or caste division is not done on the basic of birth, rather it is done on the
basis of work. Difference in the duration and difference in the process of maintaining
‘Osoucho' are not logical.
And that's why people from every caste maintain 'Osoecho' for ten days and on the
eleventh day they do the'Shradha' of the late person. But it is done of one's own accord.
Some rules are logical and same rules are important for several castes for the unity and
amity of Hindu society.
Exercise

1. Which form of marriage is done with man and woman exchanges worth with oath?

a) Prajopotto b) Gandhorbo

c) Asur d) Bramhe.
2. What do you mean by ‘Somaborton’?

a) Going to teacher’s home for learning

b) Giving valuable gift to the teacher while learning

c) The farewell occasion after the learning course

d) Coming one’s home from teacher’s home after learning
Read the passage below answer the question no-3
Gopal is his grandmother's only grandchild. Is highly grieved when he sees his
grandfather dies in front of him. He also notices that the dead body is embellished with
wreaths of flowers and 'Chandan' and it is carried to the 'Shoshan' by his father and
other neighbours. According to the scripture Gopal and his parents has maintained
‘Osouecho' for 12 days.
3. What’s the reason of carrying Gopal’s grandfather to the ‘Shoshan’( creamation ground)?

a) Maintaining Hobishano b) for yoggo

c) for shraddho d) for funeral ceremony
4. The thing that they will achiest by maintaining Osoucho is-

i) legibility for shraddho

ii) Preparing them for the betterment of soul.

iii) Maintain the rules of scripture which one is right?
Forma-8, Hindu Religion and Moral Education, Class-9-10

58 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Which one is right?
a)iand ii b) ii and iti
c)iand iii d) i, ii, and iti
Creative Question
After completing Gradualion, Mita’s parents have fixed the date of her marriage.
Dressing Mita with clothes and Imitations her father has handed her over to the
bridegroom. On that occasion, the priest recited the scored speech and completed the
marriage ceremony by oblation.
a) What is ‘Songskar’?
b) Why ‘Onnoprashon’ is done?
c) Describe the method of Mita’s marriage according to your text book?
d) Describe the logic of oblation ceremony in Mita’s marriage?
io}
Ss
AN

CHAPTER: FIVE
DEITIS & PUJA
We have become acquainted with different deities and their worshipping the necessities
to worship and more idea in other classes. In this chaper we will discuss worrshipping
the priest and his competence. Devi Durga, Kaali, Shitala) Kartika and their
worshipping. Devi Durgais considered as Divine
AW. 1A
2 fem NaS ee pin,
& sath ee ee
Mother because she sprads the massage of happiness and prosperity among us through
the termintion of distress sorrows and sufferings. Devi Kaali installs herself with her
divine power and protects us when we fall in a worldly disaster. She is known as
Thakurani to all of the villages. Everybody worship her with great veneration as she is
the goddess of peace to all. Kartika is the the son of lord Shiva and He is the
commander in chief of Hinduism. We worship him as protector. In this chapter we will
discuss about the introduction of deities, mentora and the importance of all
worshipping in our social life. In the end of the chapter we can -
* Analyse the idea of wonshipping and priest and his competence
*  Deseribe the idea of deities
* Describe the intoroduction and appearance of Durga
* Depict the eymological meaning of the neme Durga
* Durscribe the Method of Durga Puja(ceremonial wakening and shedding)
¢ Describe pronam mantra, its meaning and its lesson
* Analyze the virgin worshipping and Bijoy Dadami and their importance and influence.
* Describe the importance of Durga Puja in socio-economic and family life.
* Be inspired to worship Durga in our ways of life.
* Describe the meditation of Kali puja, the meaning of pronam mantra and its lesson.
* Explain the influence of Kali puja in our socio-economic and family life and can
2 practice the learning of kaali puja in our ways of life.
& + Explain the introduction and method of worshipping of Shitala Devi

60 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
+ Explain the meaning of pronum mantra and its lesson.
+ Explain the importance of Shitala Puja.
*  Apprehend the influence of shitala puja and be inspired in practicing Shitala Puja.
+ Explain the introduction of Kartika.
* Explain the meaning of meditation and pronam mantra and its learning.
+ Explain the importance and influence of Kartik Puja and be inspired in
preaching his magnanimity and lesson. “alin

Lesson: 1 Worshipping and priest : The word \,% Cy ;
‘worshipping’ expresses its meaning as to revere or 1 ee line

aor ee . Ts DV a
great admiration to somebody which is done with |) rc epee
adoration and paying great homage through flowery a a es)
treatment. In Hinduism the word ‘worshipping’ Wa sds)
bears a special meaning . Maintaining all rules and Ny Wes ele,
regulation and with great veneration and flower wood, —V/f i ka Poay
grass, basil, plants, wood apple leaf incense and lamp | Perera
the worshipping programme is done to satisfy the = \,-4=—S >
symbol and appearance of God. a. ZAR =
The main purpose of worshipping is to bow down in front of the most powerful God
and deities to get accompanied with deities symbol the quality and power of creator.
For this reason, the programme which is arranged to satisfy the deities is called
worshipping.
The Priest
The word 'Priest’ is formed of the combination of 'Puros’ and 'Heet' 'Puros' means 'in
fomt of" and 'Heet' means 'welfare’. He who plays a great role in worshipping is called
priest. In general, the person who performs all the worshipping activitiesis called priest
and stays in the summit of all. In details it can be defined as the person who plays a
great role staying in the apex position to all is called a priest. To worship is his
proceeding. That the person is called an institute of a sacrifice when the worshipping
under the determination of the name of the person is done. The institute of a sacrifice
itself can be institution. But usually the institution of sacrifice calls worshipping
programmer. Generally the people of the Brammin community by birth are associated
with priestly activates. But the priest and Brahno in is not the same word. Those who
possess clear knowledge and idea about Brahama Veda are called Brahmin.
A priest must have the knowledge of language and Shastura. Those who studied, taught
and pondered science and measurements, they were the Brahmins. So it was the job of &

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 61

the Brahmins to be the priest. But now, the knowledge of sanskrit and sastra in seen is

all casts. That is why anyone of any cast with that knowledge is eligible to be the priest.

A priest must have the following qualities.

The Qualities of a Priest:

A Priest is a respected man he performs personal and social ceremonies. For that

reason, he needs the following qualities:

1. To be capable to perform the acts of a priest for any person of any cast
following Hinduism.

2. Must be acquainted with reading and writing Sanskrit.

3. To have theoretical and practical knowledge on daily duties and puja-parbana.

4. To have theoretical and practical knowledge on Hinduism.

5. To be experienced in Dharma-Shastra and the rules and regulations of Shastra.

6. To have sympathy for the progressing general Hindu people from the social point
of view.

7. To have the ability to utter mantra correctly.

8. To have knowledge and experience on various puja and religious ceremonies and
its rules and regulations.

9. To be neat and clean.

10. To be patient, honest, truthful and true to one’s word in personality.

11. To have perfect personality with modesty and decency.

Lesson- 2 Idea of gods-goddesses

Ishwar is the possesor of unlimited qualities and power. When He expresses one of

these qualities in a definite and special form. Then He is called god. Gods and

goddesses are the different qualities or powers of Ishwar in a mantra in Rigveda, it has

been said.

‘Ekong Sod Bripa Bohudha Bodonti'

Meaning: The scholars have called the great and eternal Brahman by many names.

Puja is offered for different qualities and power of Ishwar. They are made happy by

puja. In order to earn God's blessings and to live a happy and healthy life, man offers

puja. When God's are praised, Ishwar is satisfied and He grants us grace.

Divisions of Diety

Veda is the earliest scripture in Hinduism. The purana has been written on the basis of

the veda. In the veda and the purana, the forms, powers, influence, social importance

co and the rules of the pujaceremonies of different gods and goddesses have been
& discussed. On the scriptures, the gods and goddesses are of these types.

62 Hindu Religion and Moral Education

1. Vedic Devata

2. Puoranic Devata

3. Deities of Earth.
A. Vedic Debata: The god's and goddesses that have been mentioned in the veda are
the Vedic Debatas, for example, Agni, Indra, Mitra, Rudra, Barun, Baya, Shorn and
others. The goddess in the Vedic age are Sharoshati, Usha, Aditi, Ratri and afew others.
The Vedic gods and goddesses have no forms or statues. But the Vedic Mantras
describe the beauty, quality and power of each god and goddeses . The puja of the Vedic
age was Yaju. In the vedic upasana, prathima puja, was not present, fire, or Agni was
the medium by which mantras were used to pray to other Debatas. Agni is called the
priest of the gods and the god of the priests.

ae Yo PLETE =."
=
ss

The gifts and sacrifices like ghee, payesh and cakes were burnt "in fire; for them to the
gods through Agni. The Vedic sages bel ei ved the deeds of BishwaBrahma to be a giant
work of yaggya. That is why the Yaggya done by they became the symbol of universal
Yaggya. At that time this was the principal medium of prayer. Through Jaggya, the
Vedic sages achieved the blessings of gods and goddesses.
Pouranic Deities: The deities who are described in the porana are called pouranic
deities.
Example: Brahama, Vishanu, Shiva, Durga, Saraswati, etc.
At the pouranic age, many Vedic deities changed their forms and new deities took their,
forms and new deities were found. Vishnu is mentioned in the porana as deity with S

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 63
with conch-wheel goda lotus. But, in the Veda, Vishnu is a form of rhythmic natural
power only. Visnu in Veda is basically the sun.
if Hy VK if Sa At Eh
Local Deities:- The deities who are not mentioned in the vade and in the purana but
still the followers worship them are known as local deities. Example Manasha, Shitala,
Dakshimin Roy, Later on, many local deities like Manasha were included in the
purana.
Worshipping Gods and Godd LEDS LESST
orshipping Gods and Goddesses a —
All gods and goddesses are not worshipped at a Se
the same time. Many gods and goddesses have F) By yr * ON e
fixed month, time and ‘tithi’ of worship. Vishnu, //4 2) aX ey ln ir ¢ o
Shiva, Lakshmi puja is done everyday. On the BN ha ig: RE = 40) 3%
other hand, Brama, Kartik, Saraswati etc. Mg [94 AL tA \
deities have fixed time of worship. On the basis € é j ie) Ws mu
of social participation, puja or worship is divided ) a) Pe: 4
a Bs bp a G BY

in two types Family puja and puja for everyone. (@ is Lp Re

——_ , Dy) EGA OSG
Only family puja and everyone in the yl ¥ 2 SHS
society participates is the puja for everyone. Puja & = AS
for everyone turns into festivals. LPO SIG PROS ROSY CN
Lesson: 3 Goddess Durga: Identity and Description
Durga is the goddess of power; she is the cumulative expression of all the power of the
universe. She is also worshipped by the names Joy Durga, Jagaddhatri, Gandheshwari,
Bana Durga Chand, Narayani etc.

wo The Meaning of the Name Durga
Ss Du-Gomt ‘A’ Dorga A place where it is very hard to go is called Durga.

64 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Description of Goddess Durga:

th
The word durga is formed by adding the suffix ‘A’ }
to Durgo and is used as the name of a goddess. 4 / %
Durga is maharaja and tough to be attained .She can be yi YY) )
attained only by meditation. Again, since she Yyyr y
slaughtered a beast named ‘Durgon’, she is called 4 lary
Durga. Another meaning of the word Durga is Le,
Durga-tinashini which means the one who removes © yi
sorrow from the universe. y 4

4
Once Mohishashur captured the kingdom of heaven ; J
from the king of gods, Indra. At that time, from the ENG
combined strength of the gods, Goddess Durga was
created. Goddess Durga slaughtered Mahishashur.
Thisisthe reason why sheis called Mahishashur Mardini. From the ancient period, the
Hindus have been worshipping her sincerely. That is why durga puja is the biggest
festival in the Hindu Society.
Goddess Durga has ten hards and hence she is called 'Doshobhuja’ she has three eyes
like shiva and hence she is called Trinayana. Her left aye indicates the moon, right eye
indicated the sun and the central eye is located in the middle of the forehead indicate
Knowledge of fire. She has ten weapons in her ten hands which refer to as asymbol of
power and the powerful lion is her carrier. This lion also symbolizes power. The
complexion of Goddess Durgais golden yellow like theAtashi flower. She removes all
the evil things by her ten hands and brings about our happiness.
The weapons at the right hand side of goddess Durga are Trishul, Kharag, Chakra
(Wheel), Babn largo and a shakti. The weapons at the left hand side are shankha
(conch), Khetak (sheild), Ghonta (bell), Ankush and paash. She is a symbol of infinite
strength and qualities.
Lesson 4: Procedure of durga puja.
Time of the festival and its raw materials:
Durga puja is one of the major religious festivals of Hindu community in Bangladesh,
Indian sub-continent and many other countries of the world. There have been a time of
celebrating Durga puja twice a year. In the fourth mint of Ashwin, Sharadio Durga puja
takes place and in the fourth night of Chaitra, Basanti puja is arranged. In Bangladesh
and West Bengle of India, 'Sharodio Durga outset’ is declared from the day of
Mahalaya. In the month of Aswin, at the fourth night is the day of shoshthi, the idol of |:
godennes Durga is established and sharodio Durgauthshab starts and lasts until the &

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 65
fifth day dashimi In the day of Dashimi, the dashami puja is done and with that
Sharodio Durgastshon is declared over. In some places, at the fortnight of Aswing, in
the mentioned day Druga puja is celebrated. But from shoshthi, officially Durga puja
starts and this custom is much better.
According to the day of customs and rituals, the time table of Durga puja is mentioned
below:
1st days: Durga shashti-Bodhan i.e, Ceremonial weltering of Goddess Durga, incitation
and, ceremonial invitation of Maa Durga.
2nd day: Mahashaptani puja - the age of Durga formed with leaves of nine plants and
establishment, the second time of the begging of puja, satanic oriented puja.
3rd day: Mahashtani puja, kumari puja, shandhi puja, 4th day Nabami oriented puja,
5th day:
Durhani puja, Biswarjan and Bijoya Dushami.
The procedure of Durga puja has been described in the Great Nandikishor purana, Debi
purana and 'kalika purana’.

Ge OREN EI Id fase Sh ba), sy FT rrr kN UNC i

SRR E EROS Eva Bal (gay Ie Betene Tih eeaNe

iyi HABE eat Ae

Many raw materials are needed for Durga puja:
Lesson: 5. The procedure of Durga puja: Shashthi and shaptami puja.
Shashthi puja:
After Mahalaya, the sixth lunar day is started with Durga puja.
Samkalpo to devote oneself is done to observe Puja. Bodhana is held in the evening,
then odhibas and invitation is held. Parnam mantra is uttered to the Goddess Durga.
Forma-9, Hindu Religion and Moral Education, Class-9-10

66 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Shaptami puja:

After the Shasthi comes Mahashaptami. In this lunar day (tithi) Shaptami related puja
is observed. Soul is established in all the idols including Goddess Durga by reciting the
mantras. The Goddess is worshipped with the decoration of many materials like flower
wood-apple leaf, Naibadya and clothes. Establishment ofNabapatrika is one of the
important activities in this day. Basically, Nabapatrika is the collection of nine trees.
These are kadoli (banana) Darimba (the pomegranate), Dhannyo (paddy), Haridra
(Turmeric) Manak (mankachu), Kacu, Bellaw (wood-apple), Ashok and Jayonti. A
sidling is tied with a banana tree. Then a sharee is worn. This is called Kalabau.
Goddess Durga is appeared in N abapatrika by nine different names. Basically by the
worshipping of N abapatrika we worship of the life giving tree. We preserve the tree.
And power of ishwar, power of Goddess exist in this tree. By Nabapatrika we worship
Goddess Durga.

Pranam Mantra

OM sharbamangalamangalye shive sharbartha-shadhike.

Sharanye Trambake Gouri Narayani Namahstu te. (Shree Shree Chandi 11/10/11)
Meaning: oh goddess you are behind everyone’s welfare, shiva, sharbarthashadhika
Gouri, Narayani please accept my pranam.

Lesson from pranam Mantra:

Goddes Durga appears in different forms and determines our peace. That's why she is
called sharbamangala.She is shiva i.e well wisher. She accepts all prayer and fulfill all

of our drmands.There is nothing she can't do.She is our shelter.She is Gouri.We shall
pray to her for power and fight against injustice for the welfare of our society as well

as ours. We get this lesson from Pranam Mantra.

Lesson : 6 & 7: Great Ashtami puja & Kumari Puja:

During the Durga festival, Ashtami Puja (8th day) is very important. On that day
Goddess Durga defeated Mahishashura. The devotees perform this day following the
rituals and pray for her blessing.

Kumari Puja:

Kumari Pujais observed on the day of Ashtaimi puja (8th day). In our country, Kumari
Puja is observed in Ramkrishna Math (temple), Dhaka. Kumari Puja is observed in
Ramkrishna Math in west Bengal also. The major side of Hindu meditation worship is

to consider women as mother, Ishwari. Through Kumari only Goddess Durga is
worshipped. In Kumari puja women are shown respect. In this way welfare is brought
alot in family and social life. &

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 67
Nabami and Dhashami Puja:
Nabami puja:
In the north lunar day, the ninth puja of Devi
Durga is performed. During the sandhi puja
108 lamps are lit up and offered to the goddess. f
Then various other offerings are made to the [ff
goddess & prosadams are distributed among §
the devotees .
Dashami puja: \ ee ocanng tn
In the tenth lunar day the dashami puja of Devi —
Durga is performed by following rituals. The x yf
statue of Devi Durga is immersed in water. This ‘ — tle
day is also know as Byaya Dashami Devi — —
Durga is like the woman of the house. She , ————_—_——
travels to kailash Bhabhan with her children
for four days . As the statue is immersed in rivers, ponds or other water bodies the
ceremony comes to an end. The farewell ceremony of the goddess we offer her herbs
vermilion sautes betel leaf & we also wish her return next year. At this time cessation
isdone. Then to wish the welfare of all the 'ulu' sound is made.After that, the ceremony
comes to an end by the game of holy.
The Ceremonial Rites & Rules of Conduct of Bijaya Dashami:
By immersing the statue of Devi Durga in water, the Bijoya Dashami begins. For this
many ceremonial rites & rules of conduct are performed. Some important rules &
regulations are in the ceremonial rites and rules of conduct of Bijaya Dashami.
SS iUiee
Co eM Laos IIE
42+. OE <td] Ag vests

68 Hindu Religion and Moral Education

1. Decorating the goddess with vermilion, sharing some sweets and wishing good bye.

2. Married women decorate each other with vermilion and wish each other a long life.

3. Expressing love by hugging each other and by sharing sweets.

4. Using various musical instruments in an organized way during immersing

5. Returning home, than king each other and wishing each other a long lifer by using various

herbs.

6. Donating various things among relatives and the poor.

People arrange fair in some regions on the day or the day after bisorjana.

Significance of Bijoya Dashomi:

1. By defeating / killing Mahisasura, Goddess Durga celebrated dashomi. So, this is
the day of victory, the day of defeating injustice and establishing justice.

2. Goodess Durga represents the combind powers of all the Devas/Gods. That’s why
Bijoya Doshomi is the symbol of unity.

3. Bijoya Doshomi takes away all inauspicious and every type of evil power’s
impact from our life and encourages us to establish brother hood with eachother.

Effects of Bijoya Doshomi:

e We forget all grudge / malice and enmity and create amity among all class of
people. We also get encouraged to make everyone for our and near ones

e Filial solidarity increases / augments

e Respect grows for mothers / Goddess power in our mind.

e Forgetting all of our happiness, pain, hrdship we grow in unity and amity.

e Social solidarity and compectress / family also increase.

Lesson:10- The effects of Durga puja in our socio-economic filial and moral life:-

From the beginning of time/from the past, Durga puja is the most important and

unique puja for all hindu devotees among all other puja, this festival is their life.

Sharodia Devi’s puja means Devi Durga’s puja. She is the Supreme Being of the

world. She’s also the form of Ishwar’s power. Durga puja play’s an important role in

developing our socio economic and moral life. 3

N

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 69
Influence of Durga puja
Durga puja influences to arise the power to resist wrong and injustice. Communal
amity is increased through the participation of all. Puja special is published in
newspapers based on Durga puja. Many organizations publish souvenir of Sharodiyo
Puja. Cultural programme is aranged in the temple. Various gladdening and fancied
images and idols are reflected in temples. As a whole Durga puja is a great festival of
union and unique union of enjoyment and creativity.
Lesson: 8 & 9 Goddess Kalika: Description of Devi Kali:
Goddess Kali is also the Goddess of power like Devi Durga. She is dangerous to the
Devils. In this world Devi Kali removes all injustice, evil, inauspicious, sinister,
tyranny and destroys them. Devi Kali is Lord Shiva's Sahadharmini (wife) and she
possesses special power. She expresses Herself as the goddess of death and time. That's
why she is known as Shashan Kali. Apart from this Devi Kalika has also many other
names as well. For example, Vadra Kali, Shayma Kali, Maha Kali etc.
Origin of Devi Kali:
According to different Puranas, Devi Kali has appeared as the Power of Lord Shiva. In
accordance with the Hindu mythology, Devi Kali has been originated from the
forehead of Durga and is known as infinite powerful. In Markandeo Puran, it is
mentioned that She destroys the Devils in different forms and saves the Angels of
heaven. Lord Indra along with other angels prays to Devi Ambikain order to get rid of
the Monsters called Shumbho & Nishumbho. Devi Ambika got furious in anger. Then
there were two forms, oneisAmbikaand another is Kalika or Kali. Devi Kali killed the
spies of Shumbho and Nishumbho called Chanda & Mundo. Since then Her another
name was Chamunda. eam.
Kali Puja and its Session: moe, ova
Usually Kali Puja arranged in the night of Amaboshya oA a ° (ee) oom
(Dark fortnight). Kali Puja is generally organized after Si E 4 ee
Durga Puja. It is held at midnight in the month of asi) 4 ~ q ‘hou
Kartik and Agrahyan. In the evening, light festival ee “ee ee: * Se
called Diwali is performed. a , ‘4 mY ; ‘ ~~
To get rid of various epidemics such as cholera, chicken eq ye i: Bei. = pi
pox, storm, floods, drought, Raksha Kali or Shyama fe | if, ss . a rs 4
Kali puja is arranged. Wing Me
S aie SN ae ‘a

70 Hindu Religion and Moral Education

Procedure of Kali Puja:

Kali Pujais performed in the house or in the temple by making statue, like Durga puja.

Kali Puja begins with the establishment of life (Pran Protistha) of Devi. Devi Kali is

offered Pronam after meditating and offering Puja, Arati and Bhoga (offering).

Pronam Mantra of Kali Puja and its simple meaning and teaching:

Meditation of Kali Puja:

Om Shabarurang mahabhimang ghora-dangstrabarprodam
Hashyajuktang trinetrancha kapalkartikakaram
Muktakeshing loljjihbang pibanting rudhirong muha
Chaturbahu samajuktang barabhayakarang smareng.

Simple Meaning: Devi Kali is on the dead body, she is ferocious, she has three eyes,

Her teeth are dangerous, Hers extended. Her hair is unbound, She has human skull and

Katari (sharp weapon) in Her hand. In Her another two hands, She has boon and sign

of fearless. Again Devi has a smiling face. Her appearance is described both as soft and

hard.

Teaching:

1. Devi Kali establishes justice eradicating the injustice. We learn the teaching of
wellbeing from her. We also learn the lesson of being strict to injustice and soft to
justice.

2. Devi Kali is dangerous and furious to the evil doers but She is an affectionate mother
to the devotees. .

Kartik

Lesson 10: Introduction of lord Kartik and the system of meditation

and the incantation / spell of prostration of Kartik: re

Kartik is a mythological god. He is the son of lord \ i

Shiva and devi Durga Lord Kartik is the possessor J Kh

of a very beautiful and well formed body and immense Hl AV )

energy. It is found in mythology that, the gods of iN KN h 4

heaven admitted him as their leader. His colour is just | eka (\

like the luminous gold. F aN

We can see arrow, bow and harpoon in his hand as his f pee ,

war weapon. His carrier is pea -cock, the beautiful | yn | k

bird. Kartik fought with different Asurs in different \ \ ay

times. He was born to kill Tarakasur . He also i Lyf Sy

defeated the Bali’s son Banasur . His other names are hl 3 RPT

Skanda, Mohasen, Kumar, Guha etc. Kartik is dealt in the * | RS

Skanda Puran. ~

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 71
Kartik Puja:
Kartik Puja is arranged at the end of bangla month Kartik. Kartik Puja is done by the
priest. Couples pray for children in Kartik Puja It is heard that, Deboki got lord
Sreekishna as his son by praying Kartiki.
Meditation of God Kartik

On Kartieyang Mohabhagong Moyiroporisongsthitm

Topto kanchonbornavong Shaktihastang Borprodam”

Dwivujong Sotruhontarong Abnalonkarvusitm”

Prasannabodonogn Debong Kumarong Putrodaykom”
Simple meaning:
Lord Kartik the Mahabhagong who is sitting on the pea - cock. His colour is as bright
as glorious gold. He has weapon of energy in his two hands He is adorned with many
ornament. He destroys the enemy. He has a smiling face.
Incantation/ spell of prostration:

Om kartikeya mahabhage daityadarparisudana

Pranotoam mahavaho namaste shikhivahana.

Rudraputra namastubhyam shaklihasta varaprado

Shanmatur mahabhaga tarakantakar prabho.

Mahalapaswi bhagovan piturmatuh priyo sada.

Devan yajnarakshartham jalastwam girislikhare

Shailatmajayam bhavate tubhyam nityam namo namah.
Simple meaning: -
Destroer of deman, Lord Kartik, we offer pronam to you. We respect you. You have
energy in your hand. Grant our wishes six Krittikas are your wet nurses. To protect the
Yaggya of the Lords, you were born in the high hill Hoy Lord, we offer pronam to you.

Importance and influence of Kartik Puja:

1. It is said that the face is just like Kartik. The body of Kartik is very nice,
firm and strong. For this reason, couples pray for nice and strong children.

2. Kartik is the leader of the gods. Her power is immense so, he is worshipped
as the rescuer.

3. Kartik is gentle and polite. But he is the fighter to remove all injustice from the
society.He also set up peace in heaven by defending it from Tarakasur. We
can established ourself as polite by following Lord Kartik and perform in

x building up an ideal society.
& 4. Weall should be as polite and gentle and be careful against all injustice as Kartik.

72 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Lecture 11: Devi Shitala
The introduction of Shitala Devi. A
Shitala is demotic Devi. Shitala was accepted in j | rN
mythology and then transferred to a legendary " R)
devi. Generally Devi abate the irritation of pox pe he aa
and cold us . Thus she is known to Shitala . For “A al / He. eee
getting relive from pox and skin disease Shitala is NA Sait = oe -_
worshipped. Prony gh Gi =
Devi Shitala is known to us as Thakurani \gry, Ze \ f
Jagaroni, Korunamoye, Dayamoye etc. Shitala is UA Wy Ye ~
maiden. In her head there is a crown in the form | f ih
of kula and she sits on an ass. Her carrier is ass. \ iN Ye
In Skandhapuran, Devi is described as white cit (at OW Lo | 2
coloured and two handed. In her hand there are | LE oN
water pot and broomstick. By broomstick she ~ is ag ae) ree
. MitiLy\ Migr ble Yl
spreads cold water and removes disease. “i da
Worship of Shitala:
Generally in shukla soptomi of Shrabon month we worship Devi Shit ala. In temples or
on the altar of Shitala pujait is worshipped by clergyman. The system of worsipping of
Shitala is like to worship but it is necessary cold fruit at worshipping time. Papya,
Coconut, Water-melon and other sweet items are submitted for Devi. In the
worshipping all classes of devotees participate.
Pronam montra of puja:
Om namami shitalam devim rasalohastham digambarim.
marjjanikalasopetam surpalankritam stakam.
Meaning: We offer pronam to Shitala Devi riding on the ass and bearing a broom in
her hands.
The importance of Shitala puja:
1. Shitala Devi relieves us from pox and cold us. For this reason She is known to all.
2. Devi Shitala is known to all as maintaining health rule and cleaniness.
3. There are purnakumbha and sommargoni in two hands of Shitala Devi. It is told
that by sommargoni She spread neutered cold water and remove all kinds of %
disease, heat, woe and create coldness. We also will server those who are &

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 73
affected by pox and make them cold. By worshipping Shitala we are inspired to
this kind of welfare work. She bears sometimes the leaves of him. Nim is a
diseases preventing plant. We can grow Nim plant in yards of home for
preventing disease.

Exercise

Multiple Choice Questions:

1. Which Deva is known by Shoranon?

(A) Gonesh (B) Arjun
(c) Kartik (d) Shiva
2. Which tithy the worship of Shitola is happened?
(A) Panchami (b) Shasthy
(c) Soptomi (d) Ustomy
3. For Durgasnan which soil of connected place is necessary?
I. Three connected road.
IL. Two connected road
III. Four connected road.
Which is the right?
(a)I (b) II
(c) I (d) LILI

Read the text and answer to the questions of 4 and 5:

Shukla buys a wood apple tree from plant-fair and plant it in the yard of home. She

regularly takes proper care and the tree is grown.

4. The tree which Shukla bought is concerned with which god?

(a) Kartik (b) Shiva
(c) Biswa-Karma (d) Ganesha.
Forma-10, Hindu Religion and Moral Education, Class-9-10

74 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
5. Through the taking care of plant it is expressed that -

i. love to God

ii. love to plant

iii. to develop beauty
Which one of the following is correct?

a)i b) ii

C) iii d) i, ii & iti
Creative Question:
The villagers of Palashpur became terrified because of breaking out of the pox and
cholera in the village. This is why, they were gathered to worship a special deity. They
finished the puja taking a grand preparation and through the puspanjali and pronam
mantra.

a. What do mean by deity?

b. Explain the concept of formal deity.

c. Which deity was adorned by the villagers in he stem? Explain the system of that

worship.
d. Analyze the influence of that worship in social, domestic and moral life.
26
S

CHAPTER SIX
YOGASADHANA
According to Hindu dharma shastra 'Yoga' means ‘unite’. After subduing own passion
through 'Sadhana' connecting soul to the supreme spirit for gaining Somadhi is called
yoga. To practice yoga it needs to keep the body sound however there will not be any
pain feelings are called Yogasan. Through yoga the process for adoring God is called
Yogasadhana. The body and mind are both very important during adoring God. So to
keep the body sound and mind peaceful importance of dharma sadhana for practicing
yoga is infinite. In this chapter we are going to discuss in details about Yogasadhana,
Austangayoga and Yogasana.
~ h lf AY
} y)
See => ys
‘ NCO . i
——— @) ——=< (us
At the end of this chapter we -
e Will confer in details about Yogasadhana according to dharma shastra
¢ Will describe about mental health and religious program through Yogasadhana.
e Will summaries about the concept of Austanga yoga and importance.
e Will explain the concept of Brikshasan.
e Will practice Brikshasan and confer in details of influence.
e Will discuss the concept of Ordhakurmasan.
e Will practice Ordhokurmasan and discuss about the influence of it.
e Will explain the concept of Gordasan.
wo * Will practice Garudasan and confer in details of influence.
= ewill explain the concept of Holasan.

76 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Lesson 1 : The concept and importance of Yogasadhana

The concept of Yogasadhana

Naturally the word 'Yoga’ means 'Milan’ i.e. ‘unite’. The milan with one another or to
unite or to make them united is known as Yoga. But the meaning of yoga is deeper
according to the field of sadhana. The connection with the embodied soul to supreme
soul is acknowledged as Yogasadhana.

Brahma is many, undifferentiated, offer skilled, strong rupamaya Arup, nairbektika
bektisarupa strong, strong chorachore abekta byakta The attempts to get the
connection with the Brahma are named Yogasadhana. His presence is eternal, senses
are perpetual, and spirits are endiess. He is universal and also
all-surpassing-Sachhidananda. We want the connection with this Brahma. So
therefore, through Yoga the process for adoring god and Brahma are called
Yogasadhana.

Yogasadhana is the great way to be acquitted. Firstly to be acquitted you need a
self-realization. And for this self-realization it is important to revive, to calm down and
to compose mind. That's why we have to make our body and mind suitable for these.
The body is clean, healthy and relaxed mind that the strategies we refuse to hear her are
also named Yoga. Particularly it is named as Hathayoga. Hathayoga is the first step of
supreme spirit to get the connection with the supreme spirit.

The importance of Yogasadhana:

To keep a sound healthy body and peaceful mind and for dharmasadhana the
importance of yoga is infinite. Through yoga the digestive system becomes fully
healthy, which makes the body healthy, light and cheerful. By practicing yoga we can
cure heart diseases, asthma, allergy, asphyxia etc. Especially for the stout people, to
keep a body healthy and mind beautiful yoga is great option. Through yoga our indriya
and mind is chastised, sadhaka reaches, by alienating him from darkness, his own
divine atma and paramatma, which is jyotirmaya, anandomoya, shantimoya, through
the practice of rules of ‘jam’, astangayoga. According to Vyasdev: ‘One of the
meanings of yoga is samadhi’. Through yogasadhana in purakaal saints are used to
keep their body and mind fit. Through yogasan they used to be free from diseases and
also through mediation, top-jop and pranayam they can keep a sound body and mind
and can free from worries.

Some of the yogees do practice yogasadhana only to gain the yoga power, some of
them do practice severe tapashya just to get rid of the inner maya and sacrificing
thyself for the welfare of the people of the world.

Through self-absorption they gain Mokhya. The most-prudent Bhishmadeva said, <
regarding the self-absorption through yogasadhana and the ideology of yoga, said: the &

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 77
yogees, like the archers who with a sound and absorbed mind hit their targets, achieve
moksha through the performance of sadhana being free from impure desires and
undivided attention. Yogatattwabids greatmen gain most-precious brahmapada
through the unification of jibatma with paramatma after getting over the mayataranga
of the domestic life.
The yogee being free of all sort of ohingsha can unify the jibatma with paramatma and
will gain mukti through the performance of yoga.
Group work: Write down the influences of yogasadhana.

New word: Individual persona, gratification of ones desires, customary, the world,
digestive system, sudoul, chastisement, luminous, self-absorbed, quite lost,
Lesson 2,3 & 4 : The importance and concept of Austangya
The concept of Austangya:
Every person wants to lead a happy life. Yogasadhana is the way where a person can
lead his life peacefully, happily and blissfully with full of liberty and without fear. This
way is known as Mohorshi patanjali protipadito austangya yoga. There are eight steps
of yoga to find humans soul which is prescribed by Mohorshi patanjali. They are- Yam,
Niyam, Ason, Pranayam, Prottahar, Dnarana, Dhyan, Samadhi
All of these are known as Austanga yoga. Now we are going to discuss in details about
aunstanga yoga:
1. Yama
The first step of Austanga yoga is Yam. Yam means mortification. It is taking out indrio
and jealousy, unluckiness from mind towards self-centralized. There are five kinds of
Yam such as- Ahimsha, Satya, Austeyo, Brahmacharjya, Aporigroho.
a. Ahimsha
Ahimsha means not to hurt to anybody by any kind of activities. We should not think
anything bad about anyone, should not say any ill word to anyone even should not feel
any kind of jealousy. That means we should be devoted to the earth.
b. Satya
Satya means ‘the truth’. Whatever we see, whatever we do and even whatever we think
there has to be legitimacy. If our mind rules truly, being honest and lead our life on the
basis of the truth then we can get close to the God.

co}

S

XN

78 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
c. Austeyo

Austeyo means not to steal. Ifwe steal somebody's property which is not owned or
grabbing things from someone illegally are called Steyo. So yogees always minimize
their demand. Because yogees only have one wish, as much as they can get close to
Ishhwar.

d. Brahmacharya

The lexicographical meaning of Brahmacharjya is the exercise of vedic ideas and
leading sole life . If someone in life achieves the Brahmacharjya, they feel strength and
courage in body and mind, and also it's extending/spreading knowledge. Whenever
yogees are practicing the Brahma acharjya in their life, their sense of knowledge is
extending and it influences as a shining star. This way, they can easily approach
towards I shhwar.

e. Oporigroho

The word Oporigroho means not to accept. As not accepting the irrelevant things same
way accepting the things in life according to one's limit. To live a simple life at least
you need wealth, clothing, and food etc things and at the same time by leading your life
the most important aim will be the Ishhwar aradhana, is called Oporigroho.

2. Niyam

The second part of Austanga yoga is Niyam. The Mohorshi Patanjali has identified the
five kinds of Niyam, such as - Shoucho, Santoshh, Tapo, Shadhya, Ishhwar pronidhan.
a. Soucho

The purity, innocence is called Soucho. One is internal and another is external.
Everyday the Sadhak has to purify his body by using water, to purify his mind by
practicing Shattacharan, through tapo and bidhhya they also has to get rid of impurities
to achieve purity of soul and vast extension of knowledge.

b. Santoshh

The word santoshh means facing the satisfaction. It doesn't come at once; it has to rise
slowly inside the mind. If somebody doesn't have Santoshh there wouldn't be any
concentration. The yogees don't have any kind of lacking senses and that's why there is
no existence of Osantoshh inside of their body and mind. They get feelings of heavenly
pleasure just because inside their mind santoshh exists.

c. Tapo

Tapo is the way to achieve the strict path of sadhana. Attashudhhi, attashason,
attasangjam is necessary for this sadhana. Yoga tapo means the peaceful try to getan .,
ultimate unity with Ishhwar. S

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 79
d. Sadhhya
The word Sadhhya means bed-adhhyan, shastra adhhyan or we can say bhagabad
grantha adhhyan as well.
e. |swar-Pronidhan
Pronidhan means offering. To offer all the karma and wish to Ishwar is known as
Ishwar -Pronidhan. Ohong or proud is destroyed once everything is offered to I shwar.
He who believes in Ishwar does not become hopeless in his life and becomes full of
energy. Yogee offers all his karma to the Ishhwar and hence, all his karmas bear
godliness.
3.Asan
Asan means to sit steadily with happiness, i.e., sthirsukhamasanam. Different postures
or a physical gesture, to keep a healthy body and sound mind, is known as Asan. The
body gets stronger, healthier and light. Mental balance is achieved through the practice
of Asan in one steady and happy posture. Harmony in body and mind is brought by
Asan. Yogi wins his body through Ashana and makes it the perfect carrier of the soul.
There are many kinds of Asan, e.g., padmashan, Shukhasana, gomukhasan, holashan
etc. Yogi concentrates his body and mind in the thought of Ishwar through the exercise
of different kinds of Asan. Exercising Asan is very important in Yogasadhana.
However, one needs to learn it from a guru or yogi.
4. Pranayam
It means 'Ayam' of Pran. Here Pran means the air we breathe and 'Ayam' means to
spread. Hence, it means spreading the breathing air. In other words, to control the flow
of breathing as your wish is known as Pranayam. In Pranayam, the air we breathe is
spread all over the body. This is because Yogi lives longer not in days, but through the
counting of his breathings. The more number of times he breathes, the more he lives
longer. Frequent breathing will lessen the days he will live. That's why, he breathes less
and breathes deeply in a rhythm. Through such deep and rhythmic breathing, his
breathing organs become stronger, nervous system remains calm and his desires remain
under control. Pranayam is completed through three processes - Rechok, Purak and
Kumvak. Taking breathe in is known as Purok, leaving the breath out is known as
Rechak and to keep the breathe in is known as Kumvak. Pranayam can, alternatively,
be termed as the science of breathing. However, one should not practice Prayanayam
through Rechok, Purak and Kumvak without the proper supervision of a competent
guru.
5. Protyahar
sc It means to take in. In Yoga, to take all our senses inwards overlooking all the worldly
% interests is called Protyahar. All of our sense organs are taken inwards through hard

80 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
perseverance and control of habits. Once the sense organs are taken inwards,
worldly-affinities are destroyed. In these situations, the soul can concentrate in its
desired subject-matter.

6. Dharona

To concentrate or stabilize mind into something special is known as Dharona. Dharona
means assiduity. You cannot achieve anything without assiduity. If you want to grasp
any subject, you need to concentrate reducing your attention to other emotional
feelings. To get Ishwar you have to want him intently. To want intently, you have to
practice one-theory. You have to focus on a part of your body, like - naval, top of your
nose or middle of your eye-brows or you can try to think about any god or anything. By
doing this, yogi earns the quality to achieve his desired objective. Dharona is the basis
of dhyan.

7. Dhyan

Dhyan means continuous deep thinking. If the mind thinks about Ishwar continuously
then at the end it will achieve isnwaropom. In dhyan, every sense of a yogi, including
his body, breathing, senses, mind, intellect and proud, dissolves in Ishwar and he enters
into an unexplainable conscious state. He feels nothing but the supreme pleasure and
he can see the inner light as well.

8. Samadhi

It means to dedicate your soul completely to I|shwar. If you can do that, you will be able
to find jibatma in parmatma, and thus a sadhaka ends his search. A sadhak achieves
Samadhi at the highest pick of dhyan. Then he gets into a mindless, intellect-less,
proud-less healthy state. Then he gets connected with the paramatma. At that time, he
does not have any sense of his 'self' or his 'persona’, because then his body, mind and
intellect are shut down. A sadhak achieves the true yoga at that time

Lesson 5 : Importance of Austanga Yoga

By following and exercising austanga yoga, one's turbulent mind calms down and his
inner strength increases. A large water body is created by controlling a reckless river
which becomes a canal after the construction of embankments on it and thereafter, that
water is used for agriculture and for producing electricity resulting into a happy and
prosperous life for the general people. Similarly, through exercising austanga yoga you
can control your mind and channe! it in a way to create peace and self-devel opment to
gain enormous power.

No one can be a yogi without performing austanga yoga. It is not only for a yogi,
performance of austanga yoga is a must for those who want to be fully happy intheir .
personal life and want to see all the animals live happily as well. Yama and Niyama 5

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 81

are the basis of austanga yoga. Through yama and niyama, a '

sadhak controls their thinking and emotions which helps I\

them to create harmony with other persons of the world. LAL

When the mind and body becomes more sound , strong and

fresh through asna, harmony is created between Him and the

nature. At the end he can be devoid all the senses of his body. yA

He wins the body and uses it as the carrier of the soul. A ‘ " N,

sadhak can control his mind by breathing easily through ta i :

Pranayam and Protyahar. Thus he frees his senses from i)

earthly feelings. Dharona, Dhyan and Samadhi take a sadhok Y {

into the deepest state of his soul. Then sadhok does not have yy 4

to look for Iswara in the heaven because he gets the feeling y ),

that Iswaralivesin his heart as auntaratma. Austangayoga has yj / (}

proved itself necessary for religion, adhyatma, humanity and A Y 4

science. Austangayoga is the only way to stop murder and A of Bai,

conflict in the world. It is the only way to establish world a

peace. If one wants to find existence of him and wantsto ~ BA

introduce with the truth of life, he has to practise austangasan. |
Single task : Make a chart writing the usefulness of ]

Austangasana. be .

By practising austangasan one can achieve personal and social unity, fitness, and

intellectual development, mental and spiritual peace.

New words: propadita, selfish, earthly, constancy, resilience, nerves, glands,

cholesterol, vein, thrombosis, immobile.

Lesson 6: The Concept, Method and Effects of Brikshasana

Concept of Brikshasana

At the time of practising this Asan body is seen as like as a tree, because of that this

Asan is called ‘Brikshasana’.

Practising Method

One has to stand straight joining both the legs with the feet parallel to the floor. Now

one has to break the right leg up to the knee and the right feet joining with the left knee

creating a triangular shape while the toes facing downwards. At this moment one is to

stand depending on the left leg Now in the style of namaskara draw the enjoined hands

to the breast and pull them up straight over the head. Stand in this posture for ten

Forma-11, Hindu Religion and Moral Education, Class-9-10

82 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
seconds without any movement, keeping the breathing normal. Then slowly lower the
hands straighten the right leg and stand in the normal position. Reverse the whole
process with the left leg for another ten seconds. Then he/she has to take rest in
sabasana for ten seconds. One has to practise three times in total.
Single task: Do the Brikshasana.
Effects:
After exercising Brikshasana regularly —
1. One’s power to control physical harmony increases.
2. The strength and resilience of the muscle in the leg increases.
3. One’s leg becomes stronger and his power of agility increases.
4. It helps keep the resilience of the thigh-joints.
5. The strength of waist and backbone will increase.
6. The construction of one’s arms and legs becomes more healthy and beautiful.
7. Knee, arms become soft by increasing blood circulation smoothly.
8. Helpful to remove arthritis of leg.
9. Helpful to remove weakness of hand and leg.
10. It can control cholesterol and save from thrombosis.
Single work: Write five usefulness of Brikshasana.
Lesson 7: The Concept, Method and Effects of Ardhakurmasana
Conception of Ardhakurmasana
Kurma means turtles. In this asana, one’s back looks like the back of a turtle and that’s
why it is known as Ardhakurmasana.
(G Sy ,
= iS a GY YYYy

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 83
Practising Method
One must knee! down. Both the knees and the feet need to bejoined together along with
the buttock resting on the heels. Hands will be resting at ease on the knees. Legs, from
knees to toes, must remain parallel with the ground. After that, place the arms beside
the ears and raise them over the head. Now enjoin the palms, as in the posture of
namaskar, touching the thumbs together so that the shape at the top of your hands looks
like a pinnacle of a temple. Then while keeping the hands straight and keep breathing
out, slowly lower the upper part of the body, till the waist, in the posture of pronam until
the forehead touches the ground and project the enjoined hands as far as possible. Take
care so that, while doing the above mentioned posture, a gap is not created between the
heels and the buttock and alight pressure is maintained on stomach, breast, both side of
the ribs and thighs. Stay in this position for 30 seconds maintaining anormal breathing.
Reverse back to the upright position while breathing in and out normally. Finally, take
rest for 30 secondsin sabashana. Do this three times. However, patients with high blood
pressure must not do ardhakurmashana.
Single task: Practise ardhakurmashana.

Effects:
The effects of exercising ardhakurmashana are:
1. Body loosens up
2. Backbone becomes stronger
3. Organs inside belly becomes powerful and more active than before
4. Doing this ashana one can be full of energy and healthy body
5. Calms down the brain
6. Pancreas remains healthy
7. Reduces indigestion, acidity, lack of appetite, constipation and dysentery
8. Increases digesting power
9. Reduces gas in the stomach
10. Improves asthma and diabetic situation
11. Cures muscle pain in the legs and arthritis of bones
12. Cures muscle pain of the shoulder
13. Reduces the fat around the stomach and the buttock

eo 14. Muscles of stomach and thighs become stronger

S 15. Mind becomes more subtle, stable and balanced to take joy and sorrow equally

84 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
16. Loosens emotions like sorrow, horror and anger
17. One slowly becomes devoid of sorrow and pain and cares less about worldly
enjoyments.
18. It helps the yogi concentrate in his yoga sadhana.
Group work: Prepare a poster of the advantages of Ardhakurmasana.
New words: kurma, loosen up, indigestion, gastric, constipation, buttock, ribs,
prakapa liver.
Lesson 8 & 9 : The Concept, Method and Effects of Garudasana
The concept of Garudasana S
In this asana, one’s posture will be like the eagle and hence, it is (_ | FR
known as Garudasana WZ N b
\ 5
Practising Method uv
7 t.
One has to stand straight joining both the legs with the feet parallel (\ 43 »
to the floor. He has to break up to his right elbow and then take it YJ .
under the left elbow and then touch the right palm with the left
palm making the posture of namaskara, while coiling the left leg
with the right leg. Always one has to keep his breathing normal and
be in this process for thirty seconds. Reverse the process and f ly
practise it for four times, Then take rest in sabasana. fi My
D ey
Single task: Practise Garudasana. { N
iN 4 "
Effects : ye
Practising Garudasana regularly —
1. beautifies the arm and the leg and will make them stronger ;
2. prevents arthritis. (i
3. prevents hamstring injury. -
4. makes the upper portion of the thigh, buttock and arm stronger |
5. makes the joints of buttock, knee and ankle smoother “>
6. smoothes the hard neck
7. straightens the back bone. 0
8. helps one keep the Brahmacharya. s

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 85
9. makes one taller
10. keeps the body well balanced.
11. keeps the kidney in good condition
Group work: Write the advantages of the Garudasana
New words : Garudasana, Brahmacharya.
The Concept, Method and Effects of Halasana
The Concept of Halasana
‘Hal’ means the plough. Since the posture of the body looks like a plough, it is
called Halasana.
rn
S RY =
as x\'
2 ~~
Practising Method
One has to lie down on his back. Both the thighs, knees and feet should be enjoined and
straight. Both the hands should remain at both sides of the body. Now slowly raise the
joined legs up while breathing out and raise them straight and bend them over the head
stretching out as far as possible so that the toes touch the floor behind the head. Stay in
this position for 30 seconds. After that slowly return to your normal position and take
rest in sabasana for 30 seconds. Practise it for three times. Those who have dysentery,
heart disease, high blood pressure and those who have unnaturally large spleen and
liver should not practise Halasana.
Single task: Practise Halasana.
Effects:
Practising Halasana regularly —
1. keeps the backbone healthy and easy
2. keeps the elasticity of the backbone
co 3. makes nerve centre around the backbone and the muscles at the both sides of the
% backbone fresh and active.

86 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
4. prevents constipation, indigestion etc.
5. increases the power of spleen, liver, urine-bag etc.
6. makes different glands like thairoid, parathairoid, tonsil etc. stronger and more active.
7. reduces the fat of the belly, waist and buttock.
8. prevents diabetes, arthritis.
9. cures back pain.
10. helps those who are suffering from hard neck.
New words: hal, spleen, thairoid, parathairoid, constipation.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions:
1. ‘Yoga is spiritual kamdhenu’ — who said this ?
a) Vyasdeva b) Dr. Sampurnananda
c) Maharshi Patanjali d) Maharshi Yajnavalkya
2. What is the meaning of Asteya ?
a) Satisfaction b) Know thyself
c) Concentration d) Not to steal
3. Which is the foundation of Meditation?
a) Niyam b) Asana
c) Dharana d) Protyahar
Read the following passage and answer the question no 4 & 5:
Simple and gentle boy Sourav is a student of class nine. He never thinks harm to
other. Not only that if any cat drinks milk from his glass, he(s) helps the cat drink milk.
4. Which part of Yama is expressed in Sourav’s charecter?
a) Asteya b) Brahmacharya
c) Ahimsa d) Aparigraha
5. The Significance of Yama is boundless, because it -
i. makes self development
ii. makes peace in the society x
iii. increases affection to everything wordly. S

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 87
Which one of the following is correct?
a)i bi &ii
c) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
Creative Questions:
El HN
SS att \ M
ee E> . — P
a) What is called worshipping God through Yoga?
b) Explain a step of Austangayoga.
c) What problems are there in the yogasana of picture?
d) It is important to practise systematically of the asana in picture, to control mental
peace and physical soundness explain.
oy
S

CHAPTER SEVEN
MORAL EDUCATION IN RELIGIOUS BOOK
The word Religion means - 'which or who preserves’. Dhree (dhatu) + mon (protya) =
Dharma (religion). Dhree means to preserve. Preserving something spiritual in one's
heart, human being can live beautifully; go on disciplined and holly way that is
religion. In which book the advices of building morally the worldly and the spiritual
life is called the Religious book. Everybody has inner respect to religion and similarly
to the scriptures. So, it is called a part of religion to read or hear the scriptures reading.
27
vie
Ne A : f li
Knowledge of religion, religious practices, religious reformation, religious activities
examplary are presented in the Religious book. So the scriptures or the religious books
have a strong role to build our life ideal. These scriptures are Veda, Brahman,
Aronyaka, Upanishad, Ramayana, Mahabharata and Srichaitanyamrita etc. Here a
short introduction of Upanishad and its significance, learning and an advisable story
from Upanishad will be presented. In addition, the spiritual value and learning of The
Ramayana and the Mahabharata will be will be explained here.
At the end of this chapter we -
e Will be able to explain the significance of Religious book to ensure the ideal
life and morality for Human beings
e Will be able to describe Upanishad in brief as a Religious book
e Will be able to explain the significance of Upanishad to build the ideology and morality.
e Will be able to narrate a story from Upanishad and it’
e Will be able to explain the role of the Ramayana and Mahabharata to build ideology,
value and morality. co
e Will be able to apply the learning of Ramayana and Mahabharata in the real life. S

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 89
Lesson - 1: Importance and Role of Religious book to build upon Ideal life and
Morality
Man is the best creation with the basis of knowledge and wisdom. The knowledge of
teacher and learner's has been going on from the ancient time. After the invention of
letter, all knowledge had been collected as a book. Spiritual theology, the speech of
early lives and lives here after, the speech of superiority and various stories had been
presented in Veda, Upanishad, Purana, Ramayana, Mahabharata etc for the
welfare of human being. There are also described about happiness-sorrows,
happiness-excitement, war-conflict, king- kinship, various mysterious thought about
the universe. The creator of this universe, the creation of existence and destruction is
God. Veda is the original religious book of the Hindus. So Hinduism is called Vedic
Religion. Hindustan flourished on the basis of the Veda.
We have learnt the theory and information about religion. We also learnt about various
religious books. We all should obey religion. The religion of human being is humanity.
Those who have no humanism is similar to animals. If one follows the activities of
religion, the wildness behaviour will be destroyed. A developed sense of humanism and
holly feelings of purity will be developed in this welfare feeling is religion. We know,
according to Manusamhita, veda, smriti, sadachar, and viveker bani, these four
characteristics are mentioned as the special principles of religion.
‘Veda smritih sadacharah swasya cha priamatnanah
Etachchturbidham prahuh sakshat dharmasya lakshanam.’ (Manusamhita-2/12)
One should have firm faith in veda and fallow the principles of smritisastra; take
decision following the great men i.e. the rules of sadachar. But if one fails to find the
solution, he has to follow the viveker bani, the voice of conciseness. One has to apply
one's knowledge of expenence.
Unit work: Write the general principles of religion.
There are also more other ten external characteristics through which the nature of
religion is expressed.
‘Dhritih kshama damohasteyam souchamindriya-nigrah
Dheervdya satyamakrodho-dasakam dharmalakshanam.
That is- tolerance, forgiveness, kindness, not to steal, purity, self-restraince, practising
virtue, knowledge, truth, dispassionateness. God is the root of everything. So, God is
the root of religion. The main object of religion is faith in God. Everybody should
fallow the directed path of God. The opposite of religion is called sin. Such as not to
take part in stealing is virtue; stealing is sin. So nobody should steal because it commits
Forma-12, Hindu Religion and Moral Education, Class-9-10

90 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
unethical activities and it is against morality. Religion is essential for moral education.
We have got an idea about virtue and sin and it is clearly inscribed in the religion books
in details. There are various facts or sub-facts, tales or sub-tales described in the
scriptures. The process of gaining and how non-rediigious activities are defeated and
destroyed is shown in these books. What will bring the welfare of human being and
what will develop human being morally is shown in the religious books. Annd it is also
described how one brings destruction by himself. So it is found that the role of religious
books have great significance in building up ideal life and morality. We will be able to
be the owner of good characteristics through studying the religious books. And in this
way our society, nation and country will be prosperous and rich.

Lesson 2: A brief history of the Upanishad

We have known about the Veda, Purana, Ramayana, Mahabharata, Srimad
bhagabatgeeta, Srichandi etc. before. Now we’ I] know about vedic literature.

Upanishad

The Veda is a vast storekeeper of knowledge. If one wants to know the historical
background of the world he has to know the Veda. The Veda is full of knowledge by
which man may get the chaturbarga. They are Dharma, Artha, Kam and Moksha.
Actually education-culture, religious practice, custom everything has been reflected
through the Veda. It is told in Manusamhita7 "Veda Akhiladharmamulam' that is Veda
is the root of religion. Vedic literature is the collection of four subjects which are
different in meaning but spiritually co-related. These are- 1. Mantraor samhita 2.
Brahman 3. Aranyaka 4. Upanishad. These are divided into two. a) Karmakanda b)
Gyan kanda. In krmakenda, the mantras, rules of vedic sacrifice (yajna), customs,
activities have been described. In Gyankanda, God, Brahman, Creator and mystery of
creation have been explained. Upanishad is the part of the Gyankanda part of
knowledge. The knowledge on Brahna means the deepest knowledge about birth and
death of human being. These are explained in Upanishad. This is why Upanishad is
called the mystery of knowledge.

Upa-ni-chasad+kwip= Upanishad. Upa means to near, ni means sure, chasad means to
damage; so Upanishad means the deep knowledge by which one can damage abidya
(bad knowledge) in presence of guru (teacher). There is another different explanation
of Upanishad. Such as where people sit (chased) around (pari) one, that is called
parishada; similarly where people sit (chrsad) combindly (sam) that is called sangsad.
As like as, where the students sat (chasad) close (upa) to Guru (teacher) before that
meeting was called Upanishad. There is discussed about Brahma. After that in which S
book, this knowledge was composed, in known as Upanishada. s

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 91
Another meaning of Upanishad is mystery. The knowledge of Upanishad or Brahmais
very deep and very hard to understand. It is not expressible to everywhere. So
Upanishad and the word mystery are same.
Upanshads are more than two hundred but only twelve are very famous and important.
These are Oitareya, Koishitaki, Chhandogya, Brihadaranyaka, Isho, katho,
shwetashwatara, Chhandogya, taittiriya, prosno, Mundak and Manduky. All of those
except Manduky were explained by Shankaracharya, so these are considered as main
Upanishad.
Unit work : Write three sentences about each of the Veda and Upanishad.

Lesson 3: Significance and teaching of Upanishad
It has been told that there are two kandos (chapter) of the Veda. Karmo kando (chapter
of work) and Gyan kando (chapter of knowledge). Upanishad belongs to Gyankando
(chapter of knowledge). Somebody think the last lesson or last decision belongs to this.
So it is called Vedanto. Brahmabidya is the root of all knowledge. So it is called the
vedanto. The ways to have the knowledge of Brahma is called Upanishad. It destroys
abidya and carries the living being to supreme Brahma. There are the discussions about
the knowledge of how to achieve Brahma or knowledge in Upanishad.
Upanishad or Vedanto is full of mysterious about Brahma. Those who are self-restraint
and dedicated to the scriptures only they can realise the knowledge of vedanto.
Upanishads are the part of Brahman and Aranyak. Upanishad belongs to Samhita. So,
it is called the Samhitopanishid and others are Brahmopanishad.
The great men who are not involved in domestic life went to jungle for meditation.
Their thinking has expressed through the Upanishad, Their followers have developed
this thinking.
Upanishad does not make life unwilling to work or lazy, makes devoted to work. It
makes life full of work. Brahma is truth, universe is false. Life is nothing but Brahma.
According to Upanishad, everything of the universe is co-related. Thereis no deference
among the living being on the universe. So being jealous to other means being jealous
to own self. Doing harm to other means doing harm to own self. So, we everybody
should not be jealous, and do harm another. We should help, love and respect others. In
this way, a good relation among the people, i.e. communal harmony in the society will
be established. Whole world will be peaceful.

2

&

92 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Lesson 4: The story in Upanishad - Aruni Shwetaketu Sambad
There was a wisest sage named Aruni in the ancient period. His son was Shwetuketu.
At the age of twelveAruni sent him to the guru to practise Brahmacharya. After twelve
years being a scholar with vast knowledge on veda Shwetaketu came back home. Then
his father asked him, 'Shwetaketu, being a scholar you have come back, but have you
asked your teacher how one can hear the unhearing matter, how one can think the non
- thinking matter and how one can know the unknown matter? Shwetketu said, ‘Lord,
what is that advice? Father told, 'Dear, by knowing a piece of earth, we can know the
whole earthen matter, by knowing a piece of golden ornament we can know all gold ,
varities of ornament is only for style , actually gold is gold . Just like this, the advice by
which one can hear the unhearing subject, can think the unthinking matter and can
know the unknown matter. Shwetaketu told, 'l think, my respected teachers were not
known about this. If they knew, why didn't they advise me? So, you advise me please.
Aruni agreed advise him (s). He thought that He would be Bahu syam i.e. I'll many,
then he creates power (ray). It was created water from teja, rice from water. This is
why; there occur rain, and grow a lot of rice, mon from anno, Pran from water and
Buck (root of speach) from teja. Shwetaketu told, ‘teach me please.’ Aruni started,
‘Listen, purus is attached with 'sholokala’. Don't eat for fifteen days, but drink water as
you can, because Pran(soul ) is full of water.
A age ae Saste
Z ZS IN sds pa ) is Z 3 :
} : X
Shwetaketu did not take meal for fifteen days. He told his father, 'What will | say?
Father told, 'Utter Rik, Yaju, and sam mantras.’ Shwetaketu told, 'l cannot remember
that.’ Aruni told, 'dear, you have been starving for fifteen days, for this reason your one
‘kala’ is remaining out of 'sholo’. So you cannot understand veda. Take meal and you x
will understand my advices.' After taking meal Shwetaketu went to his father and this &

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 93
time he understood everything easily which his father said. He told, ‘dear, without
water there is nothing in our body. Try to find the cause of ‘teja' through the
germination of the water. Everything of the universe has created from virtue, laid on
virtue and abolished in virtue. This virtue is soul.
Shwetaketu told, 'Father, | cannot understand this.'Aruni told, 'Dear, if one can know
one's soul, one will know the Brahma, because, 'sarbam khalwidam brahma'-
everything and everywhere is Brahma.
Shwetaketu told, ‘But who are you? Aruni answered, Brahmasi- means | am Brahma.
Shwetaketu - who am |?
Aruni- 'Tattwamasi- you are that (brahma).'
Shwetaketu- if we all are Brahma, so why we cannot see Him? Then Aruni told
Shwetaketu to come next day with some salt and a glass of water and ordered to keep
salt into the water. Nextday Aruni told Shwetaketu to find out that salt from water but
he(S) didn't find it.
Then he (A) asked to drink the water, Shwetaketu did it but it was very salted.
Aruni told, ‘Dear, salt has mixed into water, so it is not seen but it isin water. Just like
this Brahma is everywhere but we cannot see Him. He is the subject of feeling. He is
the soul. Knowing the Brahma means knowing the soul, knowing oneself. This is the
root of knowledge.
Learning of this story
From this story we can feel! that everything of the universe isin Brahma. Brahmaislaid
into living being as the soul. So there is no difference between each other. To malice
one is to malice own self. To harm anybody is to harm own self. So we should not be
jealous or harmful to rather we should do help, love and respect other.
Lesion 5: Learning of Ramayana in building religious activities, values and
morality.

early poet Balmiki Muni composed The Ramayana. Ramayana is called the epic. It is
one of the most ancient religious books. Original Ramayana was written in Sanskrit.
Krittivas translated Ramayanain Bangla. There are the stories of ideal kings, victory of
the religious and defeat of the irreligious, the stories of building values and morality in
this scripture. These stories inspire or motivate us to enrich our values and morality. We
learn from the story of the Dacoit Ratnakar. If one commits sins, he/she has to suffer for
his sin.

co}

S

94 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Father, mother, wife, son, and daughter will not share the suffering. Dacoit Ratnakar
became a sage by following the advice of Brahma. Not only giving advice; having the
mentality of accepting advice is also important. This story inspires us to the receive
advice. So we should follow the honest way/ path always, to speak the truth, to do well
behaviour with others, not to hurt others. These series are described in the holly books
so that one can increase his/her morality. Duties

of son to father, love for brother, firmness of 7 j
love for husband, perseverance of patriotism, ar f}
duties of the kings towards the subjects; duties o. eS & HH}
and loyalty of younger brother to the ders are. Pie Sy ak:
described in the Ramayana. Ram went to jungle asap a)

for fourteen years to keep his devotion to father. f <x ig oie fo My
Sheeta and Lakshman went with Ram, thisis the e Ly Of is y
instance of devotion to husband and brother. f ee Li A iN Iu, ||
Kidnapping of Sheeta by Ra van during her exile life and attack of Ram in Lanka and
rescuing after demolishing of Ravan along with his entire family, this is the victory of
truth.

Being angry with the agony of mother Kaikoi, Bharo it went to forest to bring back his
elder brother Rama. But Rama did not come back. Bharat returned with Rama's shoe as
the symbol of Rama. Bharat did not lead a luxurious life being a king. Being hugged
with brotherly love Bharat led an exile life though he stayed in the capital. We get
learning of brotherhood from the behaviour of Bharat and Lakshman.

Ram was an ideal king. He was always alert so that no one could lead an unhappy life
in his dynasty. He would love his wife Sheeta. But he did not hesitate to leave his wife
for the happiness of his subjects. We learn about the supreme duty of aking. Thereisa
well saying that, 'There was no existence of any kingdom like Ram's and there will not
be. 'So we should read the Ramayana and take moral teaching with profound respect
along with the religious activities.

Lesson 6: The teaching of Mahabharata to build up religious activities,
values and morality

The Mahabharata is one of the most ancient religious books. Krishna Dwaipayan
Vedavyasa composed this epic. The original Mahabharata was written Sanskrit. It was
translated in bengali by Kashiram Das. The theme of Mahabharata is the tale of wars
between Kouravas and Pandavas. This war took placein Kurukshetra. In this war it was
proved, 'Where is religion, there is victory’. Though the main theme of this book was x
the battle of Kuru-pandavas but there were added some after stories. &

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 95
The message of religion is presented in these books. Religious speech, temporal well
and woe and blessings in the long run were described in these books. There have been
described the non-religious effects and the cruel destructions of the non-religious
activities in these books. Such stories are described in Mahabharata and the stories help
human being walk through religious way and to give up the path of non-religion and
sins. It raises moral values. It helps ensure peace and discipline in society. This is why
all should read the scripture. There is a well saying that- "Which is not in Bharat
(India), that is not in Mahabharata" i.e. there is not any fact which is out of
Mahabharata. The conflict of interest was the main cause of Kuru-pandovs 'conflict.
The pride of power, political diplomacy, to destroy the rival group by any means and to
disinherit by adopting unfair means. So we see that the Victory of Religion,
establishment of truth against the conspiracy of Duryadhana, destruction of Kourava
and the regain of Pandavas lost kingdom by defecting all conspiracy of the rival
groups. It was proved that God helps them who live following the way of religion. On
the other hand, God does not forgive them, those who live following the non-religious
way, want to snatch the wealth of other. They may get prosperity, pride of power for
short time but in the long run their destruction is a must. Through the described stories
we see, the destruction of pride and the bitter grand result of equality.
We become inspired from reading the Mahabharata about the policy of a country,
socialism, theology and human value and morality. At the time of telling the stories of
fore-father of Janmajoy (son of King Parikshit), Vyasadeva described this Mahabharata
to him. Other relevant stories came there. Through these stories the social condition of
that time, state, morality etc. were exposed.
The duties of the King towards the subjects, hospitality, derive of submission, and then
power was proved. It was proved frequently that if 'God saves, who can kill? i.e. if the
Lord saves one, none can destroy him/her. So we get inspiration by reading the
Mahabharata to become religious, morally inspired and to devote oneself for the
service of humanity. So we should read the Mahabharata and get teaching from it to
enrich our country and nation.
New word: vedic, desire, rule, parisada, upanishad, kam, moksha, pandav, kourav,
spiritual, mystery, humanity, communal, vice, moral value, inspiration.
Exercise

Multiple Choice Question (MCQ) :
1. In which Veda, the Brihadaronyaka is included?

oo a. Suklayajurveda b. Krishnayajurveda

& c. Samveda d. Rigveda

96 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
2. How many years was Swtaketu in the house of scholar?

a. Ten b. Twelve

c. Fourteen d. Sixteen
3. Ratna studied attentively according to the advice of her teacher and succeeded in

her exam, What has/have been exposed through the behaviour of Ratna?

i. Submission

ii. Mentality of accepting advice

iii. Desire for good result
Which one of the following is correct?

ai&ii b. ii & iii

c.i & iii d. i, ii & iii
Read the following passage and answer the questions no. 4 & 5
Sreyoshi’s father is an industrialist. He is a pious and trustful person. He is
always very careful about the faithful and problems of his workers and pays their
wages in time. He can give up any profit for their betterment and always tries to
keep his words. Sreyoshi never disobey her father. She is ready to shoulder any work
to keep her father’s name and fame.
4. Whose characteristic has reflected in the character of Sreyoshi?

a. Srikrashna b. Ramachandra

c. Srichaitanya d. Balarama
5. Through the behaviour of Sreyoshi , that expressed is ---

i. love

ii. devotion to father

iii. sympathy
Which one of the following is correct?

a.i b.ii

c. 1& iii d. i, ii & iii

°9
Ss

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 97

Creative Questions:

1) Arnio established an orphanage and socio-organization along with doing social
activities. They contribute subscription for the orphanage. Sometimes they
pressure to collect subscriptions or steal to manage goods and money. Because he
thinks that it is not necessary to think about just and unjust in order to save those
orphans. But Amio's father advised him that one should not steal and collect money
by creating pressure and one should do well deeds by honest earning.

a) From which book one can learn the symptoms of religion.

b) Explain the significance of stem to build morality.

c) Explain the symptoms of religion according to your text, which are expressed
through the activities of Amio.

d) Amio’s father’s advice helps build morality- evaluate this statement.

Observing the leadership qualities in Mitali, the class teacher selected her to

2. control the class. Some of the students hel ped her maintain the class. Most of the
students and the teachers became pleased. But Pritam and some other students
could not bear it, so they went on conflict. They started propagandas against
Mitali. Teacher was convinced. He handed over the duties to Pritam. But when he
realized the fact , he returned the power to Mitali and warned Pritam to be rectified
himself.

a) Who composed the Mahabharata in Bengali?

b) Why the battle between Kuru and Pandava described in the Mahabharata is important?

c) Explain the character of the person of Mahabharata that has been reflected in the
character of Pritam.

d) Evaluate the role of the teacher according to the objective of the Mahabharata.

Forma-13, Hindu Religion and Moral Education, Class-9-10

CHAPTER EIGHT

RELIGIOUS STORIES AND MORAL EDUCATION

We have known about how we can get moral education from the <

holy scripts in previous chapters. Now we will know about ; p\\ ea |
i) WN Acie

religious stories and moral education in script of this chapter. ¢ wees

The stories play an important role in acquiring moral education. \\ i. oF

We will know the significance of involving of religious episodes in Ww 4 vt

the chapter. We will discuss two moral conception named ae) Le \

Humanity and Moral Courage the reflective episodes. “fi | iJ ) }

At the end of this chapter we- | ae) di

e Will explain the significance of inclusion of religious stories | fi Z ON ;

e Will be able to explain the conception of humanism in religious way i | il }

e Will be able to describe the exemplary story of humanity

© Will be able to mark the moral education of described episodes

e Will be able to analyze the significance of the education in social nN

and domestic life jek

e Will be able to explain conception of moral courage an

© Will be able to describe the exemplary story of moral courage | a 2 \\

e Will be able to explain education of described episodes je ag oh

Part -1: Significance of inclusion of the episodes in Religious Pook * Wh td

Man is usually piety. One may be powerful, may have much Be\ al f \

property but there is no one in the society who does not fear of i i iY a y \

God or Almighty creator. bY

That is why those who are good men in the society all of them

love, respect religion and observe rules and regulations, customs,

manners and behaviours. And these are described in the scriptures. a

We know there are many scriptures of {12 Hindus, Veda, Upanishad, i)

Ramayana, Mahabharata, Purana, Bhagavata, Geeta, Chandi etc. try F ry

Many advices are given there which help us to grow morality in i Me ae

ourselves. We honour religion as well as religious book. One | pl

should obey the advices of the great men, which are included in the i ine a

scriptures. The role of scriptures to build up morality in life is very A |

important. The religious stories have been included in the script _ | on SS

with a view to ensuring welfare, strong communal harmony and peace / een i! rs

in the society. Wi | N

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 99
We will make ourselves educated morally by reading these religious stories and if
we are encouraged by this moral education, it will influence on the social life.

Unit work: What are described in the scripture? What is done by hearing or reading

a holy scripture? Make a poster about it.
Part 2 : The concept of Humanity
Monu + shna = Manob that is human. Man is born with some inherent nature qualities
Such as hunger, thirst, anger, fear, jealousy, greed, temptation etc. If one bears these
qualities, he is not considered as a man. Because all kinds of animals, lower animals
bear these qualities.
So man can be marked out as a human when he is completely different from the other
animals with a special quality. What is this quality? In a word, it is 'Humanity. Man is
superior to other animals for humanity. One who has no humanity is not considered as
aman. The inherent qualities have been mentioned at the very beginning of the lesson
are found in animals: so these are called the wild behaviours. One cannot be a man
having possessed wild behaviours. Human qualities are needed to be a man. One is
considered as a man who possesses these human qualities.

Unit work: a) Why does man regard a respect religion? Write.

b) Write some names of scriptures.
Humanity isaspecial moral quality. It is also apart of religion. We know that tolerance,
forgiveness, kindness, not to steal, purity, self-restraint, practising virtue, knowledge,
truth, and dispassionateness are the ten external characteristic of religion. Those who
belong these qualities are known as real man because it is essential to make a man
humane. Man is a social being living in society and feels pains seeing the sufferings of
others. The feelings of love or affection to man is known as humanity. To serve living
being is the part of humanity.
Man has kindness and sympathy to man. Man has sacrificed their lives in searching of
the truth from era to era. They have endured the sufferings for the well-being of
mankind. Man has become great, sacrificing himself in serving and working. They
have been great and successful utilizing their merit and labor for the well-being of man.
The root of greatness is called humanity or loving the human. A number of great men
spent other everything of their lives to be inspired by humanism. Many magnanimous
people made the supreme sacrifice not only giving money also through scarifying their
lives. Being kind to animal proves the way for the well - being of nation. Giving food
to the starved, clothes to the naked, water to the thirsty, sight to the sightless, learning
o> to the illiterate, ideology to the misbelieved, shelter to the landless, courage to the
S_ timid, medicine to the patients, condolence to the depressed are the another name of

100 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
humanity. We've the qualities of humanity in our life. We will be real man. We will
represent a story about humanity to the next lesson.
Part 3: Humanity of Rantibarma
Long-long ago there was a king named Rantibarma who had great sympathy to his
subjects and devotion to Lord Krishna. The people of his kingdom would live happily.
He was not only aking but also he was the king of kings, the greatest king, the emperor.
Being an emperor, he had no attraction to worldly life. He believed, Lord sreekrishna
only the worshipping personality. He sacrificed everything in the name of Lord krishna
and took the Ajachakbritti. According to this profession, one is not allowed to beg. He
would lead his life on peoples’ kindness and receive what they would willingly offer.
Around forty eight days passed continuously after taking Ajachakbritti. Nobody gave
anything him to eat within forty days. He also did not want to eat and nobody gave
anything to eat willingly. One of his devotees gave him some food on the 49th day. He
was going to break his fasting with that food. Suddenly a beggar with a dog appeared
there. They were very sick to look. It seemed seeing them that they did not eat anything
for many days. The beggar said in trembled voice,'! have been starving for a few days,
please give me something to eat. My dog with me had been starving’ The emperor
Rantideva was very much moved at the wretched condition of the the hungry man and
the dog. He at once offered the man whole hk
amount of the food that he got a while ago. 0) AK a
After eating that food the man said that he Gaind eae (| . NK Gan
politely there is nothing to give more. It is aa | al eau -
known as humanity. He(R) had been BU AM SB ti
without food for 48 days, yet he(R) could | ! a | | |
have the sense to offer the food he got on || ( jah Ui re
the 49 day to another hungry and wretched ii! Sil Lili hy \
man. This is a vivid example of humanity. gill Lr tt NI tA f —
It can be realized by anybody. iii
Teaching of the story: Humanity is 9 |\\ al P
religion. Morality is expressed through Se a hd
humanity and it is useful to us. We will —
earn this virtue. It will make us good and
society will be peaceful.

8

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 101
Lesson 4 & 5: The concept of moral courage
Courage means fearlessness, honesty means to follow the path of truth and justice. So
the overall meaning of courage is, following the ways of truth and justice, showing
bravery against the injustice and inhumane or sacrifices oneself to establish the truth or
justices being not to be feared of the man. Who works for the will being both of the
person and taking risk of his life or tries his best to show the ability is called courage.
When anybody tortures to the weak, we should stand with courage in favour of the
weaker. To save the beaten or tortured one from the wicked person, the courage is
needed. Those who are timid or coward cannot do any beneficial work. Society, country
and nation cannot be benefited by them. They are nothing but burden. But the brave are
pride of society, country and nation. They do not hesitate to sacrifice themselves in any
crisis of society, country and nation. Moral courage is a special quality of human being.
Satsahash that is moral courage is a part of religion.
The quality of ahero is to fight saving the religion. So to show the courage in the battle
field is the duty of the heroes.
There are many episodes of heroes in the Ramayana, the Mahabharata and the Purana
who had been famous showing their courage. We will know about the courage of Tarani
Sen taking from the Ramayana translated by Kittibas in the next lesson.
Moral courage of Tarani Sen
It was the stories of Tretayuga (third era). Dosharat was the king of Ajoddha. He had
three queens named Kousholya, Koikei and Sumitra. Ram was the son of Kousholya.
Bharat was the son of Koikaei. Laxman and Sothrugna were sons of Sumatra. Ram was
the eldest among them. Ram had gone to the forest for fourteen years with a view to
executeing his father's promise having misguided by Kokiei. His brother Laxman and
wife Seeta had gone with him. During the period of their living in the forest the
ogre-king Ravan abducted Seeta seeing her alone and confined her to the forest of
Ashok taking to lanka. Ram had built a bridge on the sea. Bivison the younger brother
of Ravon, requested Rav on to hand over Se eta to Ram and he had suggested that
he(Ravon) should not fight with Ram and he also suggested Bivison to make a peace
agreement with Ram. But the devil king had not paid heed to the words of Bivison and
he had driven out underestimating him from Lanka. Bivison had received the shelter of
Ram and taken part in the battle on the behalf of Ram against Ravon. A great battle took
place between the devil forces and Ram-Laxman. The great heroes of the devil forces
had died Ravon had a lakh of sons and a quarter of nephews. All of them had died in
« the battle. The golden Lankha had turned into desert. Being pale Ravon counted proud
S sitting into the palace. What can! do now? There is none who can save Lanka by

102 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
fighting. Though Bivison had left Lankapuri, his wife Sarama and son Toronisen had
stayed at Lanka. Transen was only a boy of twelve. The news of defeat of the devil
forces and the death of the heroes of Lanka had gone to Toroni Sen. He then prayed for
permission to go to the battle attending the palace of Ravon. Anyhow Ravon did not
want to permit him to go to this fearful battle. But at last Toronisen had left for the
battle convincing Ravan. Toroni was pious like Bivison. He had kept a flay written the
name of Ram to the apex of chariot. He had written the names of Ram on the whole
body of Toronisen and he had sat on the carriage wearing a dress written the name of
Ram. The carriage had moved quickly to the battle field. Ram had looked a boy of
twelve had reached the battle fidd. Ram became surprised seeing Toronisen. He was
wrapped with the names of Ram. Toroni coming to the battle field had started to the
throw the arrows sounding the name of lord Ram. Many of the monkey soldiers were
killed and got injured. Hearing words of Ram from the boy Toroni. Ram stopped
throwing the arrows asked Bivison "oh! Friend Bivison, who is this boy? He always
utters Ram. How can | throw the arrow towards him?" Bivison did not disclose then his
real identity. Bivison said "It is a great devil; my lord Ram, go throw the arrows of
Baishnav to him and then the devil will die”.
SO

Ram had added the arrows of Baishnav and threw the arrows aiming at Toronisen. The
arrow pushed into the body of Toronisen. Toronisen had fallen down on the ground
sounding 'joyram, joyram’. Bivison had taken the lifeless body of Toronisen and he had
cried out uttering 'my son, my son’. Ram understood the boy who had been killed is
none but the son of friend Bivison. Ram had rebuked Bivison. Ram blessed keeping the
hands onto the head of Toronisen. Toronisen had gone to Boikunth leavning the body sx
of devil. &

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 103
Learning of the episode: Everybody should take part to keep the freedom of country. We
will be as brave as Taranisen. We will not be hesitated to sacrifice for our country.
Group work: Make a poster about idealism of Toronisen.
New word: ajachakbritti, ornament, moral courage, rescue, baishnav, baikuntha.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Question:
1. Of which age has the story been described in the Ramayana?
a) Satya b) Dwapar
c) Treta d) Koli
2. What quality has been expressed in Toronisen’s character?
1. Self-sacrifice
ii. Patriotism
iii. Foolishness
Which one of the following is correct?
a)i&ii b) ti & iti
c)1& iii c) 1, li & ili
3. Which quality does the man differ from animal?
a) life b) animalism
c) Humanity d) activeness.
Read the following passage and answer the question no 4& 5 :
Ramtanu has known from TV news that his neighbouring upazilawas affected by flood.
People were suffering hard and fighting against death because of impossibility to
rescue them against the strong currant and disaster. Ramtanu went out to rescue the
people by a boat and came back with some people.
4. The rescuing work of Ramtanu in this stem is —
i. duty to living being
ii. serving the living being
iii. moral courage
Which one of the following is correct?
% a)i b) iii
& c)i& ill c)i, i & iii

104 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
5. Which values inspire Ramtanu to rescue the flood-affected people?
a) Humanity b) Kindness
c) Tolerance d) Forgiveness
Creative Question:
The economic condition of Pritha is not so good. Oneday Pritha with her mother was
waiting for rakishwa to go to a relative's home. In the meantime a beggar asked alms.
Pritha’s mother gave him alms. Seeing that, a group of beggars moved to them. Her
mother gave alms everybody. She had to go home on foot at last. It was suffering but
they felt happy for doing this.
a) Of which devota was mainly Rantibarma devoted to?
b) Why man is supreme to all of living beings - explain it.
c) Explain the characteristic of Rantibarma which is expressed through Pritha.
d) The feelings of Pritha and her mother as of were the reflection of Rantibarmar’s
feeling -evaluate it.
io}
S

CHAPTER NINE
THE WAYS OF RELIGION AND IDEAL LIFE
The ways of religion is the ways of justice, truth, non-violence and welfare. Why do we
follow religion? There is a saying 'Atmamokshaya jagaddhitaya cha’ - to relieve one
forever, to do the welfare on the earth that is to do something for making good on the
earth. The path of life on the earth which is followed to relief own self from the earth
and makes good or welfare - is called religion.
There is a relation between the ways of religion and the moral values. What is moral is
virtue what is immoral is vice. He, who follows the path of religion, is religious. The
religion goes to him who achieves Moksha. The evil doer goes to the hell and feels the
hellish pain. He is born repeatedly and gets pain of death. Religion protects the
Religious and religion becomes successful. It is said through many episodes in the
Holy books. The family has strong role in practicing religion. The importance of
honesty and civility in family is endless. The civility and respect is pronama and bows.
We know that drug addiction or taking drug is contrary to healthy life and it is the way
of unrighteous act.
eS il A
ff a \\ Mt if
y ARR Wp ah N
YN enh A Z ) =
Smoking and taking drug cause losses to both the persons and society. Drug addiction
is to be controlled. If one follows the path of religion, one will follow to the religious
way and avoid the way of evil or unrightousness. We will discuss the mentioned topics
in brief in this chapter.
At the end of this chapter we -
e Will explain the ways of religion
e Will able to explain the relation between the moral values and the ways of religion
e Will be able to know the nature of religion
e Will be able to explain the result of being religious and non-religious.
e Will be able to explain a religious story based on the line - religion protects the
religious and wins the unreligious
Forma-14, Hindu Religion and Moral Education, Class-9-10

106 Hindu Religion and Moral Education

e Will be able to explain the role of family life in practicing the path of religion.

e Will be able to explain through the life ‘Honesty is best policy’ and describe a story
about this.

e Will be able to explain the concept and importance of civility.

e Will be able to describe the concept and importance of pronam and namosker

e Will be able to explain the idea of Taking drug the way of unrighteous act.

e Will be able to explain the bad effects of smoking and drug addiction.

e Will be able to evaluate the importance of family, religions and culture in avoiding drug
addiction.

e Will be encouraged to follow the ways to piety to be eager to show honesty and civility
in learning life and will be conscious in preventing drug addiction.

Lesson 1 : The concept of Dharmapath (the ways of Religion)

Dharma path, the ways of religion is the ways of justice, truth, non-violence and

welfare. Why do we follow religion? There is a saying '‘Atmamokshaya jagaddhitaya

cha’ - to relieve one forever, to do the welfare on the earth that is to do something for

making good on the earth. The path of life on the earth which is followed to be rdieved

from own self from the earth and doing good or welfare - is called religion.

We observe religion for gaining Moksha (eternal life) and for the betterment on earth.

We know that we will have to come back many times before salvation. We have to

supper the pain of birth and death.

We are also introduced with external ten characteristics of religion.

Veda

To prove the religion and the irreligion act the most excellent examples are—Regveda,

Samveda, Yajurveda and Atharbaveda.

Smriti

Smriti verse is placed after Veda to find out the vice and virtue. The books which had

been composed after Veda to find out the duty or non-duty, religion or non religion is

called Smriti verse. Monusamhita, Parasar samhita, Yajnabalkya samhita etc. are the

important book of Smriti verse. 'Smritishastra' is the second to prove the vice-virtue.

Sadachar

If there is not any real advice from veda or smriti on any discussed subject, we have to

select the behaviours or examples of great men. The manners which are followed for a

long time by the great men, is called sadachar or well- behavior. Sadachar is the third

step to prove the religious act. &

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 107
Unit Work: Write five sentences about the way to religion.
New word: Atmamokshaya, Jagaddhitaya, Brahmalagna, The way to religion, Smriti
verse, sadachar.
Lesson 2 : The relation between moral values and the ways of religion
We know which one is beneficial activity, which one is evil or non - beneficial deed.
The sense or power of consideration which one is evil or non-beneficial deed is called
the values or ethic.
Again religion is to do good deed and to do the evil work is irreligious. Moral values
mean the work which seems to be expected and beneficial to religion. Following it and
the deed which is not beneficial is irreligious done by it.
As aresult, the way to religion has close relation with the moral values or ethics. The
pillar of justice is the moral values.
An example is given here:
To embezzle the commodities of other is injustice on the standard of moral values and
it is a punishable crime. Again to abduct others commodities are after the religious
point of view is irreligion.The aim of the ethical values and religion permitted
behaviours are the same.
The ethical values say: Don't be angry.
Religious commandment says: Don't be angry.
Morality is the quality of the pious. Those who have no morality are impious.
So it is seen that ethical values lead to the path of religion. The man, who follows the
way to religion, follows right the direction. He is considered pious. The man, who does
not do that is considered impious.
Group work: Write ten sentences discussing in-group about the relation
between the path of religion and the moral values.
New word: Abduction religion permitted, embezzle.
Lesson 3: Characteristics of the pious
Ten external characteristics of religion are (tolerance, forgiveness, kindness,
knowledge, dispassionateness etc.) expressed a person or the man who follows those
ten outer signs of religion, is pious. The pious man considers Veda, smriti, sadachar and
co calls of sense as documentary. The pious never loss their patience. They also forgive
5 having powered. They arenever guided by the pride of power. They can restraint

108 Hindu Religion and Moral Education

themselves in any situation. Our senses only want to be satisfied. When sex, anger,

greed, delusion, wine and matsarya take control over senses, we go to dogs failing

control over senses. But he who is pious can control the passions of sex, anger etc. He

is not move by the evil senses. Rather restraining the evil senses, he can make senses

according to his will.

The pious man becomes intelligent. His wisdom makes him great. He is bestowed with

all power to justify every thing. He expects in performing different kinds of learning.

Patience and learning help bring him to a higher place. The pious fond of the truth or

the pious are truthful. He remains anxious less in well and woe. He never becomes over

hilarious in delight, never becomes hopeless in grief. Donorship and kindness are two

main moral quality of the pious.

A philosophical idea of Hindu religion is: God resides in living beings’ soul. 'jeebah

brahmaib naparah' - living being is nothing but brahma.

The pious believe this maxim of Sankaracharya strongly. The depth of knowledge,

dispassionate activities and optimized Bhagobadbhaki one turned into moral values by

him. The pious are polite. He considers himself lower than plant. He is more restraint

than the trees. He considers all equal in cast and creed irrespective y.

The pious enjoy through sacrifice. He devotes himself to meditation for the benefit of

the earth. He thinks great duty is to serve the living being. The pious lead an ideal life

following the path or way to religion. He, who has no life style or moral values of the

pious is an irreligious.

Unit work : Identify five qualities of the pious .

New word: Documentary, pride, satisfied, expert, just.

Lesson 4 : Result of being pious and impious

The pious are always delightful and jolly. Rewards do not make him proud or gloomy.

He considers his work as the work of God and the result of all works are given to God.

The pious become delight in sacrifice. They are pleased in serving. Their work is

purified by knowledge and devotion.

According to the holy book the pious becomes happy on the earth and they go to haven

after death. The pious get the highest level of piety, and the pious are turned into god

and the pious receive the heaven or freedom for ever.

On the other hand, the impious remain dissatisfied all the time as they always remain

gloomy. Sex pervades them, Anger agitate, they are fallen down at attracted by greed. .,
S
N

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 109
They involve themselves in wrong on the earth. Sometimes they are given penalty for
their misdeeds. Sin is misdeed according to the holy book. Sin leads a man to death.
The sinners suffer the hellish pain. After ending their hellish pain. They have to be born
on this earth as god of humanity. He only cycled on birth hellish pain-death.
But the sinner can also be relieved by purifying himself if following the path of religion
and leaving the path of unrighteous act.
It is said in Monusamhita, 'If the religion be destroyed, it destroy the man who destroys
it, if it is protected it protects the religious. The religious become the victorious.
Unrighteous act is defeated. The pious may fee! pain for a time being. But the pious
will be victorious in the long run. The pious feel heavenly peace. A story from the Holy
book about the victory of religion is being presented here.
Group work : Write ten sentences discussing the result of being pious and impious.
New word : Disappeared, Facetious, Filtrate, purified, Hellisheain
Lesson 5 : Episode or story
Victory of virtue
It happened long, long ago. It was then the Satyayuga. Hiranyakashipu was then the
king of giants. The quarrelling between the gods and the giants is going on for forever.
Why would Hiranyakashipu be exceptional? He was against lord Hari. But a devotee
of Hari was born in the dynasty of king Harrinkashipu. His was Prohlad. Once Prohlad
was sent to a master with a view to receiving education. But he did not pay his attention
to learning. His devoted mind to Harri was not satisfied there.
One day Hiranyakashipu asked Prohlad taking the child in king'My child Prohlad, what
is your most favourite thing?
Any earthly materials are not favourite to me, i \ i | | i | ‘i | Wil |) ||
father of lord Hari in a peaceful mood. To | il ‘é | ii iy, Mh | i \ | \ |
take Shelter going to the depth jungle in any ! | fy! | i) i | i) | i , | | i | |
im 4 PTAC TABI Ahly
The king, Hiranyakashipu got astonished. i iN 4 iy i Na i i
Who convoyed the name of Hari to the child? i iP eu <— : Ae mie
The talent of children is gone to dusk by this] _V \ Capac A = a
py Lae.
way by the others. aS = MW gZ= = ial
co Send Prohlad to the house of master, take care 7 are ,
= " , i ‘Halll | } | th, \ | |
Sof his proper education, said the king.

110 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
There was no change of Prohlad other having tried more times. Then king
Hiranyakashipu decided to kill Prohlad. The giants forced with shouting having
ordered by the king. Their appearance was horrible. They took the sharp spear in their
hand. It invites the space aiming to the soft chest of Prohlad. But those spear did not
pose through his cheats. Prohlad was given poisonous food. He was fallen down under
the feet of an elephant. He was thrown from the highest hill to the sea.
“What happened?- asked the king, Hiranyakashipu. We can not kill Prohlad any way
my lord”,
they said.
The king forced with great anger to kill Prohlad.
Unit work: Prepare alist of ways of punishment which were taken to punish kill
the lord Vishnu denoted Prohlad.
"They devil for whose power are you adoring my enemies? Are you violating my
order?”
Power of god, Father. He is not enemy. Who is supposed to be enemy by you, Father?
Heis friend to all soul of all, saviour of land. He is everywhere. He lies everywhere.
Hiranyakashipu burst into anger - everywhere? Is your Horri in this state?
He exists Father,- Prohlad politely ensnared.
It is so. He Hiranyakashipu wants the pillar quickly leering the throne. He fists on the
pillar by hands. It caused a heavy sound of that pillar.
Heaven, Earth underground, every where trembled by that heavy sound. The gods
become also fearful. Heaven was bestowed with Heavenly power that Nobody like
God, human being, yaksha etc would like him on earth m underground or any place,
with only arms either by day or at might. Having surprised, everybody saw, Lord Hari
came out from lifeless pillar in the shape of lion. He sat on the broken pillar making
seat. Harrinkashipu forced to hit him with the spear. After words, Lion in the shape of
God, Lord Shrihari roared and lies Hiranyakashipu with his nails taking into lap. Lard
Shrihori appeared bless on Prohlad. What did Prohlad want to him, is known to you? It
was only devotion to Lord Hari.
It is religion which saves the pious. Only religion saved prohlad. The celebration of
religion is must.
Unit work: What learning instructions have you got from the celebration of episode
of Religion? Write it.
oo
New Word: satyayuga, Hiranykashipu, daityakul, earthly. ES

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 111
Lesson 6: The way to religion and family life
Man lives in family. We know that the interest of all family members is nipped in the
same way. So the family has an important role in following the path of religion. The
younger learn behaviours or manners in the family from the elders. The younger always
follow and imitate the older. So the practice of way to religion should have in the
family, if all the family members always speak the truth, nobody takes the shelter of
telling lie, then nobody in the family will take this shelter of lie.
Nobody will be greedy if self-reliant is taught in family, given example to control greed
if there is religion in the family.
If any one of afamily hands one's opinion to others, so there will have idealism of great
tolerance in that family. The family members of that family will show the democratic
attitude in society. The much adored child and adults compel their parents to do the
work as their opinion. What they want is given to them at any time. When he goes to
the social life with a view to showing behaviours, he fails to show the great tolerance
rather than he tries to hand his opinion family to others. If the family members follow
the way of honesty, truthfulness, great tolerance and humanity, there will be peace in
that family. So the role of family is very important to practise or observe the way of
religion.
Group Work: Write ten sentences on the role of domestic life in discussing the
path of religion with yourselves.
Lesson 7: Honesty is the best policy
The result of telling lies can not be fruitful. So it is said, ‘honesty is the best
policy’. A story about it is being represented here.
Honesty of Poor Woodcutter :
There was a small village. There was a jungle TOA. = RTS
nearby the village. A small river follows by both the i ae a NK a
village and the jungle. A poor woodcutter lived in ces € . Ca, War
that village. He managed his family cutting the fhe e =¢) (3)
wood from that jungle. One day he went to cut is Sh) | A ;
wood in the jungle. The branch of tree which was =i = = i f Hee
being cut by axe aheaded much over the river. A === === |
misfortune happened there at the time of cutting SS sles
co the branch. The axe fell down in the river for his ’
\ carelessness. There was no food at home. After pudaiia lt be SAS OE

112 Hindu Religion and Moral Education

cutting wood, he would sell and buy rice and pulse from market afterword, and then

they will eat. Now the familywould starve. He was crying in grief.

The mermaid showed her merrier sucking the worse condition of wood cutter. He came

out to the ground from the river. Her half of the body was in water and half of body was

on over water listen to wood cutter. Hearing the sound of mermaid the wood cutter saw,

mermaid looks at him’ she was smiling. She had an axe of gold in her land Mermaid

asked the wood cutter 11It is your axe, isn't it?"

The woodcutter looked at the axe of mermaid. It was glittering in the sun. He could

take this axe as his own axe. If he took it, he would be able to over come his poverty

great pains. Their life and family would be full filled with the light of prosperity. But it

would spoil honesty. He would be dishonest. Thinking for a while, the woodcutter

interned inanity. It is not for me. | see? Marmain smiled. Wait a little bit | am coming.

Mermaid again went into the water of river. She showed an axe of silver coming out

from water of river. The woodcutter again informed the axe was not his. The mermaid

requested him to wait and dove into water of river again. She brought the iron axe of

the woodcutter. Yes, just this is mine. Mermaid got surprised seeing the honesty of the

woodcutter. She gave both two axes of gold and silver. He removed his poverty. He

would not cut wood any more as before the hut was replaced by building. He bought

many acres of land. The leader of the village surprised seeing it. How quickly had the

poor woodcutter been so rich. The leader came to the house of wood cutter. He heard

everything.

Ohit is! You have been rich by mercy of mermaid! Ok. Hethought to himself the leader

made a trap one day. He went to cut the branch of tree alittle bit above the river. The

leader also climbed up to cut the branch of that tree.

After that he fell down the iron made axe willingly in the river and he started to cry

shortly. Mermaid came out with a gold made axe. Is this your axe?

He could not control his temptation. He said,

Yes, yes, it is mine.

Mermaid got angry. He wants away diving with her axe into water of river.

It passed along time. She did not rise any more. The leader went back to his village

with a heavy heart. To tell alie does not bring fortune to us.

Honesty is the best policy.

We should bear in mind this speech and we will speak the truth in every sphere of life.
Unit work : How did the wood cutter remove his poverty ? Write on board. oo

New word: Honesty, policy, woodcutter, Starvation, mermaid, surprised &

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 113
Lesson 8: Conception or idea of civility
Civility is also a part of ideal life like honesty; y
Civility plays an important role in our family AN Gi)
and social life. Calm, polite or evil behaviour \ \\\ Bill i
are called civility. Civility is one of the main \ YN 6 NY
elements of humanity. \\NY Y
Human being is different form animal being for ' r X\ \ {
this civility. To follow the path of religion is one [eA ; \\
of the elements of civility. We respect mother \)
father and teacher. The civility which is \
expressed through is known of deeds as G- V;
devotion or respect. y
Again we wish our love and affection to friends K, 2 j{ L//
and younger. All are different forms of civility.
God has carted us. Gods or goodness he!p us with their respective power.
So we praise them, we bow down to them reading propane mentor. We can say here that
civility is expressed through prevility is amoral values and past of religion.
We can take control over mind of man by civility or polite behaviour. Civility is an
essential quality or moral value in social life.
We exchange our views when we meet any one. We show respect or bow down to
elders. We congratulate our contemporary and bless our younger. The traditional
civility is here who is youngest image will bow down the older also bless them saying,
‘Be happy, live long’. It is tradition.
Conception of Pronam or Bowing down
Pronam means bow with excellence or ‘Namaskar’. Hari Chandro Bhattacharya has
mentioned his ‘Bengal vocabulary’ There are four kinds of Pronam:

1. Abhibadan

2. Panchanga Praonam

3. Austanga Pronam

4. Namaskar
Abhibadan
Uttering Pronam to bow is called abhibadan. Sometimes without saying a word one
shows abhibadan.
Forma-15, Hindu Religion and Moral Education, Class-9-10

114 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Panchanga Pronam

According to the cripture ‘Tantrasar’ — bowing with the arms, legs, head,chest and
eyes is called panchanga pronam.

Austanga Pronam

There are eight parts of pronam- leg, foot, hand, chest, knowledge, head, word
and eye. Doing pronam using these eight parts united is called austanga or sastanga
pronam.

Namaskar

The synonym of pronam is namaskar. There are three kinds of namaskar- Kayik,
bachik, manasik. It is said about the significance of namaskar according to nrisimha
purana-

Namaskarah smrito yajnah sarba yajneshu chotanamah

Namaskarena chaikena narah puto harim brajet.

- namaskar is the head of all yajna all over the universe. Man achieves hari by doing
namaskar one time.

Unit work: How many kinds of pronam are there, what are they? Write it ?

At the time of ‘puja’ we recite some fixed mantra and we bow to the gods and
goddesses. We also bow to our teachers and respected persons. The
sadhu-sajjan-baisnava-vaktas bow everybody to each other. There is a religious
philosophy in it. Whom do we respect or bow down really? According to religious
philosophy the answer is that- we do pronam to the Brahma or Eswara who isin living
being as the soul.

This is why everybody is bowed. So pronam or namskar has spiritual or social
significance as the part of civility.

New words: sistarchar (civility), pronam, namaskar, binimaya (exchange), bahu (arm),
janu (knee), shir (head), mahatmya (significance), nrisinghapurana.

Lesson 9: Taking drug is the way of unrighteousness

We know that taking drug or drug addiction is the way of immoral or unrighteous act.
Because drug addiction paralyses the normal spirit of druggist. He does not remain
normal, does not remain healthy. The behaviour which he does in a distressed mind is
the expression of immorality.

Smoking, wine, ganja, opium, codeine (phensydil) etc are drugs. If one starts takingit, sx
one can never leave it easily. Sometimes the drug addict becomes destructive. S

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 115
Bad effect of smoking and drug addiction: 4
Smoking and drug addiction causes physical, | I, iim Tn.
mental, economical and social losses. Smoking [| as, f]
causes various diseases such as pneumonia, | Shae i ee
bronchitis, tuberculosis , gastric ulcer, loss of: ||| m8 \ i | ey
appetite, heart attack etc. Not only smoking causes = MI th |
harm to smokers but also it causes harm to Vai iit IN Ty ‘
neighbour. ‘| es) | ih nell yf
Taking drug also causes various disease and the |, I | « Vil
druggist deviates from the normal path of life. fy i) y\ |) A
Taking drug causes mental losses. A druggist losses (“A hy . [Ul g\
his sense when he is addicted. He does not hesitate | j Ui) 7\\ J
in taking or arranging money by adopting unfair iit y Y

é : IH NY) Wy
meats to take drug. The ties of family and 7 )
society can be relaxed due to drug addiction. eer
Importance of religious culture in domestic life to protect drug addiction:
Family is the foundation of society. The domestic religious culture and moral values
influence over whole family. All the members of a family have to encourage about he
existence of Brahma who exists as soul in our body.
So this body is called the temple of God. He should not be impure. Secondly, drug
addiction is one of the greatest sins according to Hinduism. Not only the druggist, also
his friends are sinner. Because the sin of drug addiction also deteriorated them.
It is amoral duty to get back the druggist in normal life. The religious and moral duty
of parent is to build-up children properly. So they should know about the daily life of
their children. Not only to subdue the children, parents should increase awareness
among them, encourage children with the light of religious and cultural moral values.
Being inspired by the spirit of welfare, we will engage in meditation.
The life of all family members will be enlightened with the light of religious and
cultural moral values. But instructions or education should be given not as an
administrator, it should be through example. It is said in the
Shreechai tanyacharitamrita, 'He can teach religion to the living being who practise own
self.
We want to get such teaching from domestic religious cultural surrounding so that the
family members keep aloof them from the immoral activities like smoking and drug

= addiction.
&

116 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
“Smoking and drug taking is the path of unrighteous,
I won’t follow that sinful path till my passes’.
New words: Result, Domestic, Culture, Influence, touch, spent, greater, enlightened,
death.
Home Work:
1. Write a fact of your life on “Showing Sistachar’ and submit it to your teacher.
addiction’ and submit it to your teacher.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions:
1. Hiranyakashipu was the king of ----
a) giants b) deities
c) beasts d) mankind’s
2. Why do men have to be born being of humanity, after having suffer of hellish pain?
a) Sin comes to the end b) Sin does not come to the end
c) For the accumulation of virtue d) For loving the world
Read the following stem and answer the question no 3 & 4:
Rodela put her practical khata on the table to show how to draw some pictures of
science. But Shipra destroyed it tactfully subverting the water pot. Next day she did the
same. Rodela asked Shipra why she did so. Shipratold that actually she could not draw
the scientific images. Then Rodela helped Shipra to draw that.
3. The cause of Shipra’s malicious behaviour to Rodela is —
i. helplessness
i. disaffection
iii. underestimation
Which one of the following is correct?
ai&ii b) ii 2c
c) i & iii d) i, it & iii ES

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 117
4. What has been expressed through the non-protest activities of Rodela against
Shipra’s misdeed?
a) Forgiveness b) Love of learning
c) Malicious d) Disinclination
Creative question:
1. Dibyendu is a professor of History. He goes to his office after worshipping.
Everyday he feeds living beings and helps more the distressed. Dibyendu wrote a
research book on the pre-historical tradition of Bangladesh. He faced some obstacles to
describe the fact. But he didn't stop and disappointed. At last he was rewarded.
a) In which scripture is included Yajnavalkayasamhita?
b) What is the meaning of ‘Jibah brahmaiva naparah’?
c) Explain, how the society and family will be beneficiated through the moral
values of Dibyendu’s behaviour?
d) The example of Dibyendu proves that ‘honest work never goes to ruin’-
evaluate it.
2. Ridima, at the time of puja, recite the mantras and salute the god as does he regularly.
After completing puja, he bows his parents and starts his work. He respects his elder
brothes and sisier She never does bad to others and loves younger. So he is dear to
every body including his neighbour. Such behaviour to the people reflects on society.
a) What is Tantrasar?
b) Why do we praise the gods?
c) What education is reflected in Ridima- explain it according to your text?
d) The example of Ridima shows that the significance of civility in the society
is endless — evaluate it.
co}
S

CHAPTER TEN
AVATAR AND THE STORY OF IDEAL LIFE
He, who comes down is Avatar(incarnation). But whoever is
not called Avatar here. When lord Bishnu incarnates in the .
world from Baikuntha in different shape for the welfare of the A\ \
universe, this is called Avatar. After performing this task, he ra ‘)
returns to his own place. Lord Bishnu has emerged in various * se w/Y &\
formal images in different time. Among those, ten Avatar is | Me nN
famous. We have learned this before. In this section, we'll ‘ hia \
know about the kinds of Avatar and the causes why Sri 1 ™
Krishna emerged as an Avatar. I
Beyond Avatar, many great followers were born in different
ages they worked for the wellbeing of mankind. They had no \ ;
want of their own. They sacrificed their lives for the welfare a /
of human beings. The life history of those great men and °
women is known to us as ideal life. We have read some of .
those great men’s life. Now we’ll read some others more in 4 q3<
this chapter and we would get moral lesson from their g BC
biography. F 4 4
At the end of this chapter we- BESO
e Will be able to explain the idea and kinds of Avatar (Full & g/ "e} j
partial) ad
e Will be able to explain, why Sri Krishna had appeared as
Avatar.
e Will be able to describe the contribution of Charka and y
Sashruta in medical science (oy
e Will be able to describe the importance of the ideology of / y
Sri Shankaracharya to make religious, social, moral and /, iy,
family life. i} (|
e Will be able to describe the importance of the ideologies of A x | )
Meerabai, Probhu Nityananda and Shreema in making CNS WP)
religious, social, moral and family life. PR es
@ Will be able to describe the importance of learning the ideals of SreeRamkrishna
to make religious, social, moral and family life. S

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 119
e Will be able to describe the importance of learning the ideals of ShreeBijoykrishna
Goswami and Swami Bivekanand in making religious, social, moral and family life.

Lesson 01 : Avatar

We have already known that when Lord Vishnu comes down in the world in different

shape in different time, he is called Avatar. He does the good to mankind. The world

remains not alike all the time. Many rogue men are born in different time. They oppress

man. This creates grieves, sorrows, pains and unhappiness. The life of good men

becomes unbearable. Lord Vishnu appears as an Avatar at such hard times. He destroys

the rogues. Peace comes back again in the world and the Lord puts an end to his arts of

Avatar. Lord goes back to His residence. Lord Vishnu comes in the guise of different

animals in deferent times. He behaves like a man when he comes as a human. He is

nourished in the womb of a mother. Bears sorrow and sufferings like human beings.

But still there are some distinct characteristics, as he is the Lord. A man and the Lord

cannot do all the same at all.

Kinds of Avatar:

There are two types of Avatar full avatar (Purravatar) and particular avatar (Ansavatar).

When Bhagvan descends with His all total qualities, He is called the full avatar

(Purnavatar). All power and qualities of God exist in full avatar. Shree Krishna was the

full avatar of God. As all qualities of God existed in Him.

Unfullfilled avatar of Bhagvan is called ansavatar. All qualities and power do not exist

in ansavatar. Ansavatar are many. Tan are prominent of them such as- Matsya, Kurma,

Baraha, Nrisingh, Parshuram, Ram, Balaram, Buddha and Kalki. They performed

welfare activities appearing in different times.

Lord SreeKrishna himself has explained the reason of his emerging as

Avatar in Srimadvagavadgeeta.

Yada yada hi dharmasya glanirvabati bharata
Abhyutthanamadharmasya tadatmanam srijamyham
Paritranaya sadhunam binasaya cha duskritam
Dharmasamsthapanarthaya sambhabami yuge yuge. (4/7-8)

- That means, oh Arjuna, when religion falls in mishap and anti-religion captures the

world, | create myself then. To protect the good-honest souls, destroy the rogues and

establish religion | appear in different eras, that is to why | take birth as Avatar.

At the time of incarnation of Shree Krishna, Kangsa, Jarasandha, Shishupal and
e Durjadhan became very tyrannous. People were suffering much due to their
S suppression. Sri Krishna established peace killing them. Lord SreeKrishna gave us the

120 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
lesson of justice. Heis dangerous to the rogue, heavenly light of peace to the honest and
Vagaban to the devotees.
Lesson 2 : Sushruta
Sushruta was a great physician in the ancient India. His father was Muni Biswamitra.
Indra, the king of the gods, once seeing the people of the earth suffering from diseases,
imparted the whole lessons of 'Yajurveda’ to Dhanwanantori and told him to be born in
the earth. According to the words of Indra , Dnanwanantori was born as the son of the
king of Kashi and got name as Dibodas . Biswamitra came to know this and sent his son
Sushruta to him to learn 'Ayurveda’. Learning Ayurveda from Dibodas, Sushruta wrote
a book as to medication. The book was named after him as Sushruta or Sushruta
Samhita.
The modern researchers say, Sushruta lived in the 600 BC in the present Baranasi City
beside the Ganges and used to practice medication. Mainly he practiced Surgery. This
iswhy; heis called the father of the Indian Surgery. In his book he has given description
of 300 kinds of Surgery and 120 kinds of surgical instruments. These instruments have
been modernised in the west.
Sushruta samhita is mainly divided into four branches. Here, evolution of Yajurveda,
surgery, bio-chemistry, diseases, medicine, bones, medication, symptoms of diseases,
foods etc are described in detail. If one wants to treat according to Ayurveda, one has to
have special knowledge in Sushruta samhita. Still now it has got an emphasis in
medical science. So to be an expert physician it is necessary to achieve knowledge in
Sushruta samhita. Sushruta, in fact, has along much better for mankind writing the
Sushruta samhita.
Lesson 3 : Charak
Charak was also a great physician in ancient India. He is called the father of Indian
medicology. As to him, it is said in different books that Anantadava learned Ayurveda,
a part of Atharbaveda, when Shree Vishnu came down in the world as Matsya avatar.
After that, he came to the world to see the condition of people and observed that many
of them were suffering from various diseases. Therefore, to reduce the sorrows of
people he took birth as a son of a Muni, a strong devotee. Since he was born as a spy
char (spy) he was named as Charak. According to the modern researchers, Charak
emerged in 300 BC.
Charak started to give treatment to the people. He became a renowned physician within
afew days. There were many other physicians named Atreya, Agnivesh etc. They wrote
some books on medicine. Editing those books Charak composed a new one taking the
gist of them. It was named as Charak samhita. It wasa famous medical book in the iS
N

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 121
ancient India. The book is divided into eight sections - Sutrasthan, Nidansthan,
Bimansthan, Sharirsthan, Indriyasthan, Chikitsasthan, Kalpasthan and Siddhistan.
Charak was the first man who said about digestion and immunization. He also said
about three 'dosh' vities in health. Those are bayu, pitta. Cough. If there is any disorder
among them our body becomes unwell. When they come in good position, our body
becomes well again. Charak also said that prevention is better than cure. He suggested
finding the causes of the discuses and these types’ duels.

Charak knew about sexology. Even he knew about the sex chromosomes. He had got
an idea of anatomy. He told there are 360 bones including teeth in human body. The
heart, he said is the controlling centre of body which is connected with body in 13
ways.

This book has a great importance even in present. Charak, composing the
Charaksamhita has done immunes welfare of mankind. Both Sushrutasamhita was
translated into Arabia in 750 BC during the reign of Khalifa Abbasi. Thus it was
introduced to Europe and many European doctors came to India to achieve knowledge
about Indian medical science.

Lesson 4 & 5: Sree Shankaracharya

There was a village named Kalari in the province of Kerala in Dakshinatya
Shankaracharya was born in this village on the 5th day of full moon of Baisakh in 788
AD. His father was Shivgura and the name of his mother was Bisihta Devi. Shivaguru
was a Brahmin Pandit and devoted to Shiva.

Shankar had outstanding intelligence and power of memorizations. Observing that
Shivagurv was very amazed. He started to impart lesson to his soon from the early age
of three. His only urge was to make his son expert and skilled in subjects. But
unfortunately he succumbed to death very shortly. After that Bishista Devi gave
uponyan to her son when he was 5. Having finished uponoyan he was sent to a master's
house to study holy scripts. Only within two years he became pandit on Vedant, Smriti,
puran etc. He returned home of the age of 7. Coming home, he started a tole to teach
students. Local pandits began to criticise him saying what would teach a boy of 7. But
gradually every one of them bent down to him when they got the news of Shankar's
brilliance.

The fame of Shankar's mastery spreaded around. One fine morning Chandrashekhar,
the king of Karallaalso came to know this. He ordered his minister to bring Shankar to
his Rayal court. Shankar politely said 'I do not want to do business with education’. He
would impart knowledge only for the people interested. The king was astonished to
Forma-16, Hindu Religion and Moral Education, Class-9-10

122 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
this strong comment of Shankar a mere boy. (foe
He himself came to meet Shankar. Speaking Ww) /f
with him the king realized the depth of his 5 A i)
knowledge. So inspite of being a king, he S 'p i
bowed to this excellent boy and gone him one Vf cw AN
thousand gold coins. But shanker did not touch ea >
any single of those rather gave that away to the fe
poor. \ PO

\ f
Once some Brahmin pundits came to his house | Sy )) |
hearing about Shaker's wisdom. They were | /\ a Qo
very pleased to discuss many scripts with him. y \ ~ = Gilie:
At astage Bishista told them to see the 'kosthi' \ BY \ 3
of Shanker. Seeing that the pundits said that NE“ pS i y 5)
Shaker has got very short life. He might dieat “= A> =) \ aN,
the age of 16 to 32. Hearing this news, Batista Z 33
Devi burst into tears. She would have to lose his only son. Shankar also heard this. He
loved his mother very much. How much time he got during the leisure of teaching
students in the toll, he spent that taking care of his mother. But the news brought a
massive change inside him. He started thinking about life and the world from a
different angle. He thought, "To attain Moksha’ is the supreme aim of man. So he would
spend the rest of his life in the devotion of Brahma.
One day Shanker told frankly about this his mother. But she did not agree. At last
Shanker could convince her through great hardship. Even he said that wherever he
stayed, he would be beside her mother at the time of her last breath. Saying this
Shanker one day left home. Shanker will takeSanyas' and so he is in search of a guru
(master). Walking two months continually he reached the place of Onkamath. There he
met Gobindapada, the great yoga7devotee. He received diksha from him. Shankar
stayed there 3 years and learned Yoga siddhi and Tattagyan’. Then he went away to the
Badarika asram a lonely place of the Himalayas. There he started writing the vedanto
vashya. He finished this task within 17 years of age as per the directive of his master.
After that as a religious master, he started a new life. He found many deciples. He had
already been famous as an Acharya. Shankaracharya left Badrika ashram for the holy
place of Baranasi and started to preach religion there. The motto of his preaching was
Adwaitabad. He said Brahmais the only truth, the world resembles falsehood. There is
no difference between living being and Brahman.
At the very first stage many people did not accept this doctrine. But afterwards every
one surrounded to his umfathomable wisdom and oratory and supported his way. He .,
defeated Kumaril Vatta, Mandal Mishra etc one after another in religious debate. 5

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 123
Shankar travelled whole India to preach his doctrine. He established four temples at the
four corners of Indin. Sarada math in Dwaraka, Gobardhan in Puri, Joshi in
Jyotirdham(Badrikashram) and Shringeri in Rameshwar. He engaged four of his
disciples to run these maths. They were Surehwar, Padmapath, Totakacharya and
Hastamalakacharya. Shankaracharya brought many different opinion and made them
united.

When Shankaracharya was born, the political condition of India was very distressed, at
the religious life of people was also alike. Different types of superstitions engulfed
Jayin and Buddhist. Even Hindu religion also becomes fade. The activities of the Veda
got importance in the society. Shankaracharya resurrected the past glory of Hinduisms
spreading his decries of 'Adwayitabad'There is no difference between animals and
Brahmma saying this he proved love for man and even for animal in human mind. Asa
result envy was reduced. This was a great contribution of Shankaracharya. Not only
this, the preface to Brahmasutra and Vedanta he composed also was a super
contribution in the fidd of exercising Hinduisms and philosophy. Besides he wrote
many books likes Mohamuedar, Anandalahari, Shivastab, Gobindastak and so on for
the common people. Shanker breathed his last at the age of only 32 at Kedamath of
Uttarakhanda performing such outstanding work. However, he was present beside his
mother bed at the time of her as he gave words to his mother.

Some verse are :

1. Who is your wife and son? This varied world is an illusion. Where have
you come from and who are you? Thanking and find out the answer. This
is the essence of religion.

2. Life is, as if, a drop of water on a lotus leaf. Know that disease have seized
the body like a poisonous sank. The world is bewildered in sorrows.

3. Days, nights, evenings dawns, dews, summers run after one another. Thus
time destroys our life time. Yet man cannot give up hope.

A man, as long as he can earn, he is surrounded by his family. In old age. when
his body becomes unfit, none asks his woe.

Lesson 6 and 7: Probhu Nityananda
Probhu Nitynand was born in Ekchakra, a village in the district of Birvum in west
Bengal, India in 1473AD. His father’s name was Harai pendit and that of his
mother was Padmawati. Harai pendit was an honest Brahman. His family was
very much solvent by means of the wealth he inherited as well as his traditional works.
cove)
&

124 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
The real name was Kuber. His father arranged his N

early education in the village toll. As a student pen \

he was very brilliant. But he was not attentive to \} N

his lessons at all. Rather he had much devotion Pan Gf ~\
to religion and liked to hear about religious talks. a i / ip \
Though he used to play with the local boys, he Wi i Mi (7?
preferred sitting in any temple instead. In the ] i| oni

root of his devotion to religion, there existed Sree RA

Krishna. His only aim was how to get Him. Ny = \
Whenever he met any saint or sannyasi, he asked \

him what was the right way to get Sreekrishna. W/ {

Kuber was a boy of 12. One day a sannyasi oH

came to their village and took hospitality in

their house. He will go to Brindaban. Kuber \ .

heard that Brindaban was the land of charms of \\ d
Sreekrisna.So he thought if he went to Brindaban wl sl

he might get lord Krishna. Kuber made a clean breast to the Sannaysi. Sannyasi said,
"It isnot right to take sannyas in this early age. Moreover, it requires permission of the
parents."

But Kuber was adamant to go to Brindaban. Finding no other way was his parents
allowed him and he left home with the sannyasi. He began to roam about many forests,
hills and mountains and different holy places. Many years passed. Suddenly he lost the
sannyasi one day. After that he himself started to visit the holy place. In this way once
he reached his desired Brindaban. Coming here, his mind became restless to meet
Krishna. He began to wonder about madly the places where the signs of Krishna
existed.

One day he met a great sannyasi, sripad Madhabendrapure. He received diksha from
him. Staying some days with him. Kuber set our for holy places. He wandered lonely
for some days. By this time he visited Rameswer, Nilachl, Gangasagar and so on. But
his agony for Krishna lessens grew gradually. His only thought was to bein touch with
Krishna. So he returned Brindaban.

Kuber always remain thought for Krishna meeting and how to get him. He was passing
him days in this way. Suddenly he saw Krishna in the dream. Krishna said to him 'Go
to Nabadwip in Goud. Nimai Pandit is presching Krishna love there. Join him. It may
be maintioned that this Nimai Pandit is known as Sree Gouranga or Sree Chaitanya.
Seeing Krishna in dream, Kuber's mind became pacified. He was happy to get the ..
meeting of Krishna through dream. So he left Brindaban for Nabadwip according to the 5

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 125
order of him. There he met Nimai Pandit in the house of Nandan Acharya. They
became known to each other and felt that they had common views as if they were
one-in-two. They were only born for the salvation of the living beings in two different
bodies. Form that very day Kuber was named after Nityananda or Nitai . On the other
hand there was Gouranga or Gour in brief. The devotees called them as Gour-Nitai.
Gour-Nitai started spreading in Nabodwip. They used to flourish the holy name of
‘Hari’. There was no discrimination in there doctrine, there was no classification. At the
time the superficial practice of religion was prevailing in the society and the love for
mankind was undermined. In that situation, Gour-Naiti embraced all to them. As a
result many groups of people became there follower.
But the anti-Baishnav group made obstacles to the way of them. They even attacked
Gour.
In that time two brothers named Jagannath and Madhab ruled Nobadwip. People called
them as Jagai-Madhi. They were drunker and very dangerous. They used to do
whatever they liked. Nabody dared to protest against them. Nityananda came to know
this. He told Shree Guranga "we have to save Jagai- Madhai'. Pravu agreed with him.
One day Nityanand and Haridas were returning through the road murmuring the name
of Krishna. All on a sudden they met Jagai -madhai. They were drunker and became
anger. Madhai threw the upper portion of a broken pitcher to Nitai. It hit Nitia and his
head was cut.
The wounded place was bleeding. But Nitynanda pressured the place. With his plan
and continued his song. This enraged Madhai much. He wants forward to attack Nitai.
Jagai prevented his way. Some passers-by gathered there at that time. They felt pity to
see the condition of Nitai. Yet nobody uttered any single word in fear of Jagai-Madhai.
Shree Gourango came to know the matter. He rushed toward the spot at that very
moment with his companions. His patience knew no bound. He would give hard
punishment to Jogai Madhai. Coming forward to him Nittananda said, "Provu, Jogai
has done no wrong. He has saved me Madhai also has done nothing but mistake. Please
forgive them."
Gourango become pacified hearing Nittanando. He stepped forward and hugged Jogai.
Seeing regret rose in Madhai. He said " Probhu | have committed crime forgive me."
Gourango said, "You will get pardon if Nitai forgive you". Then Madhai forwarded to
Nita with clipped handed. Nittanando embraced him thus Gour-Nitai saved
Jagai-Madhai with this great love. Everyone started to laud them highly in this way
Gour-Nitai made all people near and dear ones to them with there love and spreading
the name of Krishna. The difference among people also reduced by this. In this time
S Shree Gouranga once went way to Nilachad taking sannyas. Nittanando accompanied
=

126 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
him. After staying some time there one day Gourango said , "Nittanando , at gour
devotion to power and Tantra is going one in one hand and practice of reason based
theory of knowledge is going and in the other hand the religious people do not find any
way. You please go there and begin household activities spread devotion to Hori and
Premdharma rich and poor. Tie them all with a single rope in the name of Krishana.
Nittananda was thundered to hear this. He was to leave his master. But it was his
master's order. So, he has to obey. So, Nittyananda came back in Gour and married two
daughters named Bashudha and Janhavi. He made a family in Khardaha. Bashudha's
son was Birvadra. Janhavi adapted a son as she had no son of her own. His name was
Ramai Goswami. Goswamis of khardaha are their descendant. Goswami's of
Nittananda ways extended of the religion of love for some period in the society of
Gour.

Being ordered by Gouranggo, Nittananda began to preach the name of Krishna and
premdharma specially in Nabodwip. Besides, he used to sing:

Vajo Gouranga, Kaho Gourango, Laho ouranger naam

Je Vaje Gouranga chand, Se hoy amar pran

Thus he mingled the name of Shree Gourango with the name of Krishna.

Gourango emerged in Goud as a Vajohari was very generous and temper able to his
wife. He could read the heart of Meera.

So he constructed a temple of Krishana and set up an idol of Krishna there Meera
became very pleased. Respect and love to her husband grew in Meera. But her time
passed away through the worship of Krishana. She was indifferent to the family life.
For this, their relatives and the people of the place started to criticise her.

Lesson 8 : Meerabai

There is a village named Kurki. Kurki is at Rajsthan in India Meerabai was born in
1498 AD in this village. Sne came of arather family. Her father Ratnasingh was the son
of Rao Dudhaji, the emperors of Mehta Her mother Bir Kauri was the daughter of
prince Shanustan Jala . Ratnasingh got control over 12 villages in the kurki area and
started to leave there making garh.

Meera was the only daughter of her parents. So she was grown up with great care and
affection. But she lost her mother at the age of 8. This caused break in her life
Ratnasing feel in atravel with her daughter. Then Meer's grandfather Rao Dudhaji took
Meera near him and nurtured her dearly.

Dudhaji was a pious man. He established the temple of Chaturvuji beside Merota
palace. He used to worship there. Meera also went there now and then. At the temple, sx
Gadadhar Pandit discussed various Holy scripts. Meera listened to him vey &

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 127
attentively. Her grandfather Dudhaji also made
her hear the Ramayana the Mahabharata and re A =
the Puran. As a result, an idealofreligious life SQ
was engraved in Meera's heart from her early 2 Wee “
age. Meeraintroduced her outstanding talent in Nang he 5
composing vajan sangeet. In the temple se ! Jey ah”
Chaturvuji_ some excellent vajans are 9 s¢ 74 A LPF Al
inscribed. Once a sadhu gifted Meera an icon rah Kee 2 » ‘i
of Giridhari Gopal. Meera took it to the 1 vk ee RB fir is
temple. She used to worship daily. In this eg" ° 4 is
process a deep respect and lord Krishna grew Nea ay ky
in her from the tender age. Meera is now a ie N) wy
young girl. She is unique in beauty and charm. RN" Lad
Her grandfather arranged marriage for his gS’ ERS
grandaughter. The bridegroom is the son of Le Va G
Rana Sangramsingh of Chittor. Meeas A. 7
marriage ceremony was held gorgeously in ~~ WY
1516 AD and she went away to the residence
of her father-in-law.
There was no lack of anything. Moreover she had a father-in-low like Rana
Sangramsingh and a worthy husband like Vojraj. She got a lot of wealth as well as
many servants and maid servants. But Meera felt no attraction to those. The only aim
of her life was Krishna prem and to meet Giridhari she remains plunged into worship
and devotion.
Whenever any sadhu or saint came to the palace, she rushed toward him and listened to
the holy name of hari. Some times she herself started to sing vajan being intoxicated.
She sang so sweetly that everybody become spellbound.
Gradually M eera's eagerness increased. She was like aself denying saint. She remained
busy often in the day and night in worshipping and appreciation of God. She sometimes
cried for Gopinath. In this condition, Vojraj told his wife calling, "Tell me clearly where
is the great of your soul, what is your landing? Tell me what do you want? Tell me how
will you be happy and what will give you mental peace?"
Then Meera arswered singing a Vajan in her sweet voice:
Mere to giridhar Gopal, Dusra na koi
Jate shir mor mukut mere pati soi.
It means. I have nobody but Giridhari Gopal. He is my lord who wears Mayur Mukut
S on His head.
N

128 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Vojraj was fascinated hearing the music of his wife. He could understand her. He
started all kinds of association in the worship and vajan of Meera. In this side common
people and saints and pious people of Chitor had known Meera's ecgmess of Krishna.
They had known Meera as devout Meerabai, not as a queen. Music of Meera's sweet
voice and devotion was spreaded all around Rajsthan.

In this state Vojraj suddenly died in 1528. After some days her father-in law Rana
Sangam singh also died. Then Bikramjeet singh became new king of Chitor. He started
to oppress on Meera. He tried to kill Her. But She was saved by the mercy of
Giridhari.

At last Meerabai went back to Her father's house Merota. Then she went to Brindabon
from there. That time Srirup Goswami was the Acharya of Goud Bashnav mandali.
Meera desired to visit Him. But the Acharya (professor) did not agree to let a women
visit him. Then Meera asked him. Have you forgot the saying of vagvat? Sni Krishna
was the only male of Brindaban. And rest are nature then why Gowshwamiji is so
hesitated to appear before me?

Goshwami was impressed to listen to the theoretical speech of Meera and talked to her
Meera's eagerness of Krishna fascinated Goshwami.

Coming Brindaban Meera became plunged in the loving devotion intensely. Her name
was spreaded everywhere. Meera's name was well established in Rajsthan and
North-west India. Meerabai the devotee of Krishna showed the way to devotion, song
of Krishna, worship of Krishna and worship of Vagvat shows a new way. This trend of
music creates a loving relationship between Hindus and Muslims. And this loving
relationship is called Voktibad. In Vagvatdharma and Vaktibad of Hinduism and
Sufibad of Islam people of all classes are considered same.

After that one day Meera started for Dwaroka the Memorable place of Krishna
Finishing all activities in Brindaban and coming Dwarokadham she passed her last
days of life in the worshipping of Ranochorjee's idols. She breathed Her last in
Dwarokadham. We learn from Meerabai's biography that, who are real devotees, they
are above all worldly thing.Physical beauty, worldly matters, place and comfort don't
attract their heart. They solely meditate to get the desired thing leaving everything.
They also become successful in their adoration.

Lesson 9 & 10: Sree Ramkrishna

All Religions are true, the more is the opinion the more is the way’ it means though
there are different opinions and ways, everybody's aim and destination is one to have
Ishwar. He who realized this absolute truth, was not educated in traditional education.
He was self-educated. He could realize the theory of religion by his sdf-earned x
knowledge. &

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 129
There is a village named Kamarpukur in Hugly in the West-Bengle. Sree Ramkrishana
was born in that village on 17 February, 1836 AD. His father's name was Khudiram
Chattopadhya and that of his mother was Chandramoni Devi. Khudiram named his son
as Godadhar. This Gadadhar becomes world famous as Sree Ramkrishana
Paramhangsa afterwards.

Young boy, Godadhar, was so nice to look at and attracted to nature. Sometimes he
became thoughtful seeing flying cranes in the sky or seeing natural scenary . It was his
innate characteristic. But he was not attentive to academic studies at all. So, it was not
possible for him to achieve academic education. But he had a sharp memory. He could
tell anything after he had heard. In this way he learned religious shloak and hymn of
praise from his father, he learned Ramayan and Mahabharatfrom village people who
recited legends or myths, and learned religious song from Puri going after pilgrim .He
had a deep attraction to worship and glorification. In this way Godadhor became expert
in various books without having any academic studies.

Godadhor's father died at his early age. After his father's death, there was a strange
change in his life. Sometimes he sat in the crematorium. Sometimes he passed time in
desolate garden. He noticed eagerly if he saw any pious or Baishnar. He learned
reverence from them. In this stage his elder brother Ram Kumar sent him to Kolkata.
He admitted him in his school for learning Sanskrit in Jnamapukur. But there was no
change of Godadhor's mind. He remained indifferent to studies.

This time Ram Kumar came to Daksinaswar as the priest of the temple of Kali
established by queen Rashmani. Godadhor also came with him. He was so delighted to
see the idol and worshipped goddess Kali. It was seemed that he was in the desire of
such thing for a long. So, he sometimes used to be meditated in the temple and
sometimes wander on the bank of Gangas thinking of self interest.

Suddenly one day his elder brother Ram Kumar died. As a result the responsibility of
worshipping Goddess lay upon Godadhor. He started to worship with full
concentration. He often became senseless while singing hymn at the time of prayer. In
the passage of time he was successful in the devotion of Kali. He gave spiritual
knowledge to his wife Saroda, which elevated her as "spiritual mother". In this way
Godadhor achieved the appearance of goddess as all pervading and vigilance.
Godadhor was appointed as priest in the temple in 1855. This time, he got a golden
opportunity of worshipping Kali. Six years later, devotee Shidha Vairavi came to
Daksinaswar in 1861. Godadhor took her as his master and acquired perfection in
Tantras. This Bhairavi is he who titled Godadhor as an excellent yogi and avatar. After
that saint Totapuri came in Godadhor's life. He made Godadhor expert in devotion and
named him as Shreeram Krishna Paramhansha. Sreeram Krishna also got perfection in
the practice of Bhaishnava.

Forma-17, Hindu Religion and Moral Education, Class-9-10

130 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Ram Krishna was not confined only in the practice of Hindu religion. He also practised
according to Islam and Christianity. In this way he realized Ishwar by the practice of
different religions. To him the aim of lifeis to feel Ishwar in every religion. Though the
ways of religion are different, their aim is one and dissimilar and that is to get the
proximity of God. So, he said open-heartedly; "every religion is true, the more are the
opinions, the more are the ways." He was not like other traditional devotees or didn't
wear clothes like others. Even he worshipped his wife Saroda Devi considering her as
the mother of the world.
Shreeram Krishna was the teacher of the world. He made other understand the complex
theory of religion very simply. Ishwar exists in all animals, so serving animals is to
serve Ishwar .It was his philosophy. He was a strong believer of religious intimacy. His
great follower Swami Bibekananda spreaded his ideals of religion in the world. As a
result of this his ideals of serving animals that is humanity is highly popular in the
world. Bibekananda said about his master, era of truth came in the day when he was
born in. From now on differences is removed, get all inclusive love. He removed all
differences between male7the female, the rich and the poor, the Brahman and the
Chandal.
Practice and philosophy of Shreeram Krishna
was spreaded all around. As a result many ZN 2
learned people and scholars started to come (" _t
Daksinashwar. In the influence of his religious i ye)
views many educated youth of western xi =)
education and philosophy came back to Indian ] a
ideal. As he went to the people of different / )
community, they also came to him. Many iff
renowned persons including Shivanath Shastri. /
Keshobchandra Sen, Mahendranath Sarker, } /! i
Girishchandra Ghosh came to his close Ki
attachment. Wise man of France Romnaronla " )
was so influenced to listen to Vibebkananda that dpe)
he composed a large book about Ramkrishna. = Ss
Shreeram Krishna saw the mother of the world 7 62S ——
in all women. Women are nothing but like a
mother to him. So, he worshipped even his wife
considering her as mother. There is no other
incident in the world like this.

5S

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 131
The speeches of the great man Sree Ramkrishna were not mere simple words-uttered,
but truths of life practised. He served living being as Shiva without pride. He felt
sorrow to see the distressed. Once he was going to visit aholy place with Mathur Babu,
the son-in-law of Rani Rasmoni. Then they were in Deoghar. Shree Ramkrishna was
depressed to see the sorrows and pains of poor the villagers he urged Mathur babu to
feed the poor as he feels them as the God (Narayan). Mr. Mathur did so.

Sree Ramkrishna was the worshipper of Kali. He worshipped before the statue of Kali.
Heworshipped his mother through this. But he had no controversy against Brahmoism
who didn't like in image worshipping. He had a deep relation with Keshab Chandra,
one of the leaders of the Brahma society. It was Keshab Chandra who published about
Sree Ramkrishna through his speeches and newspaper. From this, it can be realized
how much tolerant he was in other's opinions. All religious combination was
established through the system of his meditation and religious activities. It is the great
contribution of Sree Ramkrishna Sree Ramkrishna did not see the class, caste, creed,
dignity, learning and wealth. He felt the heart of men. So, all classes of people came to
him. So, the Dakshineswar temple was open to all.

Shree Ramkrishna would say, "When you will mix with the people outside, you will
loveall. Asif you are not different. Never keep offensive attitude. He believesin corpo-
real, he does not believe in incorporeal; he believes in incorporeal, does not believe in
corporeal; oneis a Muslim, one is a Hindu, oneis a Christian" - do not avoid anybody
saying so.

The people of India were greatly influenced with the generous attitude of Sree
Ramkrishna. Everybody came to Sree Ramkrishna without considering religions and
colours. They listened to his divine sayings and got deepest peace in heart.

Not only the Indians but also the foreign people were overwhelmed with the generous
religious motto of Sree Ramkrishna. A Russian professor read 'Sree Sree Ramkrish-
nakathamrito (Gospel of Sree Ramkrishna) and said that, "So generous, so universal, SO
global is not found any where. A Jew said that a centre of Ramkrishna Math is essential
in Israel. An African said that he also wanted to open a centre on Ramkrishna Vedanta
in his country. This great man died on 15 August, 1886 AD.

Some advices of Sri Ram Krisna.

1. Respect your father and love him. The world pervading is mother or Ma.
Mother is universal. The religion practised in deceiving mother. Motherland
and parents is fruitless.

2. Mother is arespectable person. She is as like as goddess. So everyone should

% look after her as long as she is alive.
&

132 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
3. Distinction of caste can be removed by devotion. A worshipper has no caste
problem. If a devotee is completely devoted to God, his body, mind and

soul everything will be purified.

4. _ If you do your domestic duties, there is no harm. But fix your mind on the
lotus feet of Godhead and work desiring no fruits.

5. A sincere man can go though all religions and may attain God. There are
many ways to reach Him. "As many tenants as many ways to salvation."

6. — Livelikean antin the world. Think that sugar is mixed with sand. Your task
is to collect sugar like an ant.

7. If the boat is on water there is no problem. But if water enters, it will be
sunk.

8. | Godisone. He has many names and unlimited pity. You can pray to Him
by the name as you like.

9. The devotees call him by several names. Think,there are 4 comers in a
pond. The Hindus are taking water from one calling Jal, the muslims are
taking water from one callinig Pani, the English are taking calling Water,
the another one is taking water called Aqua. So god is one with many
names.

We learn principles from the life of Sree Ramkrishna that we have to serve the creation
thinking as God. We have to respect our father, mother and mother land. We should
have patience towards all religions. Religious harmony is established. Then there will
be no religious anarchy. All religions have one goal-to reach God. God is one with
many names. One can attain God by calling any of His names one likes. There will be
no difference among all nations if there is respect for all religions. The devotee has no
cast and creed. Devotion makes body, mind and soul pure. Narayan is poor, but we
have to serve Him. And God wil be pleased with it. We all will follow this ideology of
Sree Ramkrishna. Then we will be treated as real human being.
Lesson 11: Sree Bijoykrishna Goswami
It was the month of Sravan of Bengali year, 1248 (1841A.D) It was the period of full
moon. The Hindu festival of Krishna's swinging (Jhulan Jatra) was going on at every
mandir of the Baishnavas at Santipura in Nabodwip. During such an auspicious hour
Bijoykrishna Goswami was born. His father Ananda kishore Goswami was a faithful
devote. His mother Swamamoyee Devi was also a pious and kind hearted lady.
Bijoykrishna's primary education started in the village pathshala.He studied sanskrit in
tole at Shantipur. Then he went to Kolkata for higher education and got himself
admitted into Kolkata Sanskrit College.
oo
S
N

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 133

After that Bijoykrishna was admitted in ,

medical college. At that time he, a :

together with a few students formed a py ‘a wf

council called Hitasancharini. It was fy ‘ 4

decided in the meeting of the members of gE

the council that what one would think to fr i. ‘ *

be true would try one’s best to do that. { PAG At

Bijoykrishna also said that taking ' ine

paita(holy thread) is the sign of caste |

system. Then all his Brahmins classmates — _)-

left the paita and stopped using it. At that \ = rent

time it was a brave deed indeed. fe = y ‘ "

That time Bijioykrishna had a contact with an Sy A 4

Brahma society. There was a change in his —T anal ry

mind by hearing the speeches of Mohorshi ,

Debendranath Tagore and Keshobchandra.

He felt a feeling for Brahama religion and took Brahma religion. He took Back paita

(threat of purity) and his family didn't take it as normal. When Bijioykrishna arrived at

Shantipur, they become very angry with him. But Bijioykrishna had a strong feelings

and confidence in his belief. He came to Kolkata.

Then the medical examination of Bijioykrishna was knocking at the door. He was

preparing for the exam. But the Brahma society called him to preach. Bijioykrishna

prefer the responsibility of preaching rather than the bright future of a doctor's life. He

had been known as teacher Bijioykrishna of Brahma society. He preached Brahma

religion in Dhaka, Barishal, lessor, Khulna and some places of India. He also initiated

many people in Brahma religion.

Once he was staying in a place of north (uttrasthot). Then he was attacked with a serious

disease. That time he came round by dint of pity of Shrilokinath Brahmachari of

Barodi. It made a dip impression in his life. Because of Baba Loknath and Tagore

Ramkrishna, the sense of Baishnav arose again in him. That time he met Yogi

Barahmananda Swami at Akash gaining mill of Gaya. By preaching him, he made him

Hindu yogi again. Then Bijioykrishna quit Brahma religion. That time Bijioykrishna

with his family and followers fell in severe financial crises. Then he established a

ashram at Gendaria of Dhaka by the order of Baba Loknath and started to sing for God
eo and Hari sankirirtan. At that time his condition was improved and spread away his fame
& in Dhaka

134 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Though Bijioykrishna established ashram in Dhaka. He often visited Kolkata. Once he
went to Brindaban with his wife. There his wife died of cholera. Then he went to
shreekshetra puri in the month of Flagon on Bangla 1304 (1897 A.D). There he became
famous in very soon. His fame also spread away in the state. For that reason some local
people who were irrespective of religion become jealous and one day. give him to eat
poisonous laddu. As a result, he fell sick and breathed his last on Sunday, 22 Jaishta in
Bangla 1306(1899 A.D).
Some advises of Bijioykrishna :
1. There eight orders to have Hari’s love or affection:
a. Being aware of sins b. Repentance for the sinful act.
c. Not engaged in sinful act. d. Disliking for a bad company.
e. Love for honest companies
f. Patience for the name of God and hate for illiterate words.
g. Having thoughts. h. Love.
2. One cannot feel the works of God with jealousy in his mind. If there is no jealousy
in his mind for a moment, he can fell God.
3. Never speak ill of others.
4. Speak the truth and always keep Brahma religion
5. Always take the name of God by honest means threat of purity.
6. Always be careful of all creatures.
7. Never be proud of yourself.
8. Keep belief in religious books and honest persons.
io}
S
AQ

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 135
Lesson 12,13& 14 : Swami Vivekananda Atm
Bahurupe sammukhe tomar, chari kotha khnujicha fl FE
Ishawara "Jibe prem kare Jei Jan, Sei Jon Sebiche Ishwar" G poems
Love and adoration to animal, to serve animals lo N \
considering Ishwar who told this and when only one 4 SAW
told this. The teller of this immortal speech is Swami es a\ \
Vibekananda. He was born in Kolkata on 12th January ry WSS
in 1963. His father Bishwanath Datta was a famous Lex. i
lawyer of the High Court of Kolkata and mother K Wt \
Vobaneshwari Debi was a good housewife. al
Real name of Vibekananda was Narendranath Datta. He Qin f ii Vr
was very meritorious. He had a great scholarship \\ i if | | yj 4
specially on Philosophy. When he was a student of \ i! We
General Assembly College, the Principal of the WANS
college, Hesti was amaged at his merit in a debate and told, no student will be found
like him in Germany or England. Vibekananda went to Americain 1893 and delivered
speech in the global religious summit held in Schigago. He told in his speech, Hindu
religion considers all religions of the world equal. The aim of all religion is same. As
the rivers united in a sea, the aim of all religion is the same - to have Ishwar. So, no
contlict, only co-operation; no destruction, mutual understanding; no confute,
co-operation and peace. He also said, Christians need not be Hindus or Budhists; or
Hindus or Budhists need not be Christians; but every religion will adopt main theories
of other religions and will be developed and will be expanded keeping its own
originality. Answer fascinated to hear his speech. He was considerd the best orator of
the congregation of religion Newyork Herald, American newspaper, commented, After
listening to the speech of Swami Vibekananda it will be seemed that it is avery stupid
activity to send preacher of our country ot the knowledge affluent country like India.
Philanthropy is religion, oppressing is sin. Confidence and faith in God is the only way
to prosper.
Vibekananda would say that truth is the pillar of all religion. To be honest and to do
honest work is the part of religion. He told with the quotation from Athanbaved, not
falsehood, truth conqurs; only through truth the way of getting Ishwar is expanded, He
who can abandon his petty self for the world, the whole universe is for him. He who is
sacred and courageous, can do everything.
There was no caste distinction to Vibekananda. He would say - low caste, the illiterate,
the poor, the cobbler, the sweeper all are our brothers. To serve them is the best religion.
Influenced by this ideal even Brahman youth serves the lower caste cholera patients.
S Ten years after the death of Vibekananda Suvasheandra Bashu could realize to read his
N

136 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
win tings that, serving human being is the only way of salvation. So serving without
interest was his principle oflife. Later, he was embellished with "Netaji".
Vibekananda blived in women's freedom. He boldly supported female education. He
mentioned some of the learned women of the Boidik age Moitreyee, Gagi etc. He said
if the women of that age could achieve so much education, why not women of this
age?
According to him the nation which does not honour women cannot become great. He
established a temple in charge of Saroda Devi so that the women also could get the
scope to study spiritual knowledge.
Swamiji also thought about the reformation of the society for the development of the
country. He told that to develop the country it is necessary to develop all the stages of
life. He protested against the people of high level for the oppressed people of lower
class. Seeing the power of their doing hard labour, he foretold that they will reign the
country soon. So he told "Come out new India”.
Let it come out holding the plough, through the hut of the farmers, from the basket of
fishermen, mala, and sweeper from basket. Let it come out from the grocery, from the
fireplace of the boiler. Let it rise from the factories, hat and bazaar. Let come out from
the bushes, hills and mountains.
Vibekananda realized in this heart that no nation can prosper without education. So, he
would say - people of a country should have to be educated, only then it will be
possible to build up a developed nation. Swamiji wanted to see that everyone should
get equal education. So he told if the son of a Brahman needs a teacher, the son of a
Sudhra needs two teachers. He wished that Brahman should be in his place but he
should try to take a Sudhra up to his level. It should be the aim of life to be aman and
to help other to be areal man. Vibekananda adopted new strategy to spread education
among poor people of the society. He ordered his followers, 'If the poor can not come
to school, we should reach education to them in mills - factories, in the field-farmhouse
where they work. He also said, If you don't have ability, build a hut. Poor people will
come here to get help and for prayer’. Preaele and the saying of Puran will be read in
this temple in the morning and evening. Through this teach their learning thing.
Swamiji could understand that religion is not possible in hunger. So he told, we want
food, want food! Food should be managed for poor people. Food is before religion. We
are making them hear preaches who are passing days in hunger. Can religion remove
hunger? Poor will get the major part of everything. Our night is only on the remaining
part. Poor are the representative of God. He who suffers is the representative of God.
Who gets happiness in taking meal without giving to the poor, he gets happiness in,
sin. Ss
N

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 137
In 1897 famine broke down somewhere in Bengal. Vibekananda stood beside the
famine distressed people with his followers. From Almora he wrote in a letter to his
sister Nibedita, 'l sent some of my boys to the famine distressed distriets. It is working
like a magic. | can see what | thought. | see only through heart it is possible to reach to
the world’.
Vibekananda was grateful to Raja Ram Mohan Roy for stopping the widow burning. He
addressed Vidyasagar as a great hero for starting widow marriage. But he told to make
them self-sufficient with proper education beside, remarriage of widows. He hated
early marriage. He told, in early marriage most of the girls fall in to the Jans of death
during giving birth to children, being short lived their children increase the number of
beggar in the country. If girls are married after mature age affer getting education, their
children will make the country benifitted. Not only this he told 'if any women is
unwilling to marry, she should have the fundamental right to do that.’
In this way Vibekananda thought about the reformation of the society and the
development of the country besides missionary work. He did not engage himself mere
praying to God like other ascetics. His preceptor Sree Ram Krishna Porom Hongsdev
expected this.
Vibekananda established Ran Krishna Mission in 1897 for preaching his preceptor's
ideology. Next year he established a Moth also. It stands on the western bank of the
Ganges at Bellore in Hawra. Generally it is known as 'Bellore Abbey.’
There are branches of this Ram Krishna mission and Ram Krishna Abbey in different
places of the world. The Beloore Abbey is the main centre. There are many abbeys and
missions in Bangladesh whose centre is Dhaka Ram Krishna Mission. Hundreds of
people are being served through this abbeys and missions. The fields of service are
education, treatment and help in crisis etc.
Vibekananda's saying
1. Religion is a way of thinking which elevates animal into human and human into
God.
2. Rise, awake, no more sleep, you have the ability to remove all scarcities and
sorrows- believe this and you get the power.
3. To love others is devine and to hate others is sin.
4. It is education which makes one self- reliant.
5. All great deeds in the world was done with courage and brain but not with money.
6. Do not think you are poor or friendless, who and where have you seen money has
made a man, man always makes money. Which development of the world is, all is
Forma-18, Hindu Religion and Moral Education, Class-9-10

138 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
done by human power, by the power of encouragement, by the power of belief.
Ancient religion would say, who doesn't believe God, he is an atheist. New religion
is saying, who doesn't have belief in him, he is an atheist.
7. Belief is the greatest power of human society and all religions.
8. There is no religion as like as serving the living being "He, who loves
animals, has served Ishwar.
We can learn from the life history of Vibekananda that all the people of the world are
the same. There is no discrimination among the people. Their religions may be
different. But the principles of all religions are same. Thisis fact. Nothing but the truth
is the religion. To serve the living being is to serve God. It is necessary to remove
poverty before religious counselling. Because nobody wants to listen to religion in
hunger. There is no difference between the rich and the poor, the cobbler and the
sweeper. All are brothers. There is no profane, he may be of any profession.
Male-female, rich-poor all have to be educated. Worldly or spiritual prosperity is not
possible without proper education. Self confidence and faith in God is the first step of
prosperity.
We will always hold this learning in our heart. We reflect it in each and every activity.
Then we will also be successful in life.
Ma always loved to engage in work day and night as if work were her life. She spent
her life without aspiration.
Ma was not only a saint or yogi, but a lover of beauty also. She tried to find the
similarities between the inner and external world of the nature and wanted to develop
both the described beauties. In this way Ma made the Asram a place of beauty and
purity.
Mahad a master plan to establish a city named Arovil in the name of SreeArabinda. In
1954 she took the plan. For this she bought a land of 15 square miles at the 6 miles
north-east of Pandicheri and on 28th February 1968 founded it collecting clod from 126
countries. Clod was collecting by the youth of those countries. On the 21st February
1972 (birthday of Ma) establishment work was started.
Maplaned thisArovil city would be modem and there 50 thousand people would live.
It would a be tax free zone. Every body would serve the truth being the religious
person. In 2006 A.D the master plan of Ma became a success. The inhabitants of that
city are living there happily.
ShreeMa could draw, sing and play on the organ. On the every last night of the year she
welcomed the New Year playing on the Organ. She had talent in literary world also. cS
8

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 139
The ideology of this AravinbaAsram of Pandicheri has been established with fame all
over India by the untiring labour of ShreeMVa. There are some branches of theAsram in
other places of India and Bangladesh.
In 1973, 17th November Ma breathed her last at AravindaAsram of Pandichery.
We get some learning from the life of ShreeMa. We should take ideology of purity in
personal life, believein God, get education and serve the living being. Development of
civic sense and morality are good for our society.
The self oblivious nation was habituated to come back to life from the old religion. The
unity of India came to light in its national life. Vivekananda was hardworking. He knew
nothing without work. As aresult he became sick . He died in BelooreAbbey on 4 July,
1902.
Vivekananda’s sayings:
1. The internal godness in man is religion.
2. Rise,awake, no more sllep, You have the ability to remove all scarcities and
sorrows. Believe this and you get the power.
3. To love others is divine and to hate others is sinful.
4. Itis education which makes one self-reliant.
5. All great deeds in the world was done with courage and brain but not with
money.
6. Do not think you are poor or friendless. Who and where have you seen money
has made a man. Man always makes money.
7. There is no religion as like as serving the living being.
We can learn from the life history of Vibekananda that all the people of the world are
the same . There is no discrimination among the people. Their religions may be
different. But the principles of all religions are same. Thisis fact. Nothing but the truth
is religion. To serve the living being is to serve God. It is necessary to remove poverty
before religious counselling. Because nobody wants to listen to religion in hunger.
There is no difference between the rich and the poor, the cobbler and the sweeper. All
are brothers. There is nothing profane, he may be of any profession. Self confidence
and faith in God is the first step of prosperity. Health must be sound before religious
activities. Because
=
&

140 Hindu Religion and Moral Education

Lesson 16: Shreema

Shreema was born at Paris of France in 21st JN \|\N

February, 1878. Shree Aravinda called her 7 we)

Meera. When she came to Aravind Asram at K eat

Pandicheri in India . She was named as aS

Shreema, The devotees called her by this ine Sy ve

name and she was known by this name to all. / 7 any, UW

From the childhood the spiritual thinking | / 7 ¥

was raised in her. From the age of only four, } ( y\

she started to be absobed in meditation. An 4 Y/ b j

educational environment was made for her fp Wy 1 j Mi riiljgeh

but she had no eagerness to study. Not only if i [Eo | j ‘ Y) y

that, she had no attraction to any earthly MA uly L fs WV) 7

thing. She thought only about the God. oF

There was deep jungle out of Paris. Shreema had gone there and did meditation staying

under the tree. Then the birds sat on and squirrel ran over her. An eternal relation was

developed there. For this reason her parent became sorry.

At the age of nineteen she went to klemsen of Aljiria. There lived a wise man named

Teon. She learned Hathayoga and many guptabidya from the wise man.

Coming back, she started deep meditation. She realised, there is God as jyotirmaya.

Once she dreamt a jyotirmay man and told him to rise up himself.

Shreema started to learn philosophy and Theology. She believed that, the shapless

God has expressed through shrikrishna. So she wanted to come the place. In 1914 AD

she came in India with her husband Mansiya Pal Risa. They went to Pandicheri

AravindaAsram on 29th March. Here after seeing risi Aravind, she thought this is the

jotirmaya man whom she dreamt. That place seemed to be heaven to her. She became a

follower of Aravind. Then a magazine named ‘Arya’ was published in English and

France from the asram.

But Shreema did not stay for along time then. She had gone to Paris at the time of

World War. This seperation from Aravind made her unhappy.

Then after five years, the war stopped and she again came to India and on the 24th

April, 1920 she reached Pandicheri. She started meditation and work. There everything

was couned all her European dress and took the Indian dress. Ke
>
N

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 141
In 1926, 24th November Shree Aravind achieved full siddhi and from then he started to
stay alone. Shreema had to take the responsibilities of Asram. She made theAsram self
dependent in all respects .
There she opened a patshala which has now become a University named ‘International
school of Education. It is open to all.
Asram bears all their food and living expenses, those who are staying in the Asram. It
has its own land, garden and dairy firm. Honestly Sreema established the Asram acom-
plete institution.
The main learning from theAsram is to eradicate all sorts of discrimination. Those who
are living in the Asram, they have to work. There is no discrimination of work and
religious blindness among them. By the word Ma wanted the devotees to be respectful
to the other religions after learning the philosophy of religion. The University students
would spread out the sprit of the religion around the world.
Ma loved and took care of them like her child. Ma had also loved for the nature and
living beings. If any stranger comes to the Asram he will be treated gladly and advised
not to tear or break any trees unnecessarily.
Exercise

1. Who is the purnavatar of God?

a) Matsya b) Baraha

c) Nrisingah d) Shrikrishna
2. Whom did Susruta learn Ayurveda from?

a) Charaka b) Dibopdas

c) Atreya d) Agnivesh
3. How many parts are there of Charak samhita?

a) five b) six

c) seven d) eight
4. The reason of incarnation of Shrikrishna is-

i. to establish religion

o6 li. to destroy the evil, to nourish the righteous
S ili. to destroy the gentle

142 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Which one of the following is correct?
a)1 b)i & ii
c) i & iti d) i, ii & iii
5. When did Shankaracharya start to teach students?
a) At the age of six b) At the age of seven
c) At the age of eight d) At the age of nine
6. What is the real name of Prabhu Nityananda?
a) Gouranga b) Kuber
c) Gadadhar c) Narendra
7. What is name of Meerabai’s Mother?
a) Padmavati b) Bisisthadevi
c) Beer kunyaree d) Chandramoni Devi
8. ‘Mother is respected personality, as like as the Brahmamayee’- who told it?
a) Shankaracharya b) Bijoykrishna
c) Nrisimha d) Vivekananda
9. Where did Bijoykrishna Goswami establish Asram following the order of
Loknathbaba?
a) Dhaka b) Barisal
c) Jessore d) Khulna
10. Who is known as ‘cyclone hindu’ in the newspaper of America?
a) Prabhu Nityananda b) swami Vivekananda
c) SreeRamakrishna d) sreeAravinda
11. Which physician’s thinking is reflected in the character of Dr Bidhan?
a) Susrata b) dibodas
c) Charaka d) Atreya
Read the following passage and answer the question no 11 & 12
Dr Bidhan has been working at Goumadi Upazila health complex for along time. He
consults with patients dearly before giving treatment and advises them about
preserving good health. Following his advice patients becomes alert and protects sx
themselves from diseases. As a result, diseases have been decreased herein this area &

Hindu Religion and Moral Education 143

which one of the following is correct?

a)i&ii b) ti&iii
c)i & ili d) i,ii&iti

Creative Question:

1. Tama studies and gives food regularly to the birds at the comer of courtyard. The
birds eat with cheerful mind. She also gets joy. Tama's father arranged her
marriage stopping her study but she strongly refuses it. With the help of her
headmaster she can establish her right.

a) Where did Vivekananda establish his vedanto samiti?
b) Explain the cause creating Vaktimood of Vivekanada to sreeRamkrishna?
c) Loving birds of Tama, belongs to which ideology of Swami Vivekananda?

2. In Class nine religious teacher Dineshchnadra was teaching on ideal lives. He
told about a lady who leaving the European dress became a saint and took
responsibilities of an Asram. She made this Asram as a famous self-depended
institute. Not only that She established a planed city with the thinking of beauty.
a) What is the name of ShriBijoykrishna’s father?

b) Why did Bijoykrishna take Brahmadharma?

c) Explain the life of the saint-nun according to your text which is reflected
through the passage.

d) Evaluate the contribution of that saint and nun to establish the city.

Short Question:

1. What does Avatar (incarnation) mean?
2. Explain the cause of appearing Shrikrishna as the Avatar?
3. Why does Susruta call the father of Indian surgery?
4. Explain the implication of Adwaitabad preached by Shankaracharya.
5. How did ShreeMa make a relation between animals and birds?
6. Why did the Pandicheri Asram be seemed as heaven to ShreeMa?
Lo}
S
N

144 Hindu Religion and Moral Education
Broad Question:
1. Evaluate the cotrbution of Charaka in Chikitsasastra?
2. Analyse role of Prabhu Nityananda in emancipating men.
3. ‘Meera is not a queen, a devoted nun Meeravai’ — analyse this statement.
4. Evaluate the ideology of Shree Ramakrishna in building the religious, domestic,
social and moral life.
5. Analyse the speech of Swami Vivekananda which he made in Biswadharma
council at Chicago.
THE END
io}
Ss
N

Academic Year
9-10 Hindu
WATS Steerer! HU acer PAR at SATS Aq
— ay aerTal OF PTA
dos WH (Gtr fF, 28 8 St SH) CHT PT
Ge 73
US
Tener®

