e
History of Bangladesh
@ ene [J
and World Civilization
Classes Nine-Ten
ee - — Som Pe
saa r
pe il Fy ’ awe
Zeal 1. ee : ; ph Fe
NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH
Renee”

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a Textbook for Class Nine-Ten from the Academic Year-2013
History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Classes Nine-Ten
Written by
Prof. Prodyot Kumar Bhowmik
Prof. Dr. Sultana Nigar Chowdhury
Prof. Dr. Mohammad Salim
Edited by
Prof. Dr. Syed Anwar Husain
Translated by
Dipak Kumar Karmaker
Mohammad Nafiz
Md. Zulfeqar Haider
Alok Kumar Saha
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Dhaka.

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel commercial Area, Dhaka.
[All right reserved by the Publisher]
First Publication : December, 2012
Revised Edition : November, 2013
Co-ordinator
Syed Mahfooz Ali
Cover
Shudarshan Bachar
Sujaul Abedeen
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
Computer Compose
Server Station, Chittagong.
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Government of Bangladesh
Printed by:

Preface
Education is the pre-requisite for the holistic development in our national life. To cope with the
challenges of the fast changing world and to lead Bangladesh to the doorstep of development
and prosperity, a well educated and skilled population is needed. In order to build up a nation
imbued with the spirit of the Language Movement and our Liberation War, the secondary
education aims at flourishing the talents and prospects inherent in the learners. Besides, the
other aims also include expansion and consolidation of the basic knowledge and skills of the
learners acquired at the primary level in order to make them fit for entry into higher education.
The aims of secondary education further emphasise on developing these learners as skilled
and competent citizens of the country through the process of acquiring knowledge at the
backdrop of socio-economic, cultural and environmental settings.
Keeping the aims and objectives of National Education Policy 2010 ahead, the curriculum at
the secondary level has been revised. In the revised curriculum the national aims, objectives
and contemporary needs have been reflected. Along with these expected learning outcomes
have been determined based on the learner's age, merit and level of acquisition. Besides, efforts
have been made to raise, starting from the level of moral and humanistic values down to
awareness on history and tradition, the spirit of the Liberation War, passion for art-culture and
literature, patriotism, feelings for nature and equal dignity to all irrespective of religions,
caste, creed and sex. Efforts have also been made to apply science in all spheres of our life in
order to build a nation advanced in science. Attempts are also there to make the learner
capable of implementing the goals envisioned in Digital Bangladesh-2021.
In the light of the present curriculum almost all the textbooks at the secondary level have been
introduced. While introducing the textbooks, the capacity, aptitude and prior knowledge of
the learners have been taken into utmost consideration. While selecting the contexts and their
presentation special attention has been given on the expansion of the learner's creative
faculty. Adding learning outcomes at the beginning of each chapter, hints about the achievable
knowledge of the learners have been given. By adding variety of activities, creative and other
questions evaluation has also been made creative.
History is a compulsory subject for Humanities Group of Secondary Education in class Nine-
Ten. It is important for every citizen of an independent country to know the history of his
nation. The socio-eco nomic, geographical and cultural evolution reflect in history
consequently. This text book (The History of Bangladesh and World Civilization) have been
written with special consideration to make a citizen with human qualities, non-communal and
spirit of Liberation War. We hope, objectives of the new curriculum and syllabus have been
reflected in this text book appropriately.
Considering the challenges and commitments of 218t century and following the revised
curriculum the textbook has been written. Recently the rational evaluation and tryout
program has been completed to make correction and revision of the textbook. I hope the
outcomes of the program will be reflected in this revised edition. Any constructive
suggestion for the improvment of the textbook will be welcomed and incorporated in future
editions.
We appreciate the endeavours of those who assisted very sincerely with their merit and hard
work in the process of writing, translating, editing, revision, illustration and printing of the
book. We hope the book will ensure joyful reading and achievement of expected skills from
the learners.
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Dhaka.

Table of Contents
Fone | Introduction to History
World Civilization (Egypt, Indus, Greek and Rome)
Janapadas of Ancient Bengal 28-32
Political History of Ancient Bengal (326 B.C. -1204 A.D.)) 33-50
Social, Economic and Cultural History of Ancient Bengal
Six Political History of Bengal in the Middle 64-91
Age (1204 A.D.-1757 A.D.) .
Seven | Social, Economic and Cultural History of the Middle Age 92-109
of Bengal
The First Stage of English Rule in Bengal
Nine Resistance, Renaissance and Reform Movements 126-142
in Bengal during British Rule 7
Ten Movements for Right to Self-determination in Bengal
during British Period 143-170
The Language Movement and afterwards Political Episode] 171-184
Twelve | Military Rule and the Movement for Right to 185-200
Self-determination (1958-1969)
The Election of 1970 and War of Liberation 201-228
Fourteen] The Reign of Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman (1972-1975) 229-241
Fift The Mili Rul d Sub: t Devel t
ifteen ilitary Rule and Subsequent Developments 9-959
(1975-1990)

Chapter One
Introduction to History
The Liberation War of Bangladesh took place in 1971. We achieved our victory on 16
December 1971 by defeating the Pakistani army after a nine month long war. The war
of independence is a story of our glory and pride. We have many such glorious events
in our national life. If you want to know about them, you have to study the history of
Bangladesh. In fact, history presents the truth. It order to have a deep insight into
history, you must know the elements and types of history.
Let us begin with-What is history? What are the elements and classifications of
history? What are the ways of writing history? What is the necessity of studying
history? This chapter focus on these issues. Therefore, by the end of the chapter you
will-
-
Antifact from Wari-Bateshwar

@ beable to explain concepts, nature and scope of history and heritage;

® beable to describe elements and classification of history;

® beable to discuss the usefulness of studying history;

® be interested in history and heritage.
The concept of history and heritage
The meaning of history, Ttihas', comes from the word ‘itho' meaning ‘oitijyo’ or
heritage. Heritage is related to habits, education, language, art, culture and literature of
the past which move on or merge to the future. History is a means to pass traditions
Forma- 1, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

2 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
from generation to generation. Historian E.H. Carr defines history as an endless
conversation between the present and the past. We all know that our present is based on
the past. History is the factual narration of the past and its evolution. Now a days
history also narrates contemporary events that is known as contemporary history.
Hence the range of History is extended from the remote past to the present.

The Bangla word of history, “Itihas” is a combination of two fragments ‘itiho+ as’. It
means it was like this or it happened. The similar opinion is also expressed by another
historian Dd Johnson. He says that History is what has happened. If anything is yet to
happen, that is not history.

The English word 'History' comes from a Greek word ‘Historia’. This word was first
used by the famous Greek historian, Herodotus (Sth century .

BC) who is considered to be the “Father of History”. He used WONG \

the term 'History' to name one of his research works. Herodo- ‘2 ne 4 j

tus believed that the ultimate objective of history is to seek eS

and record what exactly happened. In his research Herodotus . ( wg )
analysed different aspects of the war between the Greeks and Aq XS » ef
the Persians. For example, he recorded different information WOW, \

he could collect, important incidents that took place during :

the war and the victories the Greeks had. His objective was Herodotus

to inspire next generations for bravery and heroic deeds. He didn't let these events or
incidents go from people's mind. Herodotus was the first person who combined the two
concepts history and research together. Thus History turned to science, became com-
pletely information based and a subject to research. Historian Rapson thinks that
history is the continuous and scientific description of events.

Another famous historian Toyenbee considers. History is the life of society. In fact, the
unending flow of incidents in human society is History. ENN Bags

The father of modern History, the German historian Leopold 2) Sa
Von Ranke thinks that History means the research and the true pane
description of what took place. So, it can be said that History 1 B “4 2 im
means the sequential and true description of different activities | 77 oe ry
related to the evolution of human society. Authentic history is |” i ox fig ‘
always written based on facts. Ly ie ee
Sources of history a) :
Sources of history refer to the facts and findings used to 7] =

establish historical truth. These elements can be divided into} 74) pos
two categories written sources and unwritten sources. ” Hiinen- Tashi

Introduction to History 3
1, Written Sources: The written sources of writing history include literature, overseas

accounts, documents, etc. Literary works of different times are also good sources of

collecting information about that particular time. For example, the Vedas,

Arthashashira by Kautilya, Rajtarangini of Kalahana, Tabagat-i-Nasiri by

Minhaj-us-Siraj, Ain-i-Akbari by Abul Fazal, etc. have good historical sources.
Chinese travelers, Fa-Hien, Hiuven-Tsang and {%\ 4% ee ee ee
Itsing who came to the Bengal respectively from / Oud q uf) a = Bs 4
the fifth to seventh century are some of the oy Pa ee oe
wonderful written sources of history. \/j ym \% we IO)
Descriptions of this region are also available in 4°) “S” / Ne NU ey
the writings of Aftican traveler Ibn-Battuta and [4/07 /\/\\"))\"" ga 3
others. We can learn about the society, economy, ( f i ALG pe P aR
politics, religious practices, rituals and customs “3 “LU ah Y CM is
of that time in this region from these descriptions. Stone tools
Literary sources of history include fairy tales, myths, and stories. The Tibetan writer
Lama Tarnatha uses historical sources of the Pala Dynasty. He describes how the
founder of the Pala dynasty Gopala ascended to the throne; but that was done in a very
imaginative, literary way. Thus there are hidden truths behind stories and the job of a
historian is to find them out through proper analysis and research. Sometimes the
government documents such as proceedings, file notes and letters also reveal
substantial historical truths.
2. Unwritten or Archeological Sources: Unwritten 4 Ssh

or archeological evidences refer to those things #7 “RS ay

or sources from which we eat eed SEAR

place or person. All archeological edifices such “age

as coins, inscriptions on stones or copper,

column inscriptions and buildings belong to Findings from Wari-Bateshwar

unwritten elements. Scientific experiments and

analysis of them disclose the socio-political-economic conditions of the time that

these elements refer to. It helps us understand about the civilization, religious

practices, lifestyles, urbanization, utensils used, trade and business, agricultural

tools etc. of the ancient people. For example we may think about the archeological

sites of the Indus civilization as well as those of Mahastangarh, Paharpur and

Moynamati of Bangladesh. The new archeological discoveries can change even

the history of « nation. For instance, we can consider the new discoveries of

4 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion

Wari Bateshwar in Narsingdi. The archeological relics found in Wari Bateshwari are

proofs of urban civilization in Bangladesh even two thousand five hundred years ago.

This discovery is going to open a new horizon about the ancient civilization in the

Bengal. Since the discovery is changing many old ideas, the history of the Bengal

needs to be written afresh.

Individual Work: Make a list on different sources of history.

Classification of History

With the advancement of human society and civilization, people have been writing

history on new more subjects. As a result, the scopes of History are expanding. History

is incessantly connecting the past events to the present generation. In that case, it is
difficult to classify History. In addition, people, their society, civilization and life-style
lie close to each other as the subject-matter of History.

Yet, for the sake of study, discussion and research, history can be divided into two

groups—Geographical History and Thematic History.

1. Geographical Aspect or Geographical History: It tells about the context
especially the place and time related to the History being written. History can again
be divided into three groups for the advantage of understanding from the
perspective of geographical situation, such as Local History, National History and
International History.

2. Thematic History: Thematic History refers to the history which is written based
on a particular subject. The scope of thematic History is very wide. Yet, it can
generally be divided into five parts, such as Political History, Social History,
Economic History, Cultural History and Contemporary History.

Subject matters of History

History is the evidence and written documents of chronological changes of people,

their society and civilization. One of the modern historians, Vico believes that the

inception and growth of human society and institutions are the subject matters of
history.

Therefore, all the important achievements that contribute to the development and

progress of human society and civilization are art, culture, literature, philosophy,

sculpture, politics, warfare, religions, laws etc. which as a whole directly or indirectly
influences society and civilization is a part History.

Introduction to History 5
Nature of History
History is different from other subjects. Its formation and presentation are also
different from other branches of knowledge. A discusion on the charactorerics of
history will give a clean conception about it.
Firstly. History reconstructs the past through authentic informations.
Secondly. The focus of History is the chronological progress of human society and
civilization. However, this information must be based on authentic sources.
Thirdly. History never stops; it is ever-flowing for which it is difficult to use years and
dates in dividing time. For this reasons, it is difficult to divide history as the Ancient,
the Middle and the Modern period etc. Again, the trends of changes did not take place
in all countries at the same time.
Fourthly. History is to uphold a perfect account of events that had taken place to the
next generation. If the presentation of an event is not neutral, it cannot be authentic
History.

Individual Work: The charateristics of history is to reconstruct the past through

authentic imfomation — explain

Scope of History
History include everything done by human beings. The edge of history is extended to
all branches of human thinking, planning and activities. The scope of History is being
modified with the changes in man's thinking and activities. For example, during the
first phase of pre-historic period, man's activities were limited to collecting foods. As
a result, the scope of History was extended to the activities of food collection. With the
passage of time, as civilization expands, so do human activities. It results in the
application of more scientific approach in the study of History. Thus, everyday new
branches of history are opening and expanding the scope of History. In the nineteenth
century though history was regarded as a subject only to study politics, after the spread
of Marxism, historians started to exploring history of economics, history of social
evolution, history of fine arts etc.
Necessity of Studying History
History is an account based on the evolution of human society and civilization.
Therefore, as a branch of knowledge, the importance of History is limitless. The study
of History helps us realize the past and make comparison between the present and the
past too. It also help us predict the misfortune that may befall on us and on our country.
Therefore, the study of History is essential for individual beings as well as for their
country and nation.

6 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
Outstretched knowledge and dignity: The factual accounts of the past helps increase
our knowledge. When this account is about one's own country, its struggle, glory or
heritage, it incurs patriotism. This helps become self-determined and self- reliant. Thus
the study of History is so imperative to develop nationalism and national unity.
Enhancing awareness: Knowledge of History increases awareness among people.
Humans can easily understand difference between good and the bad if they know the
causes of ups and downs of different communities and the causes behind them.
Therefore, they become aware of the consequences of their deeds.
Giving lessons from a paradigm: The applied aspects of History is unlimited. By
studying history, people could learn a lot from the past events. This lesson can be
applied to better the present. Since History teachers through examples, history is called
the Educative Philosophy.
The study of History enhances the capacity of our judgment and analysis which helps
form philosophical outlook. Consequently, there grows an interest in acquiring and
inculcating knowledge.
Group Work: Identify the historical sources of a historical place or sight in your
locality by visiting it.
Questions for practice

Multiple Choice Questions
1. Who is called the father of Modern History?

a. Herodotus b. Leopold Von Ranke

c. Toynbee d. E.H. Carr
2. The archeological inscriptions obtained in Wari-Bateswar proves that —

i. Bangladesh was rich in pottery from the ancient time.

ii. Urban civilization grew up in Bangladesh during very ancient time.

iii. Thoughts and ideas of the people of ancient Bengal were very developed.

Introduction to History 7
Which one of the below statement is correct?
a i b. iandii
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
Read the stimulant and answer questions 3 and 4.
Rima went to Comilla with her parents to visit Moynamati Museum during Eid
vacation. There she could see coins, stone inscriptions, column inscriptions, copper
plates ete.
3. The sources of history that Rima found in Moynamati museum were —
i. written
ii. Unwritten
iii. Archaeological
Which one of the below answers is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iii
c. ii and iii d. i, ii, and iii
4. Rima will know about acient Bengal from the visit of moynamati museum
i. Social History
ii. Economic History
iii. Cultural History
Which one of the below answers is correct?
a. iand ii b. ii and iii
c. iand iii d. i, ii, and iii
Creative Questions
1. Sajal goes to the National Library with his maternal uncle. He reads different
types of books there. Despite being a student of science, he likes history books.
He collects history books from different sources. Sajal's father rebuked and
asked him, 'Why are you killing time by reading such books?"
a. What country was Hiuen- Sang a traveler of?
b. How is the periphery of history expanding with the evolution of time?
c. What kind of sources of history did Sajal find in the National Library? Explain.
d. Do you agree to the attitude of Sajal's father?

Chapter Two
World Civilization

The primitive people did not know cultivation. They wandered around forests and

collected fruits and roots. Those were their only food. Then they learned to break down

stones and curve out weapons of stones. In those days stone-made weapons were their

only instruments for survival. This is why the age is known as the Stone Age. The first

part of the Age was known as the Old Stone Age or the Paleolithic Age. In this age, men

would hunt animals collectively. They also knew the use of fire.

The Late Stone Age ended with human being's learning to cultivate and it brought an

end to their nomadic lifestyle. This age was known as the New Stone Age or the

Neolithic Age. Man started to live on the banks of rivers for the purpose of farming

land. They learned to build houses and infrastructures. Little by little civilization was

formed. In this chapter we will discuss the true stories of how men gradually improve

civilization.

At the end of the chapter we will be able to -

e describe the gradual evolution of the ancient Egyptian culture;

e discuss the state and society of ancient Egypt with the significance of the Nile
river;

e evaluate the contributions of ancient Egypt in the gradual development of world
civilization;

« know the story of discovery and the geographical location of the Indus civilization;

« describe the political, socio-economic and the religious conditions of Indus
civilization;

¢ — describe the roles of urbanization, arts and sculpture of the Indus civilization in the
development of human civilization;

e discuss the emergence of the Greek civilization with description of the
geographical location and its time frame;

e explain the concept of a democratic state in respect to a military state;

e describe the contributions of the Greek civilization in education, religion, culture,

e philosophy and science in the development of world civilization;

e describe the ancient the Roman civilization by mentioning the geographical
location and the time frame;

- explain the different stages of the Rome and the Roman empire;

e analyze the contributions of Roman civilization in the development of education,
literature and the writing system;

e describe the contributions of the Roman civilization in architecture, sculpture and
science in developing world civilization;

e discuss the contributions of religion, philosophy and law of the ancient the Roman
civilization in developing world civilization;

World Civilization 9
e respect the ancient history and tradition by learning about the world civilization.
Egyptian Civilization
Background: The North-east side of the African continent which is now
known as Egypt was once the center of the ancient Egyptian civilization. From
5000 B.C to 3200 B.C, one state emerged on the banks of the Nile River. From this
time onwards, Egypt began to influence the ancient civilizations through many
contributions.
— Mediterranean oa ISR AEL
JORDAN
Cairo
Sinai
Nile
EGYPT River SAUDI
ARABIA
El-Minya
%
i >
Assiut AN
SS Wadi Hammamat %
& Deir el-Medina and tine Red Sea
N the Valley of Kings }
Edfu “By
Bs
‘Aswan
Lake
0 50 100 150 200 250 KM Nasser
Ld
Ancient civilization of Egypt Map
In the later periods from 3200 B.C the Early Dynastic Period began which marked the
beginning of the historical eras of Egypt. In this period, Narmer or Menes (known by
both names) united the Lower and Upper Egypt and became the first ruler and priest of
Egypt. He is known to be the founder of the First Dynasty in Egypt and receives the
honor of being the first Pharaoh. Hence Egypt under the rules of the Pharaohs began to
flourish and leave its mark in the world civilizations with important contributions.
Geographical Location: From a geographical point of view Egypt was situated in a
very important location with three continents surrounding it. The country was situated
on the coast of the Mediterranean Sea, surrounded by Asia, Africa and Europe. In the
north of Egypt is the Mediterranean Sea, in the east the Red Sea, in the west the Sahara
Forma- 2, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

10 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
Desert and Sudan and other African countries in the south. It has a total area of nearly
4, 00,000 square miles.
Time Frame: The Egyptian civilization continued for more than 2500 years. The long
and sustaining history of Egypt began in 5000 B.C. particularly in the Neolithic Age.
However, Egypt was founded under the leadership of Menes and maintained its glory
and zenith for 3000 years. In the 10th century B.C a barbarous nation of Libya took
over the throne from Pharaohs. In 670-662 B.C the Assyrians spread their dominance
over Egypt. But in 525 B.C Persians took over Egypt and the glorious sun of the
ancient Egyptian civilization finally came to set.
State and Society: In the Pre-dynastic period Egypt was divided into small
administrative regions. They were called Nomes. The first ruler or the first Pharaoh,
Menes or Narmer, in 3200 B.C united the entire Egypt into one state and made
Memphis, located in South Egypt, the capital. From then on, Egypt became a unified
state and the dynastic rule emerged. The title Pharaoh originated from the Egyptian
term 'Per-o' The Pharaohs were very powerful. They believed that they were the
decedents of the Sun God. The title Pharaoh’ was hereditary. Only the Son of a Pharaoh
could inherit the title Pharaoh.

Individual Work: Make a flow chart showing gradual periods of the rise and fall

of the Egyptian civilization.
The Egyptians could be divided into particular classes based on their professions; such
as, royal family, priests, elites, scribes, traders, artists, the farmers and slaves to the
lands.
The economy of Egypt was basically agriculture based. The staple agricultural
products were wheat, barley, cotton, onion, peach, etc. In trade and commerce they
were equally advanced. The cultivated wheat, sheets of linen, earthen pots, etc. from
Egypt were exported to Crete Islands, Phoenicia, Palestine, Syria and other
neighboring countries. The Egyptians imported gold, silver, elephant tusks, wood from
their neighboring countries.
Nile River: The Nile river originated from Victoria Lake of Africa. From there the river
ran through different countries and finally through Egypt it fell into the Mediterranean
Sea. The father of history Herodotus aptly said, "Egypt is the gift of the Nile". Without
the Nile river Egypt would have been nothing but a desert. In ancient times, the Nile
river flooded every year. After the flood, the land on both sides of the banks would be
fertile with the black silt and Egyptians would cultivate many crops in the silt left
behind by the flood water.

World Civilization 11
Contributions of the Egyptians to Civilization: There is no way to dispute the
contribution made by the Egyptians to ancient civilization. Their religious beliefs, art,
sculpture, script writing, invention of paper, science and everything is part of the
tremendous contributions they have made to the development of civilizations. A very
unique characteristic of the Egyptians was that every sphere of their lives was
influenced by their religious thoughts and beliefs.
Religious Beliefs of the Egyptians: Probably there is no nation among the ancient
civilizations that was more involved and influenced by the religious rituals than the
Egyptians. Because of this, many of the philosophical ideas, rules and regulations, rites
and rituals of human civilization came from the Egyptians. They worshipped inanimate
objects, idols and also animals. Though there have been many changes in their
religious views. They had a firm belief that the Sun god 'Ray' or 'Aman Ray’ and the
God of nature, grain and the river Nile 'Osiris' together ruled over the entire world.
However, the most important God to the Egyptians was the Sun god ‘Ray’.
Individual Work: Draw a chart of the exported cash crops and the imported
trade products of Egypt.
The Egyptians believed that the dead will | = =i
again come back to life. Therefore, they used ei,
to keep dead bodies fresh by making mommies ro
of the dead bodies and created Pyramids to y war ‘a
protect the mommies. The Pharaohs ruled the fs yt pe oe cj BS >
nation as the representatives of God on earth. @ sco bel Mek as oe eine
They were the chief priests and they appointed = © 4 =e
other priests in different services. Pyramid
Industry: The paintings and art of the Egyptians are very diverse and historically
important. Similar to other countries the art and painting spurred from the religious
beliefs of the Egyptians. They first started the painting to decorate their pyramids and
their tombs. The popular colors of the time were black and white. In the tombs,
pyramids, temples, palace, gardens and even in the walls of common households, the
Egyptian artists used to draw beautiful and spectacular pictures. These pictures
depicted the political, religious, social and family lives of ancient Egypt.
The Egyptian artists also had tremendous achievements in curving and sculpting. The
furniture, earthen potware, gold, silver and valuable stone plates, ornaments, mommy's
faces, everyday tools, elephant tusks etc. bear the mark of excellence of the Egyptian
craftsmanship.

12 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
Individual Work: Draw a chart of the murals illustrated in the wall by the
artists of Egypt.

Sculpture: No other civilization has been able ,

to make such a contribution as the Egyptians 4 Cy

in the art of sculpting. The greatness of size, a 4 f

diversity of style and the religious fervor found wt te

in the large scale statues reflect the excellence a aa

of the sculpting art of the Egyptians. All the 4 fate ie: 2

statues are influenced by the religious feelings, |) — = oe eee

rituals and philosophy of life and death. Each = sf ‘gg de ae a ae i pe

and every one of the sculptures was in some ih oe Z aoe ee cy r’

way or the other bear spiritual artisanship. The 7" =

greatest specimen of Egyptian sculpture is the a B sam @ = :

Sphinx in Giza. The Sphinx is a statue that has Sphinx

the body ofa lion and the head of a man. The

biggest Pyramid in Egypt is Pharaoh Khufu's pyramid. The temples of Egypt also

teflect the beautiful work of sculpting of this great civilization.

Writing System and the Invention of Paper: One important features of the Egyptian

civilization was the invention of written characters and letters. The writing system in

Egypt emerged with the spread of urbanization. 5000 years ago they were the first to

invent a 24 consonant alphabet system. At the very beginning, they communicated and

expressed their feelings by drawing pictures. This type of writing system was known as

‘Hieroglyphic’ or sacred alphabet.

The Egyptians learned to make paper from the { Re ge CITI

mash of reed-like plant. They wrote on this Gopal) oa ND |

paper. The Greeks called this paper papyrus. & See EIN IS AW Re

The English word “paper” came from the word [Xj] ee BEING ee — Sj :

papyrus. It is noteworthy that Napoleon Bye 5 a pee (om p= a

Bonaparte in his campaign to Egypt discovered [ee ©: V2y | VA ey

a stone plate that is known as the Rosetta stone. [A 5) ee

On this stone was encrypted in Greek and [jean 9u¢ a OS

Hieroglyphic language that conveyed much Ae al SN SS al

information about ancient Egypt. Hieroglyphic Inscription

Science: It has been said that the Egyptian civilization was agriculture based. So the

flood, the navigability, the measurement of current, ebb and flow of the river Nile and

the measurement of land were very important for the Egyptians. Therefore, astrology
and mathematics had a deep connection with these measurements. So the Egyptians

World Civilization 13
managed to master this two disciplines for the purpose of necessity. They introduced
two branches of mathematics: Geomatry and Arithmatic. The Egyptians knew how to
add, substract and divide. In 4200 B.C the Egyptians invented the first solar calander of
the world. They also came up with the concept of 365 days for a year. The ancient
Egyptians invented sun dials, shadow dials and water dials to measure time.

The Egyptians were interested in applied science for their faith in religion. They
believed in the after life and believed that the Pharoahs will be emperors in the next life.
So they invented ways to prevent the dead body of the Pharoahs from decaying. From
this practice they came up with the process of mommification. The Egyptian scientists
found out ways to stop the body from decomposing using chemicals and other
proceduers.

The ancient Egyptians were also advanced in medical science. They knew how to
diagnise diseases of the eye, teeth, stomach etc. They also knew how to cure diseases
through surgery. They could successfully attach broken bones, read the pulse and
measure the heart beats.
The Egyptians practised philosophy and literature. Thier work of literature did not
contain sorrows or sufferings. They were very optimistic. Their literature exubarates
happiness and prosperity.

Individual Work. What is the relationship between Astronomy and mathematic
Indus Civilization
Background: As this civilization emerged on the basin of the Indus River so it is called
the Indus civilization. The culture of the Indus civilization is also known as the
Harappan culture or the Harappan civilization. The story of the discovery of this
civilization is very interesting. There were many hills in the city of Mohenjodaro in the
Larkana district in the present day Sind province of Pakistan. The local people called
these hills 'the hill of the dead’. (the meaning of Mahenjo-daro is the same). Under the
guidence of the Bangalee acheologist Rakhaldas Bandopadhay, people of the
archeology department started to excavate the hills thinking they would find some ruin
site of Buddhist temples. Unexpectedly, they came across specimen of the Bronze Age
civilization. At the same time in 1922-23 AD, by the efforts of Daya Ram Sahni,
another excavation in Harappa in the Montogomary district in the West Punjab took
place where ancient civilization was discovered. Under the guidance of John Marshal,
many other sites were discovered by the archeology department.

Geographical Location: Although the Indus civilization is the earliest civilization of
the subcontinent, it spread over a large area. The biggest sites that revealed the most
specimen of this civilization were Mohenjodaro and Harappa; yet, this civilization was

14 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
not restricted to only these two cities. From Pakistan's Punjab and Sind province to
India's Punjab, Rajasthan and in different places of Gujarat there have been discoveries
of the evidence of this civilization. Historians believe that from the Punjab to the
Arabian Sea the Indus civilization expanded to a large area.
Individual Works: In which regions of India and Pakistan has the specimen of
the Indus civilization been found? Make separate lists of the regions of each country.
_ = i PINs = See Nir a
eee) a * Teens Tibet
BS: ay | = ss ‘s ats = fa =
Baluchistan gaa — s
\% ae
Ancient India \ Traiadu The Bay of Bengal
Indus Civilization Ricg Gam
' - oe Foie.
Map of Indus civilization

Time Frame: There are different opinions among the historians about the time frame
of the Indus civilization. According to the experts, 3500 B.C to 1500 B.C is the period
of the rise and decline of this civilization. However, there are again different views
among the experts regarding the decline of this civilization. Historian Mortimer
Wheeler believes that this civilization existed from 2500 B.C to 1500 B.C.
Political and Social Conditions: Nothing is certainly known about the political life
and the governing system of the Indus civilization. The urban design of both
Mohenjodaro and Harappa were quite the same. A careful observation of the ruins of
both the cities reveals that the cities were built premeditatedly on high foundations. A

World Civilization 15
city fortress was built in a platform at one side of the city. The city was protected by a
wall. The rulers of the city lived inside the city fortress. The administrative houses were
also situated within the fortress. The city had an entrance gate. The fortress and the
large buildings indicated a centralized government system that had ruled the two cities
for several years. This centralized administration controlled the lives of the common
people.
People lived together as a community in the Indus civilization. Nuclear family system
was a very common custom. The society was divided into social classes. All men did
not enjoy the equal rights. There were mainly two classes in society: the rich and the
poor. The farmers lived in the villages. There is evidence of two different types of
households in the city for the rich and the labour classes.
For clothes they usually used cotton and wool. The Indus civilization was matriarchal.
Women of this civilization had a very refined taste. They loved wearing ornaments. The
popular ornaments for women were necklace, bracelet, rings, ear rings, waistbands,
armlet, bangles, anklets, etc. They wore long embroidered clothes. Men also wore
ornaments.
Economic Condition: The main basis of economy of the India civilization was on
agriculture and produced crops. Animal husbandry is another important part of their
economy. Aside from the subsistence of agriculture and animal husbandry, the Indus
people supported themselves by pottery, metal work, weaving, making ornaments, and
working with valuable stones. The trades of the India Civilization maintained
conmercial commaication with the foreign countries to export their high quality goods.
They maintained regular trading relations with the traders of Afghanistan, Baluchistan,
Central Asia, Persia, Mesopotamia, Southern India and Gujarat.
Religious Condition: As there is no evidence of any temple or monastery in the Indus
civilization, it is not clear what religious views the Indus people harbored. However,
there is no doubt that they had some sort of religious views. Although there is no
existence of temple and places for worship, in view of the large number of female
terracotta figures found in the Indus valley, some scholars believe that the Indus people
worshipped Goddesses. Mother-worshiping was very popular among the Indus people
They also worshiped trees, stones, snakes and animals as Gods and Goddesses. They
believed in the afterlife and for that reason they put everyday items and ornaments in
the grave of the dead..

Individual Work:

1. Make a list of the popular ornaments of the women of the Indus civilization.

2. What is the relationship between the prosperity of the crafts and the prosperity

of trade in the Indus civilization?

16 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
Contributions of the Indus civilization: One of the earliest civilizations of the
world is the Indus civilization. The contributions of this civilization are as follow:
Town Planning: Harappa and Mohenjodaro are the two biggest cities found among the
ancient cities in the region believed to be of the Indus civilization. All the houses in
both the cities were made of terracotta and sun-burnt bricks. A sophisticated and
technologically advanced urban culture is evident in the Indus civilization. The quality
of municipal town planning suggests the knowledge of urban planning and efficient
municipal governments. The design of both Mohenjodaro and Harappa were the same.
Major streets ran across the cities. The streets were straight. Every house had open
courtyards, wells and bathrooms. Waste water was directed through smaller drains to
the main covered drains, which lined the major streets. The drainage system helped
keep the streets clean. There were lamp posts in both sides of the streets.
Measurement System: The people of the Indus civilazation were the inventors of
weight of goods. Their invention is considered a great contribution to civilization. They
used various types and sizes of weights for measuring different goods. They also knew
the system of measuring length through tick off scale.
Industry: The first thing that comes to mind when we talk about the industries in the
Indus civilization is their pottery industry. They knew how to use the potter's wheel and
made beautiful earthen pots with it. They also drew attractive designs on the pots. The
weaveIs were expert in weaving and knitting. Furniture, weapons and omaments were
made out of metal. They learned to make bronze from the mixture of copper and tin.
The craftsmen made utensils out of silver, copper and bronze.
They were also expert in making ornaments out of gold, silver, copper, electrum and
bronze. The mentionable ornaments were rings, bangles, nose ring, necklace, ear rings,
armlets etc. The Indus people did not know the use of iron. Apart from metal, Indus
people were able to make ornaments with valuable stones as well. They were expert
craftsmen in handicrafts made from elephant tusks.

were good at.

World Civilization 17
Architecture and Sculpture: The Indus civilization has left a very important
and amazing contribution to the field of architecture. We have found from two
room houses to twenty five room houses. In some places three storied houses
were found. The most significant specimen of architecture in Mohenjodaro is
the Assembly Hall that is 80 feet long. Besides a big palace has also been found.
In Harappa there is a big Granary. The Great Bath found in Mohenjodaro is a
water reservoir that is suitable for indoor swimming.

- rs Me a ae yee = 3 it
oa ee as a Se TF ee
The Great Bath
In the art of sculpting the Indus civilization also left its mark of excellence. Although
the stone statues found were very few in number, the quality and the craftsmanship in
them were exquisite. So far 13 figures and one limestone head were found from this
civilization. In Mohenjodaro, one dancing
r . ‘WA aT i.
female figure was found. i ia. + 7 4 phd lat
Besides many small . | i <\ . i }
human and animal — b
figures were also found ; £ ay / f }
that belonged to this =F A —
civilization. 2500 scals tee ‘

were also found form the riiaie ie ‘ !

excavations at Harappa eg f } if i ay o ;

and Mohenjodaro. These VY ii }| } a] a
were used for trading and . dé } \ \ re ~y ® \ f

religious purposes. & i Ae [
\ 6
~~ ] *~ =A
Seal
Forma- 3, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

18 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion

Work: Fill in the chart 3

a

Greek Civilization

Background: For many years archeologists around the world have been fascinated

with the truth behind the alluring stories of 'Iliad' and 'Odyssey' written by Homer, the

great poet of Greece. Around the end of the 19th century Homer's story did not only
reside in his poetic verses, the truth of one of the great civilizations of ancient times
came out. The Greek civilization is one of the greatest ancient urban civilizations
situated in the Aegean archipelago and the west coast of Asia Minor. The ruins of
hundred cities including the epic city of Troy, were discovered. This was known as the

Aegean Civilization or the pre-classical Greek civilization.

It is bounded by the Greek mainland on the west, Asia Minor (now Turkey) on the east,

the island of Crete on the south including the small islands of the Aegean Sea. The

Greeks were the part of a very prosperous and culturally enriched nation. This

civilization can be divided into two parts-

1. The evolution of this civilization was in Crete. The time period of this civilization
is from 3000 B.C to 1400 B.C.

2. The second is called Mycenean or Achaean civilization. This civilization was
named after the name of the Mycenae city, situated on the southern region of the
mainland of Greece. This civilization existed from 1600 B.C to 1100 B.C. It is
believed that flood or foreign invasion brought a decline to this civilization.

Geographical Location and Time Frame: Greece is surrounded by the Adriatic Sea,
the Mediterranean and the Aegean Sea. There are two terms that go complimentary
with the Greek civilization. One is 'Hellenic' and the other is 'Hellenistic’. The Hellenic
culture flourished in the capital city of Athens in the Greek peninsula. On the other
hand, the Hellenistic culture flourished with the amalgamation of Greek and the
Non- Greek cultures in Alexandria in Egypt under the rule of Greek emperor Alexander
the Great.
Sparta, the Military State: Sparta is one of the many city states that emerged in
ancient Greece. This city state was situated in the south of Greece in the area known as
Peloponnese. Sparta was different from other city states. A close observation into the
lives of the Spartans reveals that they were influenced by military actions and war
tactics. Their focus was to increase the military resources of the city rather than to
improve the quality of life for the citizens. In 800 B.C after a long battle, the Dorian
soldiers were able to take over Sparta. The local people who were defeated in the war
were called land slaves or the ‘helots'.

World Civilization 19
The defeated inhabitants who were forced to become land slaves were large in number.
To sustain their rule the rulers of Sparta had only one thing in mind- to supress their
uprising.

The Spartans’ lives were dedicated to save Sparta. The Spartan society emerged from
the necessity of war. The rulers of Sparta were dedicated to prepare its citizens for war
and to lead the army. For their war-driven attitudes, the Spartans were left behind in
social, political, economic and cultural advancement.

Athens, the City State: In ancient Greece the first democratic state to emerge was
Athens. But in the earlier days Athens was a monarchy. In the 7th century B.C the mon-
archy declined and a form of aristocracy emerged. The power came in the hands of a
few elites. They only looked at their own interests in the name of ruling the state. As a
result, agitation grew up among the mass people. They failed to attain power. But some
people attained power using them. They were called ‘Tyrants’ gradual disappointment
among the common people and the deprivation of the farmers were turning into a pos-
sibility of an uproar, a revolution. Consequently, in the 7 century B.C there was a
reform in the state administration. Earlier the members of the noble families were
thought to be aristocrats. But after the reform, wealth became the primary standard of
aristocracy. In the time of crisis, all the people of the state unanimously nominated a
few people to bring reform to the state. Among those few people, the most famous of
the aristocrats was Solon. He introduced some new laws and minimized the strictness
of the previous laws. He passed the law to free the farmers from debts. He was also
responsible for bringing economic reforms to the state of Athens.

After Solon, Peasistratas and Cleisthenes were

the ones who came forward to establish the

rights of the people of Athens. They both

worked to reform the laws and to bring phy

prosperity and peace to the people of the state.

However, Athens saw the zenith of democracy x :

at the time of Pericles. His time is known as Xj rd

the “golden age” of Greece. In 460 B.C he y a P

came to power and ruled for 30 years. He he

accepted all the political demands of his oo

citizens. During his time, he gave his citizens ty q

right to fully participate in the administrative, P
legislative and judicial system of the state. The p , d oe
members of the jury who gave the verdict of :

the trial were chosen from the common 4 ‘

citizens. Athens reached the height of success Pericles

in every field during the time of Pericles. In

20 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
430 B.C. one fourth of the people of Athens died in terrible plague. Pericles also died
in the plague. After his death, Athens lost its former glory and decline became inevi-
Group work: Make a list of those great persons of Athens who brought various
refroms and passed laws for the welfare of the people of the state.

Athens, the state that had great achievements in science, philosophy, literature and
politics fell to the military state of Sparta. The longtime war that went on between the
two states was known as the Peloponesian War. The Peloponesian War (460 - 404 B.C)
was fought three times between the two leading city-states in ancient Greece, Athens
and Sparta. The two states formed coalition with their respective allies. Athens formed
the Delian League with its allies. Peloponesian League was lead by the Spartans. As a
result of the war, Athens lost its prosperity and independence. In 369 B.C. Athens went
under Sparta. After this city-state Thebes was taken away by Athens. In 338 B.C. the
Macedonian King Philip took over Thebes and Athens came under the Macedonian
rule.
Contributions of Greece to Civilization: Although for the geographical location the
Greek city states were separated from each other, their culture was the same. They
believed that they inherited the same cultural trends in spite of the political difference.
Their language, religion, literature and games and sports united the whole Greece
together. Athens played a dominating role in defining the culture of Greece. They gave
the name of this culture Hellenic Culture.
Education: The Greek scholars had much idea about education. They gave importance
to moral and spiritual education. Some of them thought that the responsibility of ruling
the state should be in the hands of educated citizens. The education system should
reflect the philosophy and the goals of the government. The main purpose of education
is to teach discipline and obedience. Greek boys at the age of seven started going to
schools. The boys from the rich family were educated formally until they were 18 years
of age. The boys of the farmers and the craftsmen used to receive the primary
education. The slaves were prohibited from going to schools. The girls were not
allowed for any institutional education.
Group Work: Fill in the chart

What did they do for the welfare of the citizens of Athenians?
Soon

tee) SS

World Civilization 21
Literature: The contribution of ancient Greece to literature is a great gift to human
race. Homer's famous epics 'Iliyad' and 'Odyssey' are still famous specimens of the
great works of literature. The Greek achieved the highest success in literature
especially in the genre of drama. They were particularly experts in tragedy. Aeschylus
is known as the father of tragedy. His famous drama was ‘Prometheus Bound’.
However, the greatest dramatist in Greek civilization was Sophocles. He has written
over a hundred dramas. Among his famous plays the most popular ones are King
Oedipus, Antigone and Electra. Another famous dramatist was Euripides. Aristophanes
was specially famous for comic and satirical plays. The Greeks also showed their credit
in writing history first. History writing started during this time. Herodotus was known
as the Father of History. The first history book of Herodotus was written on the war
between Persia and Greece. Thucydides was the father of scientific history. His famous
book was The Peloponnesian War.

Religion: The Greeks had twelve Gods and Goddesses. They worshiped natural forces
and also famous warriors. Zeus was the father of the Gods. Apollo was the sun God,
Poseidon was the sea God. Athena was the Goddess of knowledge. Among the twelve
Gods and Goddesses, these four were the principal ones. The priests looked over the
religious matters by order of the government. People from different city-states
gathered together and worshiped the sun God Apollo in his famous temple of Delphi in
Delos.

Philosophy: Greece made a significant contribution to the field of philosophy.
Philosophy emerged. as the Greeks searched for answers to the questions about the
origin of the universe, how the change is taking place in the world etc. Thales was one
of the earlier philosophers. He was the first to explain the reason for eclipse of the sun.
After him didactic philosophy was introduced in Greece. This sort of philosophers
wereknown as the Sophists. They believed that there was no absolute truth in this
world. Pericles was a follower of this branch of philosophers. Socrates was the most
famous among these philosophers. The main goal of his philosophy was to create an
ideal state and an ideal citizen. His teaching included speaking out against tyranny.
Plato, the famous student of Socrates took Greek philosophy to a peak of excellence.
Aristotle, Plato's student was also a very famous philosopher of the time.

Science : The Greeks first started practising science in 600 B.C. The Greek scientists
were among the first to draw the map of the world. They were the first to prove that the
world is one of the planets in the universe and it is revolving in its own orbit. The
Greek astrologers were also able to explain the reason behind the sun and moon
eclipse. They were also the ones to first identify that the moon does not have any light
of its own and that the lightening and the thunder was not a result of Zeus's anger, but
it was a natural cause and effect. Euclid, a geometrician was an expert in physics. The
famous mathematician Pythagoras, physician Hippocrates were also much famous.

22 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
Architecture and Sculpture: Greek civilization was well developed in
architecture and sculpture. The evidence of the excellence of the Greek art can be found
in the carvings and designs on the earthen wares. We can see specimens of Greek archi-
tecture around the country. They built large palaces on tall pillars having beautiful,
detailed sculpting on them. One of the greatest examples of the excellence of Greek
architecture is the temple of Parthenon or the Goddess Athena's temple. In Athens one
can still find the beautiful works of Greek architecture in the ruins of Acropolis.
The Greek sculpture gave birth to a golden era in the world of art. The famous sculptors
of the time were Myron, Fidias and Praxiteles.
Games and Sports: The Greeks paid special attention to the games and sports of the
children. They had their initiations in games and sports in the schools. The Greeks had
tremendous interests in physical training and =
sports. In different festivals, the Greeks arranged 65 Digs
sports competitions. Among them the most ot
popular competition was the one they did in honor f ; ‘aA ,
of Zeus. - ae 4 I

; Se
The most popular sportsmen in Greece took part J al -
in the Olympics. In the Olympics they organized q s
sports like race, wrestling, spear throwing, boxing io a, ‘
etc. The winners were congratulated with garlands "h Tia He yy
of olive branches and leaves. The Olympics was Wr’ ear va i
held every four years. It was a very prestigious ™ Ye) SS sens % it f
competition and sportsmen coming from other | 9 )) AUS Se ,
city-states would come to Athens to take part in it, / 7 Noe a) 4
Olympics were renowned for creating solidarity ae
among the participants coming from other be : ‘
city-states. . Socrates _
Roman Civilization
Background: Before the declination of the Greek civilization, another great empire
and civilization emerged on the banks of the Tiber river in Italy. This civilization was
known as the Roman civilization as it centered around the city of Rome. In the earlier
days Rome was under the rule of one king. There were also a Senate and a Council. In
510 B.C, when the king became a tyrant he was dethroned and a republic was
established. The Roman civilization sustained for nearly 600 years.
Geographical Location and Time Frame: Rome is situated in the western part of
central Italy. Italy expanded from the Mediterranean in the south of Italy to the Alps

World Civilization 23
in the north. The Adriatic Sea is between Italy and Yugoslavia. On the beaches of the
Adriatic Sea, in the north-eastern side of Italy is the ancient sea port, Adria. The
Mediterranean is also in the western side of Italy. This part of the sea was known in the
ancient times as the Etruscan sea. Rome was an agriculture based city because of its
favorable agricultural conditions. As a result of this, the frequent conflicts between the
inhabitants and the invaders were common in Rome. These conflicts turned the
Romans nation into expert soldiers.
If we analyze the history of Rome, we will see that through all the ups and downs, the
conflict and struggle eventually Rome was established in 753 B.C. In 476 B.C the
Roman finally saw its end in the hands of the barbarous German nations.
Rome and the Roman Rule: The city of Rome is situated on the top of seven
mountains, twelve to thirteen miles away from the origin spot of the river Tiber. And so
this city is known as the city of seven mountains. In 2000 B.C a group of people who
belonged to the Indo-European family started living in Italy. They were the Latinos.
Their language 'Latin' is named after them as well. The Latin King Romulus founded
the city of Rome. The city is named after him.
Rome did not become a democratic country in a day. Step by step, though many
struggles and conflicts Rome came to be a democratic state. The historians divided
Rome into particular phases. For example, from 753-510 B.C was called the period of
kingdom. In this period seven kings ruled over the country. During this period the last
emperor Tarquiniussupercus was overthrown and the Republic began. The republican
system sustained from 500 B.C to 60 B.C. As the Republican system emerged, the
people of Rome nominated their revolutionary leader Brutus and another man as
representatives of the state. After the fall of the Monarchy the people of the state were
divided into two groups. They were the Partricians, who were the aristocrats and the
Plebians, who were the commoners. Small farmers, craftsman, traders were members
of the Plebian group.

describe the Roman civilization and point out the places they are situated on a map.
In the first two hundred years of the republican state was the history of warfare between
the Patricians and the Plebians. The Plebians were the deprived group.They
continually revolted for their rights. Finally, the Plebians were able to win some rights.

24 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
Due to their revolt, the Roman laws started to be written. In 450 B.C the Plebians wrote
12 laws on a bronze plate. As a final victory of the revolution one member from the two
Plebian counselors were selected to stand for election. Thus the Roman Republic
headed for a democratic transformation.

Although Rome was a Republican state, it gradually emerged as an imperialist power.
In a very short time, Rome was able to create dominance over entire Italy. Form 146
B.C to 46 B.C. the Roman Empire underwent a dark age. Rome became agitated and
conflicted with the frequent power struggles between rich and poor, revolutions of the
slaves and violence and bloodshed for power.

The Roman economy depended on the slaves. The slaves were no longer able to
tolerate the inhuman torture on them and revolted under the leadership of Spartacus.
They were able to continue their revolt for two years. After the murder of Spartacus in
71 B.C the revolt finally came to an end. Unbearable torture and misery came down
upon the salves.

Apart from the internal conflict, Rome became involved in a bloody war. As a result,
the ambitious generals took over the power and civil war spread in the entire country.
At one stage of the power struggle, three captains came to power in a mutual
understanding. The large Roman Empire was divided into three parts among three
Generals: Octavious Caesar, Mark Antony and Lepidus took over the rule which was
known as the triumvirate. Lepidus was the ruler of the African Provinces; Octavious
Caesar was ruler of the Italian Empire and the western part of Italy and Antony was the
tuler of the eastern part of the country. However, the triumvirate did not work for long,
because the three had the ambition to become the one and only ruler of the Roman
Empire. Consequently, in a short time the power struggle began again. Octavian Caesar
defeated Lepidus and Mark Antony increased his power by marrying the princess of
Egypt Cleopatra. But in the end, he was defeated by Octavious Caesar in the power
struggle. Octavious Ceasar came to power and took the name Augustus Caesar. He is
known in history by this very name. Augustus Caesar died in 14 AD. The most
significant incident of his time is the birth of Jesus Christ. After the death of Augustus
Caesar, Rome again fell into conflict and chaos. The foreign invasions particularly the
frequent attacks of the Germanic tribes become more and more catastrophic. Apart
from that the internal conflict in Rome gradually weakened the entire country. Rome
finally fell in 476 B.C as the last Roman emperor Romulus Augustulus failed to defend
the empire from the attack of the barbarous Germanic tribes. In the mean time,
Christianity prospered and the Germanic tribes emerged.

Contributions of Rome to Civilization: Rome was influenced by the Greek in art,
literature, philosophy and architecture. They imitated and followed the Greeks in these
aspects. However, they achieved superiority over the Greeks and other nations in the
fields of military organizations, administrations, law and engineering. The modern
world is truely indebted to the Romans for their contributions in these fields.

World Civilization 25
Group Work: Write in the chart the names of the three emperors of the triumvirate
and the places they were in charge of:

ER

ae

a

Pelotas and Terence were very famous for their contributions in literature in this era.

They both left great marks in composing comedies of the time. The greatest

achievement in literature was found in the period of Augustus Caesar. Horace and poet

Virgil were very popular during that period. Virgil's famous work Aeneid is still the one

of the best translated works of the world. Ovid and Livi were famous poets of the time

too. Livi was also a famous historian. The famous historian Tacitus was born this time.

Architecture, Sculpture and Science:

One of the most significant characteristics _ So

of the Roman architecture is its enormity. a

The temple ‘Pantheon’ made by emperor =e ary i: e ae Fh

Hardin is one of the astonishing examples of ae oye cial oe

Roman architecture. In 80 A.D. the Roman | fj") cetera) A) \)

emperor Titus built the Colosseum, atheater (any = =" Me a TAN

that could house 5600 spectators at a time. (le x TEIN

The art of sculpting also flourished beside il ! | Hed es eerie ben best

the blooming field of architecture. The , af = “ie i i ecto) 4 He r

sculptors of Rome created figures and JUIEER oF JB) ELS

sculptures of Gods and Goddesses, SS
emperors and many mythical characters out

of marble. Colosseum

Some of the scientists left their marks in this field. Among them, Pliny developed an

Encyclopedia of science. In this Encyclopedia nearly 500 scientist's works have been

included. The Romans also had contribution in the field of medicine. Salsas, a famous

scientist wrote a book on medicine. Gallon Rufus has also contributed significantly in
medical science.

Religion, Philosophy and Law: The Romans were influenced by the Greeks in the

field of religion. Many of the Greek Gods and Goddesses have been adapted to the

Roman culture with a different name. The principal God for the Romans was Jupiter.

Other important Gods and Goddesses are: Juno, Neptune, Mars, Vulcan, Venus,

Minerva, Bacchus etc. The Chief Priest of the temples oversaw the religious rituals.

But, the Romans did not believe in the afterlife. From the time of Augustus Caesar, the

Forma- 4, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

26 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
custom of worshiping the emperor as the supreme god began. It is noteworthy that
during this time the Messiah of the Christian religion Jesus Christ was born. In the later
years Christianity spread side by side of the Roman religion. Many Romans were
converted into Christianity. The Roman emperor was furious at this popularity of the
new religion, because according to the Christian sacrament, the emperor could not be
worshiped as equal to God. In consequence, the Roman emperors put a ban to the
preaching of the new religion and inflicted torture on the converted Romans. However,
Emperor Constantine was converted to Christianity and made Christianity the official
religion of the state.
Many people believe that the Roman philosophy is influenced by the Greek
philosophy. However, Cicero and Lucretius (98 B.C.-55 A.D.) have been able to give
many well established concepts and ideas in Roman Philosophy. In Rome the
philosophical trend of Stoicism was very popular. In 140 B.C. Pontius in the island of
Rhodes first started this trend of philosophy.
In the world civilization, the most significant and important contribution of the Romans
was its law. In the mid- 5th century B.C. the Romans were able to formulate the
criminal and civil laws. Emperor Justinian in 540 B.C. wrote these laws in 12 bronze
plates and these plates were hung in public places for the people to see. According to
the Roman law, all men are equal. The Roman laws are divided into three sections.
They are:
1. Civil Law: This law was obligatory for the Roman people. This law was both in
written and unwritten forms.
2. People's Law : This law was applicable for all the citizens of the nation. This law
also included the protection of individual rights. This law acknowledged slavery.
Cicero was the legislator of this law.
3. Natural Law: This law talks about the basic rights of the citizens. The modern world
relies heavily on the Roman laws. In the 6th century B.C. Justinian first compiled all
the Roman laws and legislatures in one place and published it.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions:
1. How many consonant letters did the Egyptians invent?
a. 23 b. 24
ce 25 d 26

World Civilization 27
2. Why was religion so important for the Egyptians?
a. Egyptians were influenced by religion in every sphere;
b. The Aristocratic society gave importance to religion;
c. Priests ruled the country;
d. The Egyptians believed in religion.
Read the following passage and answer the question number 3 and 4:
Sima and her family were overwhelmed watching the performance of different
countries in the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games. Sima saw the program and
remembered of a civilization. She thought of organizing a cultural ceremony in her
school and took inspiration from the show.
3. What civilization did Sima remember?
a. Roman b. Greek
c. Chinese d. Sind
4. By this sort of programs among nations concrete:
i. unity of economy
ii. exchange of cultural views
iii. political tolerance
Which of the above answers is correct?
a i biti
c. iii d. i, ii,iii
Creative Questions
Bangladesh is a riverine country. Almost every year both the banks of the rivers are
overflowed here due to flood. When the flood water goes down, the land in these areas
get more fertile due to alluvial deposits. As a result, farmers in these areas have good
harvest that contributes to their properity.
a. Which king established the city of Rome?
b. Explain why the rules of three rulers did not last long?
c. Explain what civilization is similar to the situation described in the stem
and how?
d. Analyse the significance of the situation stated in the stem in flourishing
the civilization.

Chapter Three

Janapadas of Ancient Bengal
In any discussion of history periodization is treated as an important issue. This
periodization based on socio-economic and political condition of a ruling dynasty. The
historians think that 500 B.C to 1300 A.D is the ancient age of history. Meanwhile
some others think that 500 B.C to 600 A.D should be treated as early historic period as
well as the time frame from 700 A.D. to 1300 A.D would mention as pre-medieval era.
Geography of Bangladesh and its Influences
Bangladesh is situated in southern part of Asia. The political condition here changed
from the very beginning of history. This is why the boundary also changed in course of
time. Bengal is divided into two parts after the fall of British rule in 1947. Here the
western part adjunct to India and northern part still stands with Pakistan. At first the
part adjacent to Pakistan gets a name as East Bengal then changed to East Pakistan. In
1971 it became a free-sovereign state through the Great War of liberation. The new
name of this country became Bangladesh.
The great Himalaya is situated in the north of Bangladesh while the Bay of Bengal’s
widespread blue water is in southern part. Except the south-eastern part adjacent to
Myanmar, the whole country is surrounded by India. The total area of Bangladesh is 1,
47,570 square kilometers. Most the landscape all over this country is plain land. A
number of river-channels and canal-lakes found spread all over this country. The main
rivers here are the Padma, the Brahmmaputra, the Meghna, the Jamuna, the Tista and
the Karotoa.
The lifestyle and history of a country depend on its geographical location. This is why,
in the different parts of world we can notice different types of livelihood, customs and
varied ways of life. Here the connectivity and transportation of goods depend on river
as we get a plenty in number. At a time Bengal soldiers became skilled in naval warfare
to defend their country form the outside invaders. Again, an agrarian society was also
formed here on the basin of fertile land.
The weather here is tropical. Geographical condition of this land enables the people to
be calm and polite. On the other hand, due to the variation in climate, the people here
also get used to fighting against the disasters as storm and cyclone that make them
brave. This is why they had to struggle for decades to establish their basic rights.
Therefore, it is said not only the character but also the food habit, dress, housing pattern
of people here are determined by environment. This variation of landscape also gives
us some extra benefits for our defence. The rivers keep our land safe form the greedy
insight of foreign invaders. After all, the 1100 miles distance also played a vital role in
the emergence of Bangladesh in 1971.

Janapadas of Ancient Bengal 29
In ancient age Bengal ( now Bangladesh and West Bengal) was not a unique or
soveriegn state like present Bangladesh. Different parts of Bengal were divided in
many small regions in their own way. These regions of bengal were collectively named
as ‘Janapadas’.
86°OW'E . s8r00" sor0r 900 1
\ . \ ) J A
a ie ot Busha _, FB
Ne \C q he 4 Ly oanaoug [AV
St \\ Tirbnarti ay/ ly Ye \W
a X = gy } Srabosthi }/
aia fi fo =». > he R g Pro Ss /
A Pati Pua Py ee I) sompus fh { chat,
Lo | Gaya / Anga as. mc au Yee MY ee
ae es : \Ramabai 3 Msubamagnion {7
h Murshiéabad Gikrampurs// ~~) |, 2
RangagramU Rar _ Qutb "e Deb Mountain
ae as eoareN \ Banga RN | Samatat (M: .
2 % " Swsunia Brdhaman WIAA) NN a im
\y Se ’ TPenloRsbaduil SI a § a \ chivagong
ae Dakshin Ran cheadra Kehparn i] . it J Vi
pare Sukbya“”e at Khari; | Bangal A yo exec!
Da-Bhukti \ om : Bay of Bengal \
y 1
di , |
Janapadas of Ancient Bengal
At the end of this chapter we will be able to -
e@ identify the present locations of the Janapadas of ancient Bengal and
describe them;
e explain the importance of the Janapadas in investigating information of
ancient Bengal;
© become interested to know the importance of the Janapadas in acquiring
knowledge about the history of ancient Bengal.
Janapadas
The state as undivided Bengal was not born at a time. It flourished through Janapadas.
From different inscriptions and literary works, we came to know about sixteen
Janapadas of Bengal. However, the borders of the Janapadas never remained the same.
Sometimes, the area of some Janapadas extended as well as declined. Some
Janapadas are described below:

30 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
Gaur: Though the name of Gaur’ seems familiar, there are not clear evidences about
which area was referred to as Gaur in ancient time. In the 7th century, Sasanka was
called the Gaurraj (King of Gaur). Its capital was Karnasubarna. Gaur was situated at
the present Murshidabad. The Lakhnauti in the regian of Maldhah was called Gaur at
the begining of the Muslim period.
Banga: Bengal was a very ancient Janapada. A Janapada named Banga was built to the
east and the south-east of present Bangladesh. It is surmised that a nation named
‘Banga’ lived here.
The old stone inscriptions, validate two parts of Bangla. One was Vikrampura and the
other was Navya. There is no existence of any place called 'Navya' at present. It is
thought that the lower marshy places of Faridpur, Barisal and Patuakhali are included
in this 'Navya’ region. The old Banga was a very powerful region. The Bangalee nation
derieved from the word “Banga”.
Pundra: Pundra was one of the most important Janapadas of ancient Bengal. It is said
that a nation called Pundra built up this Janapada. Pundra of that time was extended at
least across the regions of Bogra, Rangpur, Dinajpur and Rajshahi. Pundranagar was
the name of the capital of the Pundras. Subsequently it became known as Mahasthan-
gar. Experts infer that Mahasthangar, seven miles away from Bogra is the ruins of the
ancient Pundravardhana. It was Pundra which was the

Remains of ancient Pundranagar
most prosperous Janapadas of ancient Bengal from the perspective of ancient
evidences. The inscriptions found on the stone wheels here are perhaps the most
ancient in Bangladesh.
Harikela: The writers of the seventh century have also described another region called
Harikela, Harikela was situated at the end of eastern Bengal. It can be assumed that
Harikela spread from Sylhet to Chittagong at the present time.

Janapadas of Ancient Bengal 31
Samatata: Samatata was situated in the East and South-east Bengal as a neighboring
Janapada of Banga. Some think that Samatata was the ancient name of present Camilla.
The coastal region extending from the eastern shore of Ganges-Bhagirathi to the
tributary of the Meghna was probably called Samatata. In the seventh century its
capital was the place named Bara Kamta, 12 miles west of Camilla city. Some ancient
remnants have been found at Mainamati, Camilla. The Shalbana Bihara is one of them.
Barendra: Another Janapada of ancient Bengal could be known in the name of
Barendree, Barendra or Barendra Bhumi. It was also a Janapada of North Bengal. It is
thought that Barendra was located in the vast area of Pundra. The Barendra region was
extended across a vast area of Bogra, Dinajpur and Rajshahi region as well as probably
of Pabna region.
Tamralipta: Tamralipta Janapada was situated to the north of Harikela. Tomluk in the
region of present Medinipur was the heart of Tamralipta. It started to be known as
Dandobhukti since the seventh century.
Chandradeep: Apart fron the Janapadas mentioned above, there was another tinier
Janapada in ancient Bengal. This was Chandradeep. The very Barisal region of today
was the mainland and the heart of Chandradeep. This ancient Janapada was situated in
the place between the Baleshwar and the Meghna.
We get a fair conception of geographical shape, demarcation, political characteristics of
the then Bengal from the Janapadas of ancient Bengal. Then there was no political unity
in ancient Bengal. The powerful rulers would gain ruling power of more than one
Janapada through executing their domination.
Individual work: Make a list of any four Janapadas of anccient Bengal and
indicate their location.
Exercise for practice

Multiple Choice Questions
1. What Janapada did Banga originate from?

a. Barendra b. Pundra c. Banga d. Gaur
2. The Tamralipti Janapada was—

i. acoastal area very humid and low-lying;

ii. known to be the centre for land trade;

iii. the best for navigation.

Which one of the following answers is correct?

a. iandii b.  iand iii ce. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii.

32 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
Read the stimulant and answer question 3-4
Shila with her parents went to visit Barendra Museum of Rajshahi during winter
vacation. After going there she got familiar with ancient inscriptions. Among these
there was particularly an inscription on the wheel of stone. She came to know that it
was an ancient stone inscription found in Bangladesh and this inscription was made
during the reign of emperor Ashoka.
3. Inscription of what Janapada was Shila familiar with?
a, Gaur b. Pundra cc. Samatata d. Barendra
4. The above-mentioned Janapada was an important one in ancient Bengal.
Because it-
i. was the most ancient of the civilization;
ii. was known to be an prosperous city;
iii. was a famous centre for river- trade.
Which one of the following answers is correct?
a i b. iandii ce. iand iii d. i, ii and iii
Creative Questions:
1.
le SO ammeter
Remains of ancient Pundranagar
a. What do you understand by Janapadas?
b. Which was the capital of Sasanka , the king of Gaur?
c. What Janapada of the ancient time is referred to in the above-mentioned
stimulant? Explain.
d. Do you think the said Janapada was the most developed in ancient Bengal?
Give arguments in favour of it.

Chapter Four

Political History of Ancient Bengal (326 B.C. -1204 A.D.)
We can get an idea about chronological history of Bengal since the Pala rule. It is not
easy to find out the history before that. During this period no ruler could reign for a
long time all over Bengal. So, the political life of Bengal evolved disconnectedly. There
was an unstable situation after the end of the Maurya and the Gupta rule. Some
independent kingdoms rose through this instability. King Sasanka of North Bengal was
the most powerful among those independent kingdoms. After his death there was no
competent ruler in Bengal for a long time. As a result, there appeared anarchy and
disorder all over the kingdom. Nearly one hundred years passed all the way through
this condition. Afterwards a leader named Gopala brought this unstable condition to an
end and established the Pala dynasty. In the middle of the twelveth century the Pala
dynasty came to its downfall. During that Pala regime small independent kingdoms
came into being in South-East Bengal. After that the Senas coming from Karnataka of
South India established a kingdom in East Bengal. The Sena reign continued for about
two hundred years. In the first decade of the thirteenth century the Sena reign yielded
to Muslim power. Then a new chapter started— the Middle Age of Bengal.
At the end of this chapter we will be able to -

® give an account of the important dynasties of ancient Bengal and their regimes;

e explain the political condition of Bengal prior to the Pala age ;

e@ develop positive ideas about the contributions of the then important dynasties

to political practices of ancient Bengal;
@ explain chronological political history of ancient Bengal after knowing
about important dynasties;

@ give an account of the kingdoms of South-east Bengal;

© describe the administrative system of ancient Bengal.
Important Dynasties of Ancient Bengal and Administrative System
Bengal during the Age of the Maurya and the Gupta
There were no sources available to write any chronological history of ancient Bengal
prior to the age of the Guptas because people of that time were not used to writing
history like those of today. We get a few sources of history from sporadic and separated
comments in Indian and foreign literatures about Bengal of that time. But it is not
possible to write any chronological history attached with dates, years and authentic
events by unjustly joining these unconnected events. In fact, in 327 B.C.-326 B.C.
Forma- 5, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

34 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
during the invasion of India by Greek hero Alexander, history took its original form. In
the writings of Greek writers there was a powerful kingdom named 'Gongaridoi' in
Bengal. The nation 'Gongaridoi' inhabited in the region between the two streams of the
Ganges now known as the Bhagirathi and the Padma.

The Greek writers referred to another nation called ‘Prasioy' in addition to
‘'Gongaridoi'.Their capital was Palibothra (Patliputra). From the descriptions of the
Greek writers, it can be thought that these two nations fought together under the same
dynasty against Alexander. It may be assumed that during the invasion of Alexander,
the king of Bengal conquered Magadha and extended his Kingdom upto the Punjab. He
was someone from the lineage of the Nanda king of Pataliputra. It is beyond doubt from
comments of ancient Greek writers that the king of Bengal was the most powerful
during that time.

Just after two years of the departure of Alexander from India in 321 B.C. Maurya king
Chandragupta Maurya established the lordship of the Maurya Dynasty on a vast region
of India. During the reign of Emperor Ashoka (269B.C.-232 B.C.) the Maurya rule was
established in North Bengal. The region turned to a province of the Mauryas. Ancient
Pundranagar was the capital of this province. Besides north Bengal, Maurya rule was
established in Karnasuvarna (Murshidabad), Tamralipta (Hoogly) and Samatata
(South-east Bengal).

After the fall of the Maurya Empire, Shunga dynasty and later Kanva dynasty
appeared. It is thought that they established their rule on some small regions. After that
quite a good number of foreign powers invaded India. Among them Greek, Saka,
Pahlava, Kushana are mentionable. But, it cannot be said whether these invaders came
upto Bengal.

The Gupta empire was established in India in 320 A.D. Then some independent
kingdoms came into being in Bengal. Among them Samatata of South-east Bengal and
Puskorona of West Bengal are mentionable. Some areas of North Bengal came under
the possession of the Gupta empire during the reign of Gupta emperor Chandragupta I.
Though whole Bengal was conquered during the reign of Samudragupta, Samatata was
a vassal kingdom. Since the reign of Samudragupta up to the middle of the sixth
century, North Bengal was used to be considered as a 'Province' or 'Bhukti' of the Gupta
Empire. Like the Mauryas, Pundrangar of Mahasthangar was the capital of the Guptas.
Bengal in the Post-Gupta Period

As a result of the attacks by the daring mountainous tribe the Huns in the fifth century
and by Joshovarman of Malava in the sixth century, Gupta rule completely came to an
end at the very first half of the sixth century. After the fall of the great Gupta Empire,
there was the emergence of small independent kingdoms in North India. Thus, after the
fall

Political History of Ancient Bengal (326 B.C. - 1204 A.D.) 35
of the Gupta empire political instability grew all over north India. With that chance two
independent kingdoms came into being. One of them was Banga. It was situated in the
southern region of South-east Bengal and West Bengal. The second kingdom was Gaur.
It's location was in the western and northern regions of Bengal.
Individual work : Write down the background of Banga and Gaur Janapadas
in the history of Bengal.
The independent Kingdom of Banga
An independent kingdom emerged in the Banga Janapada with the advantage of the
weaknesses of the Gupta Empire. It is known from 'Copper Inscription’ declarations
that three kings, named Gopachandra, Dharmaditya and Samachardeva ruled
independent Bengal. All of them assumed the title 'Moharajadhiraj'. Their regime was
between 525A.D.-600 A.D. When and how the independent and powerful Banga
kingdom collapsed is not clear. It is a notion that Kirtivarmana, the king belonging to
the Chalukya dynasty brought about the downfall of independent Banga kingdom.
Those who do not hold similar opinion say that due to the rise of independent Gaur
kingdom, the Banga kingdom collapsed. The rise of some feudal kings is also held
responsible for the fall of independent Bengal. Before the seventh century independent
and feudal kings belonging to Bhadra, Kharga, Rahr dynasty rose in the kingdom
Samatata of south Bengal.
The Independent Kingdom of Gaur
After the fall of the Gupta dynasty in the sixth century, the kings known as the ‘Later
Gupta Dynasty' with the title 'Gupta’ extended their domination in North Bengal,
northern side of West Bengal and Magadha. In the middle of the sixth century Gaur
became known as a Janapada in this very region. As a result of fifty years of
generational fight among the Maukharis and the subsequent Gupta kings, constant
attacks of Tibetans from the north and Chalukyans from the Deccan, the kings
belonging to Gupta dynasty of Bengal became weak. Taking the complete advantage of
this condition, a feudal king named Sasanka grabbed the power of Gaur region and
established the Gaur kingdom at the beginning of the seventh century.
Sasanka: The identity, his rise and the life of Sasanka are not clear to the scholars. A
ruler of a large region under the Gupta kings was called 'Mahasamanta’. It is thought
that Sasanka was a 'Mahasamanta' of Gupta king Mahasenagupta and may be his son or
nephew.
The capital of Sasanka was Karnasubarna. After strengthening his possession in Gaur
he started to extend his kingdom to neighboring regions. He extended his border
conquering Dandobhukti (Medinipur), Utkal of Odisha (north Odisha) and Konghod

36 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
(South Odisha), Magadha of Bihar. His kingdom was extended to Varanasi to the west.
The king of Kamrupa (Assam) was also defeated by him. Then he paid attention to the
west border of the kingdom. At that time there were two powerful kings in North India.
One was Thaneswar belonging to Pushyabhuti dynasty and the other was Kanyakubza
belonging to the Maukhari dynasty. However, due to the nuptial bond of Rajjyoshree,
the daughter of Prabhakarvardhan, the king of Thaneshwar with Grahavarmana, the
Maukhari king of Kanauj, there emerged an alliance between Kanauj and Thenshawar.
Rajjyoshree had two brothers named Rajyovardhana and Harshavardhana. As a result
of this alliance, the security of Bengal was at stake. As a counter step Sasanka also
enhanced his power in diplomatic ways making friendship with Devagupta, the king of
Malaba.

Before Sasanka had reached to the north, Devagupta, the king of Malaba defeated
Maukhariraj Grahavarmana the king of Kanauj. His wife, Rajjyoshree became a
captive. Then Devagupta started to march towards Thaneswar. On the way Devagupta
was defeated and killed by Rajyovardhana. Rajyovardhana then moved towards
Kanauj. But, he had been killed by Sasanka before he could exercise his lordship over
Kanauj and rescue his sister Rajjyoshree.

After the death of Rajyovardhana, Harshavardhana ascended to the throne of Kanauj
and Thaneswar. Without any delay, he started a military expedition against Sasanka to
rescue Rajjyoshree and to take revenge on him. At that time Vaskarvarma of Kamrupa
came in alliance with him. But, it is not perfectly known about the result of fight or
whether there was any fight between them. Sasanka died sometime before 637 A.D.
Sasanka was a follower of Shaiba religion. Hiuen-Tsang called him spiteful of
Buddhism. But, there is no strong evidence about the matter till today. Sasanka is a
notable name in the seventh century history of Bengal. He was the first important
sovereign ruler in the history of ancient Bengal.

Matsyanayam and the Pala Dynasty (750A.D.-1161 A.D.)

There came a dark and disastrous age in the history of Bengal after the death of
Sasanka. Bengal remained without any competent ruler for a long time. As a result,
there was anarchy and disorder in the kingdom. In one hand Harshavardwan and
Bhaskarvarman lacerated Gaur, on the other hand, every landlord was locked in clash
with one another in with a view to becoming the king of Bengal. There was no one to
take care of the central power with an iron hand. This period of anarchy has been called
‘Matsyanayam' in Pala 'copper inscriptions’. 'Matsyanayam' refers to a condition of

Political History of Ancient Bengal (326 B.C. - 1204 A.D.) 37
anarchy and disorder like when the big fishes catch and swallow the small fishes in a
pond. The powerful kings of Bengal took complete control over small regions in such
a way. This period of anarchy lasted for one hundred years. In the middle of the eigth
century this anarchy and disorder came to an end with the rise of the Pala reign.

The mind of the people of Bengal was embittered with long standing anarchy and
disorder. In order to get rid of such extreme sufferings, the senior leaders of the country
made up their mind that forgetting all strife and conflict they would elect one for the
position of king and all of them would accept his lordship. The people of the country
also accepted this proposal gladly. As a result, a man named Gopala was elected for the
position of king. During the reign of the subsequent ruler Dharmapala, this selection
story of Gopala was derived from the copper inscriptions of Khalimpur. Lama Tarnath,
a historian of Tibet later introduced a fairy-tale about Gopala's succession to throne.
Nothing special can be known about the earlier life of Gopala. Nothing clear is also
known about the identity of the Pala dynasty and their original abode. The name of
Gopala’s father was Bapyot. His grandfather was Doitovishnu. No royal title was seen
before their names. So, it is thought that they were ordinary persons. The Pala reign
began in Bengal with Gopala's ascending to the throne. The kings of Pala dynasty ruled
this country for 400 years at a stretch. No other dynasty ruled this country so long as
the Pala dynasty. Ascending to the throne, Gopala paid attention to extend his kingdom.
He brought nearly the whole region of North and East Bengal under his rule. Many
opine that Gopala reigned for 27 years. But the modem researchers think that he ruled
the country from 756A.D. till 781 A.D.

Individual work: What does 'Matsynayam’ mean? What was the nature of
After the death of Gopala, Dharmapala (781A.D. -821A.D.) ascended to the throne of
Bengal. He was the most famous of all the Pala kings. His rule was established
throughout Bengal and Bihar. During that time a competition was going on among
three dynasties on exercising domination in North India. One was the Pala dynasty of
Bengal, the other was Gurjarpratihara of Rajputana and the third one was Rashtrakutas
of the Deccan. In history this fight is known as 'the Tripartite Struggle’. This fight
started at the end of the eighth century. The first fight took place between Dharmapala
and Vatsaraja belonging to Pratihara dynasty. Dharmapala was defeated in this fight.
Yet, Dharmapala conquered quite a number of regions beyond Bengal. He extended his
kingdom to the region between the Ganges and the Jamuna, conquering Varanasi and
Proyaga. Though Dharmapala was defeated at the start of the triparpite struggle, he did
not suffer much harm because after the conquest, Rastrokutraja returned to the Deccan.
Taking this advantage, Dharmapala occupied Kanauj. But, within a short period of

38 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
time the king of Pratihara Nagabhatta II occupied Kanauj. As a result, there was fight
between him and Dharmapala. At this time also Dharmapala did not suffer any loss.
Because, as before, the Rastrokutaraja Govinda II came to north India and defeated
Nagabhatta II. After the defeat of the Pratihara king, Dharmapala also surrendered to
Govinda III. After that when the king of Rastrakuta, returned to his country, Dharma-
pala again got the opportunity of extending his domination. Some historians also think
that Dharmapala conquered Nepal. He reigned nearly 40 years (781A.D.-821 A.D.).
Like his father, Dharmapala was a Buddhist.
Among the Pala kings he assumed the highest
sovereign title 'Parameswara, Paramavattaraka Ae
Maharajadhiraja'. He built a Buddhist monastery yo
24 miles east of Bhagalpur. As his second name Hin. Pe i A. tim
or title Vikromshil, it was named as 'Vikromshil -_ = aes i —a 4
Vihara'. Like Nalanda, Vikromshil Vihara also alii : a “i — —= <
gained name and fame throughout India and
beyond India. It was known as a famous sclwlosc at
Buddhist center of learning throughout all India Somapura Vihara, Paharpur, Noagaon
from the nineth century to twelveth century.
Many Buddhist monk of Tibet used to come here to study and many famous Buddhist
scholars preached Buddhism in Tibet. Dharmapala built an enormous Vihara at Pahar-
pur in the district of Noagaon also. It is known as 'Somapura Vihara’. This architectural
work has been recognized by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site. No other stupendous
Vihara like it has yet been discovered anywhere in India. He probably built a Vihara in
Udantapura. According to Tarnath, Dharmapala built 50 study centers for the learning
of Buddhism.
As a king, one of the characteristics of the Pala age is to patronize the subjects of all
religions equally. For that reason, though he was a Buddhist, Dharmapala did not have
any abhorrence against other religions. He believed that there is no relation between
individual religion of the king and the running of the kingdom. So, he would abide by
the obligations of the scriptures and he would take care so that people of every religion
could practise their respective religions. He gave a land free from tax to build a Hindu
temple of Narayana. Most of those whom he gave land were the Brahmmins. The Prime
Minister of Dharmapala, Garga, was a Brahmmin. His generations were employed to
the position of the Prime Minister of the Pala kings for ages. Dharmapala was one of the
most famous rulers in the history of ancient Bengal. The country which was once the
playground of anarchy and oppression suddenly became extremely powerful under his
leadership and was able to establish his lordship in Northern India.

Individual work : Dharmapala was one of the most famous rulers. Give three

rationales in favor of this statement.

Political History of Ancient Bengal (326 B.C. - 1204 A.D.) 39
Se oh \ gait etan. Empi Soe Be: NY ale
Pee eS ee ee
Sa A Wie Beats bala EE gg EOS Te. go

~~ Owe ree me oe es
Rashtrakuta{ 57/620. Arakag NC
pire (21/7 Biste Wie &
2 ee Ch Nee
ee La Ce
a im )
Map of Pala Empire

After the death of Dharmapala, his son Devapala (821A.D.-861 A.D.) ascended to the

throne. He was an able posterior of his father. Like his father, he was able to expand the

kingdom. Devapala directed successful military expeditions against the kings of

Pratihara and the Rastrakuta in northern India. He occupied a large region of Northern

India. He was also able to exercise his domination on Odisha and Kamrupa. After all,

it was his time when the Pala kingdom expanded the most.

Devapala was a great patron of Buddhism. It was he who repaired the Buddhist

monasteries of Magadha. He built a monastery in Nalanda and an enormous temple in

Buddhagaya. He established a new capital in Munger. He permitted Balputradeva, the

great king belonging to Shailendra dynasty of Java, Sumatra and Malaya to build a

monastery in Nalanda. In addition to that, five villages were also given to bear the

expenses of this monastery. From this event, we can get the proof of intimate
relationship between Bengal and a group of island of South-east Asia.

Devapala was very respectful to learning and the learned. Buddhist scholars of

different countries adorned his royal courtyard. Under the patronization of Devapala

Nalanda University then became the main center of Buddhist culture in whole Asia. He

employed Indragupta, a Brahmmin, expert in Buddhist scriptures to the post of Chan

40 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
cellor of Nalanda University. Buddhism was active again in northern India centering
round this Nalanda University during his rule which was nearly lost.

Since the death of Devapala the fall of the Pala empire began. After his death some
chicken-hearted and good for nothing inheritors ascended to the throne. They could not
keep up the glory and power of the Pala empire. As a result, the Pala empire gradually
marched towards downfall. The tenure of regime of Devapala's son Vigrahapala I to
Vigrahapala II ranges from 861 A.D. to 866 A.D. Narayanapala (866A.D.-920 A.D.),
son of Vigrahapala I ruled for a long time (866 A.D. to 920 A.D.) He was a weak and
spiritless ruler. As a result, during his reign the boundary of the empire started to shrink.
After Narayanapala, Rajyapala, Gopala II and Vigrahapala II ascended to the throne
one after another. They ruled the kingdom supposedly from 920 A.D. to 995 A.D.
During the time of Vigrahapala I, the ruling power of the Pala kings were limited only
to Gaur and its adjoining regions. During the time of these weak kings, the Pala empire
suffered huge losses at the attack of the kings belonging to Chandela and Kalachuri
dynasties of northern India. As a result, inside the Pala empire there was the rise of the
Kamboja dynasty in particular sections of North-west Bengal.

Thus with the Pala empire at the face of ruin, then Mahipala I (supposedly
995A.D.-1043A.D.), competent son of Vigrahapala II came forward with a beam of
hope. The most mentionable achievement of his life was driving away the Kamboja and
restablishing the Pala empire after occupying East Bengal. Then he concentrated on
conquering other kingdoms. His empire expanded from east Bengal to Varanasi and
Mithila. He could maintain his own domination in most of the places in the kingdom
from the attack of two strong royal powers of India of that time- Tamil king Rajendra
Chola and the Chedi king Gangeyodeva.

Mahipala was a follower of Buddhism. He was a generous patron of Buddhism from
his heart. He was careful in protecting the olden monuments. He built an enormous
Buddhist monastery at Nalanda. Some Buddhist monasteries were also built in
Vanarasi during his time.

Mahipala was attentive to humanitarian activities. Many large ponds and cities are still
associated with his name. He founded many cities and dug many large ponds. The cities
are Mahigonj of Rangpur district, Mahipur of Bogra district, Mahisontosh of Dinajpur
district and Mahipala City of Murshidabad district.Among the 'dighis' Mahipala Dighi
of Dinajpur and Sagar Dighi of Mahipala in Murshidabad are famous. Probably,
Mahipala got his popularity through his mass welfare activities.

The sun of good luck of Pala dynasty rose again during the 50-year reign of Mahipala.
This is why he will remain ever memorable in history. If Mahipala did not happen to
appear during the quick fall of the Pala empire, the ruling time of this empire would
undoubtedly shrink more.

Political History of Ancient Bengal (326 B.C. - 1204 A.D.) 41
Group work: Make a list of towns and ponds founded by Mahipala I mentioning
their names and locations.

Mahipala could not leave any capable posteriors. So, as soon as he died, the empire

started to be divided. After Mahipala his son Nayapala (supposedly

1043A.D.-1058A.D.) and grandson Vigrahapala III (supposedly 1058A.D.-1075A.D.)
ascended to the throne of the Pala dynasty. During the reign of these weak kings, the

Pala empire became exhausted due to facing overseas attacks one after another for a

long time. Again opposition and disagreement were noticed inside the country. With

this chance small independent kingdoms came into being. Vihara which was beyond

Bengal started to move from the control of the Pala kings. Thus, during Vigrahapala II

the Pala empire of Bengal got divided in many independent parts.

Mahipala II, son of Vigrahapala III, ascended to the throne of the Pala dynasty. During

his reign the disastrous condition intensified more. At this time the Zaminders openly

declared revolt in the Varendra region of north Bengal. This revolt is known as

'Kaivarta Revolt’ in history. The leader of this revolt was Kaivarta hero Divyak or

Divya. He occupied Varendra by slaying Mahipala II and established his own rule.

When Varendra region was occupied by the Kaivartas, Surapala II (supposedly

1080A.D.-1082A.D.), the younger brother of Mahipala II ascended to the throne of the

Pala dynasty. It was he who was their last successful ruler. Biography of Ramapala can

be known from 'Ramcharita' written by Sandhakar Nandi, an ancient Bangalee poet.

Ramapala, just after taking the responsibility of the kingdom, made attempts to regain

Varendra.

To this end, the kings of fourteen countries including Rastrakuta, Magadha, Rahr came

forward to help Ramapala with soldiers, arms and money. In this battle, Kaivarta king

Bhim was defeated and killed. Then he set up a new capital named 'Ramavati' near

present Maldah. During the rule of subsequent kings 'Ramavati' itself was the capital of

the empire. After establishing supervisory power in Varendra, he established his
domination over Magadha, Odisha and Kamrupa in order to bring back the lost glory
of the empire.

The bad luck of the Pala dynasty was that the subsequent rulers of Rampala were very

weak. As a result, they could not take hold of the Pala dynasty strictly. After Ramapala,

Kumarapala (supposedly 1124A.D.-1129 A.D.), Gopala IN (1129A.D.-1143A.D.) and

Madanpala (supposedly 1143A.D.-1161A.D.) ascended to the throne of the Pala

dynasty one after another. During this time, warfare was a common affair. At last, at the

second phase of the twelveth century Bijoy Sena established the rule of the Sena
dynasty, destroying the existence of the Pala empire.

Forma- 6, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

42 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
Group work: Identify what steps did Rampala take to bring back the lost golory
of the Pala empire.
Independent Kingdoms of South-east Bengal
South-east Bengal was independent during most of the periods of the Pala age. Then
this region was included in Banga 'Janapada'. From the middle of the eighth century
quite a number of kings of dynasties sometimes ruled their areas independently
revolting against the Pala kings. Sometimes they would accept submission of the Pala
kings.
The Kharga Dynasty: Subsequent kings belonging to the Gupta dynasty established
their lordship in Magadha and Gaur in the second half of the seventhth century. At this
time the kings of the Kharaga dynasty gave birth to an independent kingdom in
South-east Bengal. Their capital was 'Karmanta Vasaka'. Probably, 'Karmanta Vasaka'
is the ancient name of Camilla district. The possession of the Khargas was extended to
Tripura and Noakhali region.
The Deva Dynasty: After the rule of Kharga dynasty there was the rise of the Deva
dynasty in the same region at the start of the eighth century. We get the names of four
kings of this dynasty. They were Sree Santideva, Sree Birdeva, Sree Anandadeva and
Sree Bhabadeva. The Deva kings considered themselves very powerful. So, they
attached big titles such as Paramasaugata, Paramavattaraka, Prameshwara,
Maharajadhiraja etc. with their names. Their capital was Devaparbata near Moinamoti
Camilla. The kingdom of the Devas was extended across the whole Samatata region.
The Deva kings ruled supposedly from 740A.D. to 800 A.D. Like the Pala kings, the
Deva kings were Buddhists.
The kingdom of Kantideva: An independent kingdom came into being in Horikela
Janapada of south-east Bengal in the nineth century. The king of this kingdom was
Kantideva. It is not known whether Kantideva had any relationship with the Deva
dynasty. His father's name was Dhanadutta and grandfather's name was Bhadradutta.
The present Sylhet was included in the kingdom of Kantideva. The name of his capital
was Burdwanpur. At present there is no existence of any region by this name. At this
time, a new power known by Chandra dynasty emerged in south-east Bengal. The
kingdom built up by Kantideva was destroyed by this Chandra dynasty.
The Chandra Dynasty: The Chandra dynasty was the most powerful independent
dynasty of south-east Bengal. The kings of this dynasty ruled for one hundred and fifty
years from the beginning of the tenth century to the middle of the eleventh century. The
first king of the Chandra dynasty Purnachandra and his son Subarnachandra were
probably the landlords of Rohitgiri. His title was 'Maharajadhiraja'. Troilakyachandra
established the name of his own dynasty in Horikela, Chandradwip (Barisal and <
adjoining area), Banga and Samatata i.e. in whole east and south-east Bengal. Lalmai &

Political History of Ancient Bengal (326 B.C. - 1204 A.D.) 43
mountain was the main centre of the Chandra kings. This mountain was known as
Rohitgiri in ancient time. He ruled for supposedly 30 years (900A.D.-930A.D.).
Troilakyachandra's deserving heir was his son Sreechandra. During his rule honour and
power of the Chandra dynasty reached the pinnacle. Undoubtedly, he was the best ruler
of this dynasty.
He assumed the title 'Parameshwara Parama Vattaraka Maharajadhiraja'. His kingdom
was extended to North-east Kamrupa and Gaur in the North in addition to South-east
Bengal. He established his capital in Vikrampura in the district of present Munshiganj.
He supposedly ruled with glory for 45 years (930-975 A.D).
Sreechandra's son Kallyan Chandra (supposedly 975A.D.-1000A.D.) and grandson
Ladaha Chandra kept the glory of the Chandra dynasty intact. Govinda Chandra, son of
Ladaha Chandra was the last king of the Chandra dynasty. During his reign Rajendra
Chola, king of the Chola; and Karna, kings of the Kolochuri attacked Banga. These two
external attacks lessened the power of king Chandra and put an end to their rule.
The Varma Dynasty
The Pala administrative power having become weak at the last phase of the eleventh
century, a dynasty with the title 'Varma' shaped itself in south-east Bengal. He who laid
the foundation of this dynesty in Banga was Brojovarma's son Jatavarma. It seems that
Varmas came to this country with the Kolochuri king. Like his father at the early stage
he was also a feudal king of the Kalochuri king Gangeyodeva and Karna. During
Kaibarta revolt, he established an independent kingdom in South-east Bengal with the
help and support of his father-in-law, Karna, the Kolochuri king. The capital of the
Varmas was Vikrampura of Munshiganj district. After Jatvarma, his eldest son
Harivarma ruled 46 years at a stretch. He was on good terms with the Pala kings.
Individual work: Arrange the following dynasty in chronological order :

| Serial | Name of dynasty Time of establishment

Chandra dynasty Fighth century

The kingdom of Kantideva Eleventh century

Karas diasty

Deva dynasty Seventhth century

26
S

44 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
The Sena dynasty (1061A.D. -1204 A.D.) :
After the fall of the Pala dynasty, Sena dynasty started their rule in Bengal in the second
half of the twelveth century. It is supposed that they were intruders to this country. The
original abode of their forefathers was in Karnataka of the Deccan. According to some
historian they were 'Brahmmakhatriya’. 'Brahmmakhatriya' are those who are first
Brahmmins and become Khatriya after changing their occupations. The founder of the
Sena dynasty in Bengal was Samanta Sena. He showed heroism in his youth and first
settled down in Rahr region on the Ganges at the last years of his life. Since he did not
establish any kingdom, the dignity of the first king is given to Hemanta Sena, son of
Samanta Sena. It is supposed that he was a feudal king under Ramapala.
After the death of Hemanta Sena, his son Vijoy Sena (1098A.D.-1160A.D.) ascended
to the throne. During his long reign itself, the rule of the Sena dynasty was established
on a strong footing. It is he who probably established himself as an independent king
from a feudal king. During Kaivarta revolt he helped Ramapala. South Rahr was under
the Sura dynasty in the eleventh century. He married Bilash Devi, the princess of this
dynasty. Vijoy Sena got recognition of being independent in exchange of helping
Ramapala to regain Varendra. Again, Rahr came under the possession of Bijoy Sena
due to nuptial relation with the Sura dynasty of South Rahr. Then Vijoy Sena brought
South and East Bengal under his possession defeating the king of the Varma. Taking the
advantage of the weaknesses of the last kings of the Pala dynasty, Vijoy Sena extended
his lordship by defeating Madanpala and driving away the Palas from the South and
south-east Bengal. Then, he launched an attack on Karnrupa, Kalinga and Mithila.
Vijaypura situated in Triveni of Hoogly district was the first capital of Vijoy Sena. The
second capital was established in Vikrampura in the distrct of Munshiganj. Vijoy Sena
assumed the titles like Parama Maheshwara, Parameshwara Parama Bhattaraka Maha-
rajadhiraja, Auriraj-Brishava-Shankara etc. The whole Bengal was under a single king
first for a long time under only the Sena dynasty.
Vijoy Sena was a follower of Shaiba religion. After the reign of Vijoy Sena, his son
Vallal Sena (1160A.D.-1178A.D.) ascended to the throne. During his reign he not only
protected the kingdom of his father, but also established Sena rule on a strong
foundation by bringing Magadha and Mithila under it. He married Chalukya princess,
Ramadevi. Along with other titles Vallal Sena assumed the title 'Auriraj Nishanka
Shankara’. At the old age he handed over the charge of running the kingdom on his son
Lakhsmana Sena and passed rest of his life following 'Banprastha' with his wife near
Triveni on the Ganges.

ES

ES

Political History of Ancient Bengal (326 B.C. - 1204.A.D.) 45
Vallal Sena was a great scholar. He had great fascination toward learning and the
learned. He studied Veda, Smriti, Purana etc. He had a huge library. As a poet and a
writer, his contribution to Sanskrit literature is endless. Before him, there was no
ancient king in the history of Bengal who could manifest such extraordinary merit in
literature. Vallal Sena composed two books named ‘Dansagara' and 'Advutsagara’. The
unfinished part of 'Advutsagara' was completed by his son Lakhsmana Sena. These two
books are invaluable symbols of his reign in history. He established a new capital in
Rampala. Vallal Sena was a great patronizer of Hinduism. As a result, during his reign
while the Brahmmana religion became stronger, Buddhism became weaker. It is
assumed that with a view to reshaping the Hindu society, he introduced a custom called
‘Koulinyo’. As a result of that, the aristocrats of the society had to abide by some social
regulations in practicing social rituals, wedding ceremonies etc.
Hindu religion?

After Vallal Sena his son Lakhsmana Sena (1I78A.D.-1205A.D.) ascended to the throne
at the age of 60. Like father and grandfather, Lakhsmana Sena was a skilled warrior and
showed his skill in the battlefield. He brought Prag-Jotish, Gaur, Kalinga, Kashi,
Magadha etc. under the Sena empire. But, he could not pass the last part of his life
happily. At last he became inattentive to running of the kingdom due to long-standing
warfare, old age debility and others. He started to reside in the second capital
Nabodwipa on the Ganges like his father. As a result, Gaur turned into a playground of
fearful intrigue and internal conflicts and there grew internal disorder. Taking the
advantage of the situation, Domman Pala revolted and gave birth to an independent
kingdom in the Sundarban region in 1196 A.D.
Lakhsmana Sena himself was a scholar and had eagerness to education. He completed
his father's unfinished book 'Adbhut Sagara’. Some verses (sloke) written by him were
also found. Many scholars and wise men would assemble in his royal court.
It appears that Lakhsmana Sena was converted to Vaishnaba religion from Shaiba
religion of his father and grandfather. He assumed the title Parambaishnaba instead of
Parama Maheshwara of his father and grandfather. He was his father's competent son
in practising scriptures and religion. Muslim historian Minhaj has admired his charity
and generosity very much.

x

&

46 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
Bakhtiar Khalji attacked Nadia at the beginning of the 13th century. Old Lakhsmana
Sena did not withstand this attack; rather he took shelter in Bikrampura of present
Munshiganj district, going there by river. Bakhtiar Khalji easily occupied north and
north-west Bengal. Muslim empire was established in Bengal centering round
Lakhsmanabati (Gaur). Living in south-east Bengal, Lakhsmana Sena rules 3-4 years
more. Very probably, he died in 1206A.D. (1205A.D. in another view). After the death
of Lakhsmana Sena, his two sons Biswarupa Sena and Keshova Sena ruled east Bengal
for some time (till 1203A.D.). Yet, it can be said that Sena rule came to an end in
Bengal with the defeat of Laxmana Sena.
list of these tiles .
Administrative System of Ancient Bengal
No accurate account of the administrative system of ancient Bengal is available before
the Gupta reign. Before the establishment of the Gupta rule in this country, the Kauma
society was all in all. Then there was no king; so there was no kingdom. Yet, there was
administrative system at a minimum level. Then people lived together. Among the
Kauma people, in the Panchayet system a leader seclected by the Panchayet would lead
local Kauma administrative system. The Kauma system in Bengal did not last for good.
Before the fourth century B.C, Kauma system broke down and monarchy reached its
full development.
A clear account of the administrative system in Bengal during the Gupta regime is
available. Supposedly, in the second-thirdth century north Bengal was brought under
the Maurya empire. In Bengal the center of the Maurya rule was Pundranagar in
Mohasthangar, five miles away from Bogra. It seems that the administrative system of
Bengal was run by a royal representative called Mahamantra at that time. Though
Bengal was included in the Gupta empire, whole Bengal was not under direct rule of
the Gupta empire. The sections of Bengal which were not under direct rule of the Gupta
emperors were ruled by feudal kings with the title ‘Maharaja’ nearly independently and
separately. These feudal kings would always accept the authority of the Gupta
emperors. Gradually, the Gupta emperors introduced their administration all over
Bengal. Many employees were appointed under these feudal kings.
The sections of Bengal which were not under the direct rule of the Gupta emperor were
divided into a few administrative departments. Of them the largest department was
‘Bhukti'. Again, every Bhukti was devided into some 'Bishoys; every 'Bishoy' in some eo
S
N

Political History of Ancient Bengal (326 B.C. - 1204 A.D.) 47
"Mandals; every 'Mandal' in some Bithis and every 'Bithi' were divided into some
villages. The village itself was the smallest unit of administration.
The Gupta emperor himself recruited the ruler of Bhukti. Sometimes the administrator
of the Bhukti was appointed from the prince or the member of the royal family. The
head of the 'Bhukti' was called 'Uparika'. In the later periods the rulers would assume
the title 'Uparika Maharaja’. Generally, 'Uparika Maharaja’ himself would recruit rulers
for his Bishoys. The 'Bhukti' and 'Bishoya' of the Gupta Age can be compared to
present Division and District.
The Gupta rule came to an end in north-west Bengal in the sixth century. Bengal
became independent and separate. The new system that was developed in the then
Bengal was just like the provincial administrative system. The monarchy during the
Gupta period was dependent on the feudal kings. It has not been changed yet in this
age. Rather, feudal system has been wider. The feudal kings of Bengal also assumed the
title 'Maharajadhiraja’' like the Gupta kings. They would also recruit many
employees from different classes.
In the middle of the eighth century a new age started with the establishment of the Pala
dynasty. During the Pala rule of four hundred years they had their administrative
system well established in Bengal. Like before, the main thing of administrative system
even in the Pala regime was monarchy. The king himself was the head of the
administration of the central government. The son of the king would be the king. In
spite of this rule prevailing, there were strife and conflicts among brothers and other
close relatives in the dynasty about ascending to the throne. Since then comes the
reference of a Prime Minister or Chief Secretary. He was the chief of all royal
employees.
There was a definite number of administrative division to conduct all types of
governance. A chief would be recruited for each of its departments. In spite of father
being alive, the prince in many cases could conduct governance.
The central government had different types of taxes such as vaga, vogakar, hiranya,
uparikar, different sources of income etc. were imposed on crops produced in the
country. Sometimes one-sixth portion of some production was collected as revenue.
Taxes were also collected to protect businessmen from burglars and gangsters. This
type of commercial taxes including the levy earned from ferry ghats, were some
sourch of earning for the government. Forests being the propeties of the state were

8 sources of the state-revenue too.

8

48 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
Different types of employees were engaged for revenue collection. There was
monitoring of revenue collection and expenditure as well as department for deeds and
documents. Special emphasis was given on land survey so that the tax or revenue
imposed was justified. Revenue was collected either in currency or in crops. During the
Pala dynasty judiciary and police department were quite effective. This period also
witnessed secret service for espionage. The defense comprised of infantry, cavalry,
elephantry and fleet.
There are also references of feudal kings in the time of the Pala dynasty like the Guptas.
They had different titles. The feudal kings were under compulsion to submit to the
power and strength of the central rule. Of course, in many cases they would declare
independence taking the advantage of the weaknesses of the central rule. The power of
the Pala rulers depended to a great extent on the help and co-operation of these feudal
kings.
The administrative system which was introduced in the Pala kingdom was recognized
as an ideal for ruling the country during small dynasties and the Sena dynasty in the
subsequent periods. During this time the Queen would be given royal dignity. The
princes had enough influence on administering the kingdom. The eldest son of the king
would be the crown prince.
This was fairly the administrative system of ancient Bengal. According to scholars,
Bengal did not lag behind in comparison to other parts of India in respect of
administrative system during that time.

ES

8

Political History of Ancient Bengal (326 B.C. - 1204 A.D.) 49
Questions for Practice
Multiple Choice Questions
1. When was the Gupta empire established in India?
a. 320 A.D. b. 321 AD.
c. 322 A.D. d. 323 A.D.
2. Sasanka made friendship with Devagupta, the king of Malaba
a. to bring Pushyovhuti under control;
b. to bring Maukhari under control;
c. to make Rajjyoshree a captive.
Which one of the following answers is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iii
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
Read the stimulant and answer the questions 3 and 4
Rupganj Union has been governed peacefully for quite a long time. But during the
governance of unskilled and weak Chairman Suman, local people grew displeased for
different reasons. At one stage they removed Suman from his position by revolting
under the leadership of Durjoy.
3. Which historical Character is reflected in the revolutionary leader Durjoy?
a. Bhima b. Divyak
c. Mahipala, II d. Bigrahapala
4. The cause of deposition of the same leader like Suman is—
i. failure to stop rebellion;
ii. inefficiency as a leader;
iii. inability to solve the problems of the people.
Which one of the following questions is correct?
a i b. ii and iii
c. iand iii d. i, ii and iii
Forma- 7, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

50 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
Creative Questions
1. Ajay started to live with his family in Nabinagar leaving his old abode. In course
of time he became an administrator of Nabingar. He did many thngs for the
development of the area. Besides, his ancestors also made contributions to
education, culture and literature. The people of different religions in his area would
become the victims of discrimination.
a. Where was the capital of Kharga dynasty?
b. Why are the Senas called 'Brahmmakhatriya'?
c. Which Sena ruler's activities are reflected in those of Nabinagar's
administrator Ajay? Explain.
d. Do you think the ancestors of that said ruler made adequate contributions to
education and literature? Justify your answer.
2. The Chairman of Ramnagar municipalaity Saumen Barna established an academic
institution in his area. Learners from home and abroad had the opportunity to study

in that institution. He became attentive to the advantages of different religious

people following their respective religions. He also became able to establish order

and peace in his municipalaity. As a result, he got an opportunity of remaining the
administrator of the municipalaity for a long time.

a. Whois the founder of the Pala dynasty?

b. What does 'Matsannayam' mean’?

c. Is there any similarity between the activities of the chairman of
Ramnagar municipalaity and those of Dharmapala in setting up modern
academic institutions? Explain it .

d. The ideal and inspiration of Dharmapala worked behind Saumen Barua's
running the municipalaity for a long time. Evaluate the comment .

26
S
AQ

Chapter Five
Social, Economic and Cultural history of Ancient Bengal
Man is a social being. Naturally they live in societies. This needs mutual cooperation.
This is why, they develop different kinds of social, economic, and political institutions.
Human beings primarily need three essential things for their survival- food, clothes and
shelter. Then comes the necessity of education, science, art and crafts, rules of law etc.
to better their life. All these collectively form their culture. Before the arrivals of the
Aryans the ancient people of Bengal together developed a certain kind of social and
cultural life and that was the most ancient culture in Bengal. Scholars maintain that
their language was 'Austric' and they were called 'Nishada’ by nationals. Afterwards
another national called 'Alpine' got mixed with the small ethnic groups in Bengal. They
also contributed to develop the culture of Bengal. In fact, streams of different human
clans got mingled in the human nature. Thus the people of Bengal are known as
‘crossbreed'. However, due to a long history of people's diverse style of communication
and exchange, the people of Bengal have got specific characteristics of their limbs and
organs.
At the end of this chapter we will be able to -
@ give an account of the socio-economic condition of Bengal;
@ give an account of art, architecture, sculpture and painting of ancient Bengal;
e explain the origin and development of language and literature of ancient Bengal;
e explain values and beliefs of the people reflected in religious practices,
occasions, festivals and rituals of ancient Bengal;
e develop positive ideas about the contributions of the then dynasties
in the socio-economic and cultural practices;
@ be interested in knowing the origin and development of the cultural life of ancient
Bengal through the study of history.
Society, Economy and Culture of Ancient Bengal
Social life in Ancient Bengal
Before the Maurya rule no political identity grew up in the people of Bengal in true
sense. During this time the society was divided in different classes. It was called
Kauma society. Some religious thoughts prevailing before the arrival of the Aryans
26
S
x)

52 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
spread among the Hindus afterwards. Among them remarkable are 'Karmafala'
(consequences of one's actions, especially of previous birth that governs one's weal and
woe), belief in rebirth, practice of yoga etc. The influence of many customs and
manners of this age are noticed in Hindu society in the later periods. For example,
entertaining the guests with betel leaves and nuts, singing for the Shiva, Saffron
ceremony in marriage, putting on 'dhuti-shari' (white cotton sari with narrow border of
any color put on by widows of Hindu society or by Brahmins or worshippers) and using
vermillion in the forehead of married women, etc.
The caste system was a very essenatial part of Aryan society. As a result of their living
here for a long time, this system was also introduced in Bengal. There were four castes
in Bengal in the ancient time Brahmmanas, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Sudra. In the later
period, more varieties of crossbred people originated. Every caste in the society had
particular occupation. Studying, teaching and performing religious activities were the
jobs of the Brahmmins. They would get highest dignity in the society. The kshatriyas
belong to warrior community. Trade and commerce was done by the Vaishyas. The
Sudras of the lowest class would generally do agricultural work, fishing and other
lower jobs. People of all other castes except the Brahmmins would associate with one
another. Generally, marriage would take place within the same caste, but the system of
inter-caste marriage was also in vogue between a groom of higher class and a bride of
lower class. But, in later period strict rules were imposed on this matter.
Bangalee women had fame for their good qualities. The girls would receive education.
In those days there was no system of putting on veils. Taking only one wife was the
social rule. But, men could keep more than one wife. A widow had to take food without
animal protein and give up luxury. The husband being dead, the wife would go to
Sahamarana (dying or burning with the husband on his pyre). This system is called
‘Satidaha Pratha'. Women did not have any right on wealth and property. We can learn
about the good moral character of the Bangalees from the ancient religious scriptures
of Bengal. But, it cannot be said that there was no corruption and obscenity in the social
life of the Bangalees.
Like present time, in those days the staple food of the Banglees were rice, fish, meat,
vegetables, milk, curd, ghee, kheer, etc. Different types of tasty pies were also popular.
Howevers Bangalee Brahmmanas would eat protein. Then all types of fish were
available. In the East Bengal, Hilsa and dried fish were very popular foods. Vegetables
ES
ES

Social, Economic and Cultural history of Ancient Bengal 53
such as brinjal, gourd, pumpkins, jhinge, kakrul, arum etc. were produced. Fruits such
as mangoes, jackfruits, palms, coconuts, sugarcane were available. But there is nothing
written about pulses. In addition different kinds of drink like milk, coconut water, juice
of sugarcane, palm juice were commonly used. After meal there was a custom of
chewing betel with spices.
Regarding dresses there was no pomp and gorgeousness except kings and rich people.
Men and women in Bengal would put on 'dhuti' and ‘sari' respectively. Sometimes men
used wrapper and girls used ‘uma' (a piece of cloth covering chest). Arrangements were
there for special dress on occasions. The custom of using ornaments was common
among both men and women. They put on earring, necklace, bangles, mol, etc. Only
women used to wear bangles of conch along with other bangles in their hands. The rich
used ornaments made of gems and jewels, gold and silver. Women put up hair in a bun
in different styles. Men had hair hanging above their shoulder. Perfume with
cosmetics like camphor, sandal etc. were widely in use. Lac-dye, vermillion, kamkum
(a ball filled with red powder and scented water for sprinkling) were used in the
dressing up of women. Men sometimes used clogs made of wood and leather sandals.
The use of umbrella was also common then.
There were arrangements of different types of sports and amusement in those days.
Playing chess and pasha were also popular. But, singing and dancing were more
frequent. Vina, flute, mridango, dhak, dhol, khol, kartal, even earthenware were used as
musical instruments. Wrestling, hunting, exercise, boat racing and juggling were very
popular with men. Amusements like gardening, swimming were also in practice
women.
‘Annoprashna' (when a baby eats rice for the first time), marriage, obituary etc. social
occasions were customary in those days too. There were thirteen parbans (programs)
in twelve months. On these occasions there were arrangements of festivals and
amusements. Like the present time, Vhatriditiya, Nabanno, Rathjyatra, Astomisnan,
Holi, Jonmastomi (birthday of Lord Krishna), Dashhara’, ‘Akhyatritia’,
'Gangansnan ‘(bathing in the Ganges as religious ritual) etc. were celebrated in those
days. Beside these, various amusements and festivals, worldly occasions occupied a
special place in the social life in ancient times. Garvadhan, Simontonayon etc.
programs were celebrated for the welfare of the baby to be born. After birth, some
programs like naming the baby, ‘annoprashna’ etc. would take place. The influence of
the religious scriptures on the daily life of the people of ancient Bengal was very
strong. There were strict rules for forbidden food, fasting, wedding, child education,
going abroad, pilgrimage, etc.

x

&

34 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
The main form of transport of the people of ancient Bengal was cart drawn by oxen,
and boat. Shafts like raft and donga were used to move through canals and marshes.
People would cross canals by small bridge made of bamboo. The rich would use
elephants, horses, horse-drawn cart as forms of transport. Their wives and female
family members would go from one places to another by Pa/ki or boat. After marriage
a bride would go to her father-in-law's house by cart drivern by oxen or Palki. After all
it seems that there was no difference between the lifestyle of modern village life and
that of the previous time.
As an agricultural country, people of Bengal lived in villages. People had more of less
happy life, though there were stories of miseries of the poor people. The main power
was in the hands of the highest class of people i.e. the Brahmmins. Only the
Brahmmins could practise the knowledge of scriptures. The oppressions of the
Brahmmins were intolerable to the common people. It went to its peak for the
Buddhists. General people were very displeased at the oppressions of the Sena rulers at
the later stages. During Sena regime distress descended on Buddhist society and
culture. During the Sena rule, ordinary Hindu society got weak as a result of the
influence of the Brahmmanas.
At the last stage of ancient Bengal this disordered led the growth of the muslim society.
The establishment of the muslim society inagurated the middle Age. During this time
the picture of the society and culture of Bengal got changed.

Individual Task: Make a list of dresses, ornaments, musical instruments and

sports and games of ancient Bengal.
Economic condition and art and sculpture of Ancient Bengal
The economic condition of Ancient Bengal
Bengal is always an agricultural country. Most of the people of Bengal in ancient time
lived in villages. They maintained their families by cultivating the surrounding lands of
the villages. So, the economy of the country was built up depending on agriculture.
Paddy was the main crop of Bengal. Besides, Bengal had fame for jute, sugarcane,
cotton, indigo, mustard and betel cultivation. Fruit-bearing trees were mango, jackfruit,
coconut, betel-nut, pomegranate, banana, lemon, fig, dates etc. Cardamom, cloves etc.
were also produced in Bengal. Domestic animals were cow, goat, ram, poultry, dog,
etc. Salt and dried fish were produced in some parts of the country.

=<
8

Social, Economic and Cultural history of Ancient Bengal 55
Ancient Bengal was very rich in cottage industry. All things necessary for village
people were produced in the village itself. Things made of earth were pitcher, small
pitcher-shaped water-pot, cooking pots, dishes etc. Things made of iron were chopper,
axe, spade, spud, small spud, plough etc. Besides, water-pot and mililay weapons like
arrow, spear, sword etc. were produced. Gold industry, gems and jewelery industry
developed very much for luxury. Wood industry was also very developed. Furniture
used in families, houses, temples, palaanquin, cart drawn by horse and cow, rath etc.
were made of wood itself. Moreover, different types of boat to move in rivers and big
boats and ships to move in the sea were made of wood.
Though Bengal was an agricultural country, different kinds of industrial goods were
produced in ancient time. Bengal became famous for textile industry in the very ancient
time. Famous ‘Moslin' cloth was produced in Bengal from the very ancient time. This
cloth was so delicate that 20 yards of Moslin could be stuffed into a snuff box. Bengal
was also noted for sophisticated and delicate cloth made from cotton and silk. Coarse
cloth made from cotton and hemp was produced. It is amazing that tin was available in
Bengal that time.
Agricultural and industrial goods were in plenty in Bengal. Again, these goods were in
great demand in different regions of India and in many countries of the world. So,
Bengal would conduct business with many countries of the world in ancient time.
Export oriented products of Bengal such as cotton and silk cloth, sugar, molasses, salt,
cassia leaves and other spices, rice, coconut, betel-nut, medicinary plants, different
types of diamonds, pearls, emerald etc. were worth mentioning.
Trades and commerce of Bengal widely expanded with the development of industries.
Commercial exchanges were done through both road and water ways. In addition to
trade inside the country, Bengal specially developed in foreign trade that time. Bengal
conducted exchange of goods with other regions of India through road and waterways.
That is why big cities and commercial ports were established in many places of Bengal.
These are Nabyavashika, Kotivarsha, Pundravardhana, Tamrolipto, Karnasuvarna,
Saptagrama etc. In addition to cities, trade and commerce was conducted in village
markets. In these village markets daily necessaries produced in the villages were
bought and sold. Bengal would conduct exchanges of goods with countries such as
Ceylon, Burma (Myanmar), Champa, Kamboj, Javadwip, Malaya, Shyam, Sumatra,
China etc. by sea. Trades were conducted with China, Nepala, Bhutan, Tibet and
Middle Asia by road.

xs

8

56 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
As aresult of industrial development and expansion of trade and commerce, riches and
wealth of Bengal increased tremendously. May be barter system was used for sale and
purchase, trade and commerce. Probably, before the fourth century B.C. usage of
currency started in Bengal. Though different types of currency were prevalent in
different times in Bengal, here cowries were used as the smallest denomination.
Individual work: Make a list of the economic conditions that prevailed in ancient
Bengal.
Group work: Show in a table which countries of ancient Bengal had commercial
relation by the sea and road.
Art, Architecture and Sculpture @ . . ... Ae 4
There are many testimonies of [Ram Pi ek ,, '
architecture, sculpture, and eae
paintings of ancient Bengal at aad : en le - se ;
different places of Bangladesh. Boom ai a wi
The fine arts of ancient Bengal )) i s@yggi = 4
have been destroyed due to *- ————— i
various factors. Yet, it can er Ee ae ae
undoubtedly be said that the fine Oe ma
arts in the ancient time was very @7=srsensees soe une? a i
special. Shalban Vihara, Comilla
Architecture: A very little of the of Bengal architectural proof of ancient Bengal has
been discovered. We can get some information about many edifices, temples, heaps and
monasteries with inlays of Bengal from descriptions of Chinese travelers Fa-Hien,
Hiuen-Tsang and different ancient inscriptions.
The most ancient architectural testimonies of ancient Bengal are heaps. The heaps were
made on the bones of Buddha or the things he used. The viharas were constructed for
living place or the learning place. The great Sompura Vihara was built during the Pala
dynasty.
~
S
rx)

Social, Economic and Cultural history of Ancient Bengal 57
Some years back some more ancient testimony have been discovered at Moynamati of
Comilla. It is known as Shalbana Vihara.

In the history of architecture of Indian sub-continent the temples of ancient Bengal
have occupied a special place in terms of dignity and uniqueness. Many temples were
built here in ancient time. All the temples were situated in the regions of
Pundrabardhana, Samatata, Rahr, Varendra etc.

An ancient city-civilization of 2500 years puspppeesmerecs maTROU TTS
old have been discovered in Wari- Batesh- ig igiiecgen== Maman) (ff
war archeological site. This archeological | Pa Lh, le re
site is based at Belabo, Shibpur and Raipura As = =... ae
upozillas of Narashingdi district. Different gh\” 7 —“ fs ee
types of rockes of the prehistoric era, be et = 24 = a
weapons of fossilized wood, caves of #¥PMNP ph | cg Oy Pa
copper-rock era etc. are discovered from GE >
fifty archeological sites here. In fact, ee Fens: ers — Pi
Wari-Bateshwar was one of the oldest Het aie | ae
localities of Bengal. A planned fort-city was Ruins of Wat -Bsteswar

the capital of this locality.

In the meantime, many archeological relics have been discovered here. They include
clay-made fort-walls, trenches, roads with side-walks and brick-made architectural
works. This place was in fact a river-port as well as an international business centre
beside the old Brahmaputra basin.

Here flourished a kind of factories that used to produce glass-beads with cheap stones.
The relics discovered in Wari-Bateshwar justify the high skills, tastes and philosopy of
the artists during this period. Among these discoveries old silver coins, treasure boxes,
rare architectures, various kinds of stone beads, magnificent pendants and amulets,
measuring weights, terracotta, metal-antics, pottery, art-works etc. are mentionable.
Recently, a Buddhist monastery has been discovered in an ancient village named
Bojrojogini in Bikrampur. It is the birth place of a world famous Buddhist intellectual
and preacher, Atish Dipankar. Archeologists maintain that this monastery is built in
between eighth or nineth century B.C. The ruins collected from here are of the
pre-middle era and include royal inscriptions on copper plates, sculptures made of
wood and stone, statues and columns, which are the proofs of the civilization that time.
Sculpture: The practice of sculpture and architecture is evident in ancient Bengal.
There were many temples in Bengal during that period. Therefore, there is no doubt
that it was a period for the significant development of sculptural art. Though temples
are damaged to a large extent in many places, the images have been preserved.

Forma- 8, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

58 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
The burnt clay tiles and the cut work at the § eae —
Paharpur temple revels the own sculptural styles _ - = a en
of Bengal. Not only the cut work, but also the art jas ar po ee aa
work of burnt clay was also very famous in opt, b <4) Aw 2 ae
Bengal. A good number of burnt clay tiles and || */ fer) = =< SO
images of deities have been found at Moinamoti § ae Sarre Serial
Terracotta from Paharpur Vihara
Painting: No painting belonging to the age prior to the Pala regime is yet be found. But
there was the practice of painting in Bengal in ancient time. Using painting in order to
beautify the walls of the temples and viharas was a common practice. In those days the
Buddhist writers used to make manuscripts of their books on palm leaves or paper. In
order to insert pictures in these books, the writers and artists would draw small pictures.
The artists of ancient Bengal showed faIEEEyIEREes TE s HN |
through lines. A ‘puthi' (a kind of 1G 6) Re _ ie ZB Y
religious or folk story book) ' fi | 1] » Cima ae
Astrasahasrika  Proggaparamita' a) ae Se ‘| ae Al
composed during the reign of King be) Ry F Bk ce) Oy 1c
Ramapala is an excellent testimony al p) Eg r wey K Ra Pa | 4,
of line painting of Bengal. Another ¥j } = yA aM Na .
classic example of line painting is gf) | }| ve a. ais > (
that of Vishnu designed on the other iz <| a ¥ ‘Gp iS ) PE
side of a copper plate with royal | / | 3 eats
edict of Dommanpala which was . —
found in the Sundarbans. Astosahosrika Proggaparomita
Bengali Language and Literature: Origin and Development
Austric was the language of the ancient people of Bengal. After the arrival of Aryans,
this language gradually disappeared. The name of the language of the Aryans is ancient
Vedic language. In the later period, this language was reformed. The ancient language
being reformed is called Sanskrit. Many believe that Bangla is derived from Sanskrit.
But scholars have declined this idea. So, the language that the Aryans used in the most
ancient time and the language in which Vedic books were written experienced many
changes due to differences of time and places. Later Sankskrit turns to ‘Prakrito’ and
‘Prakrito’ turns to 'Apobhrongsho’, Bangla language originated from ‘Apobhrongsho' in .,
the eighth century. For example: Krishno>Kanho>Kanu>Kanai. s

Social, Economic and Cultural history of Ancient Bengal 59
AAS NAT EAS Trae Sar AEN Sea aATIAS
Eat DA NAAT ATA TS FST TE Psi esta Sas

Charyapada

The examples of such language are found in the four ancient Buddhist 'puthis' collected

from Nepal by Haraprasad Shasri. They are known as 'Charyapada'. Bengali literature

is originated from this Charyapada. Therefore, the importance of these 'Charyapadas'
are invaluable in terms of the history of Bengali language and literature.

Cultural life, Values and Beliefs of Ancient Bengal

Religious Conditions of Ancient Bengal

It is not clearly known if there was any religion before the establishment of the Vedic

religion. But the small ethnic groups of the said time were quite prejudiced. They were

believers of different kinds of worshipping as they had fears as well as respects and for
many things. Religious practices were not all the same everywhere. Rather it differed
according to the caste, class, kauma and janapada. Moreover, the ancient religious
beliefs, practice and prejudice etc. were transformed to and mingled with Vedic
religion. Even many women-practices in the rural Bengal replicate some of the
practices of the small ethnic groups of the ancient period. Some of them are
worshipping trees or using amro-pallab (tender mango branches with five or seven
leaves), sheaf of paddy, grass leaves, banana, betel leaves and nuts, coconut, ghat

(small earthen pitcher), vermillion etc. for religious festivals and occasions. Thus the

worshipping of Manasa, Shoshan Kali, Banadurga, Shosti etc. bear the identity of the

religious activities of the small communities. People of different Kaums such as

Khasia, Munda, Sautal, Rajbangshi, Buno, Shabar worship trees, stones, mountains,

birds and animals, fruits and roots as Gods and Goddesses like their primitive

forefathers.

From the very fourth century Bengal came under the influence of three great religions

of the sub-continent: Vedic religion, Buddhism, and Jainism. There was no spread of

Aryan-Vedic religion and culture here up to the third or fourth century. It is known from

copper inscriptions that the Brahmmins settled down in many places of Bengal coming

from 'Moddhyadesh'. Thus, the waves of the Vedic religion and culture reached the
eastern frontier of Bengal in the sixth century.
Ss The influence and power of the Vedic religion in the Pala regime remained undamaged.
“Almost all of the Barma and the Pala kings believed in Brahmmin religion. During that

60 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
time Buddhism got damaged to a great extent. The influence and power of the Vedic
religion in the Pala regime remained undamaged. Almost all of the kings and the
Maharajas believed in Brahmmin religion. During that time Buddhism lost its glamour
somehow. The practice of bathing-charity-meditation at special lunar moments as well
as burnt offerings for gods and goddesses began as Vedic occasions. Gradually
different rituals like jatkarma, niskramana, annaprashana (first hard food for the
child), churantakarana, upanayana, somabartana, vivah (wedding), grihaprobesha
(entering a new house for the first time) etc. spread in the Brahmmin society of Bengal.
The Brahmmins were patronized by the state to spread these rituals all over the
country.

Though Vedic and Brahmmin religions spread very fast in Bengal, there was evolution
in course of time. Worship of new gods and goddesses started. The new gods and
goddesses were basically the gods and goddesses depicted in the Puranas and epics. So,
this religion is called ‘Pouranic Religion’. The ‘Purohitas'(priests) got all-out
responsibility to conduct religious activities. The complexities of religious activities
increased. The custom of sacrificing animals instead of offerings of milk and ghee at
the altars of deities spread further. Various types of superstitions appeared as a part of
religion. A few religion originated from the rituals of mythical worshipping. Vaishnaba
religion was the most remarkable among them. Shaiva religion was also practised
during the Gupta reign. In addition to these gods and goddesses there were many other
deities to worship in Bengal. Among them the most remarkable were the worshipping
of the Sun and that of Power. The Jainism was noticed in north Bengal.

In the religious world of ancient Bengal Buddhism has occupied a special place. With
the active patronage of the Palas and the rules afterwards for a long period of four
hundred years or so this religion gained international dignity and recognition across
Bengal and Bihar.

During the Sena rule itself worshipping of Gods and Goddesses such as Vishnu, Shiva,
Parbati etc. started and many Hindu temples were built. As a result, the decline of
Buddhism started in Bengal. The last strike came from the Turkish Muslims.

Though there was the existence of Vedic, Puranic (Mythical), Jain, Buddhist and other
religious communities in ancient Bengal, there was no conflict and clash among them.
Rather they lived in harmony. Though the Pala kings were the patronizers of
Buddhism, they were respectful to other religious communities. During this age the
religious life of Bengal was quite developed and tolerence to other religions was one of
the traits of Bengalee character.

Social, Economic and Cultural history of Ancient Bengal 61
Occasions, Festivals, Customs and Practices of Ancient Bengal
There were enough arrangements for worshipping, celebrations, and festivities in
ancient Bengal. Durga Puja was a huge celebration in the Varendra areas. A kind of
musical dance called ‘sarodotshoba’ was arranged on the day of Bijoya Doshomi.
Holka which is called Holy now was one of the biggest festivals. Everybody
irrespective of male and female took part in that festivity. Occasions like vratriditiya,
akashprodip, jonmashtomi, akshai tritiya, doshohara, gangasnan, bramhaputrasnan
on the day of mohastomi etc. which are celebrated now were celebrated at that time too.
In addition to festivals on the occasion of worshipping, many mundane rituals occupied
a special place in the social life of ancient Bengal. Rituals like garvadhana,
pungsabana, simantonnoyana, shoshyontihome were common practices to wish for the
upcoming baby. While after the baby was born different rituals would follow. They
were jatkarma, nishkromona, namkarana, poustikkarma, annaprashana, etc.
There was strong influence of scriptures on the daily life of the Hindus of Bengal.
People would strictly follow the directives of the scriptures regarding food and work
for specific hours of the day and for fasting, marriage, study, overseas travel,
pilgrimage etc.
In those days, Bengalee males had bad reputations of being quarrelsome and arrogant.
But, Bengalee females were different. Since they had access to education, in educated
society the honour of a mother or a wife was quite high. During that period there was
no provision of using veils or remaining behind the curtains (Purdah Protha). Generally
people had one wife, but polygamy or having more than one wife was in practice too.
Many women had to stay with other co-wives.
Widowhood was considered as one of the worst curses in life. Widows were forbidden
to take sindur (vermilion) on forehead and use cosmetics and ornaments. They were not
allowed to take proteins. They were vegetarians. They had extreme stoic life without
any luxury. There was provision of Sahamarana (idieing with husband). Women didn't
have any legal rights to wealth However, in absence of the husband, a widow without
any son could claim the husband's property.
The scriptures of Begnal appreciated high ideals and moral life. Truthfulness, sanctity,
kindness, charity etc. were appreciated very much. Similarly, killing men, drinking,
stealing, going to another man's wife etc. were considered great sins. There had been an
arrangement of atonement and punishment for that.

26

&

62 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
Questions for Practice
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Which world famous cloth is produced in Bengal from ancient time?
a. Rayon b. Silk
c. Maslin d. Woolen
2. The economy of ancient Bengal is called agro-based because during this time----
i. the staple crop of Bengal was paddy;
ii. Bengal had fame for sugarcane, cotton and betel productions;
ili, main cash crop was jute.
which one of the following is correct?
a. i b. ii
c. iiand iii d. iand iii
Read the stimulant and answer the questions 3 and 4.
Kabita went to visit the Shalban Vihara in Camilla with her parents during summer
vacation. There he noticed that the central temple was on a high mound in the middle
of the Vihara. There were many rooms around for Buddhist monks and there was
terracotta drawing on the walls. All the things together was an excellent ancient
testimony.
3. Which testimony of ancient Bengal is in harmony with the traits of what
kabita has seen about ancient Bengal?
a. of Ashrafpur of Dhaka b. of Jheuwari of Chittagong
c. of Paharpur of Noagoan d. of Bahularar of Bakura
4. The traits that are noticed in the said ancient ruins are_
a. made by the Buddhists;
b. aplace of acquiring knowledge;
c. having great fame home and abroad.
Which one of the followings is true?
a. iand ii b. i and iii
c. ii and iii d. i, ii, and iii
sy
Ss
aN

Social, Economic and Cultural history of Ancient Bengal 63

Creative Questions

1. Tina has come to visit her village home on the occasion of her friend's elder sister

Neela's marriage. Neela's father is a wealthy businessman of the village. He exports

cotton cloth, silk, medicine, fine rice to foreign counties. Many cottage industries

have grown up in the village. Many necessary things are made in the village indeed.

The people of the village still use pitchers and containers for cooking made of earth.

There are still sufficient agricultural land, meadows, markets, ports and ways for

traffic movement. In the village Tina is impressed at the idea that she has been able

to come to such a village. On the day of marriage Tina has put on a cotton sari very

nicely, lac-dye in the foot, 'kumkum' in the forehead, ‘urna’ on the head and put up

hair in a bun. Rice, fish, meat, vegetables, curd and kheer have been served at the

wedding party. After the meal, betel was served with spice. After the end of

wedding and feast, there was a small program of songs.

a. What was the language of the Aryans?

b. How did Bengali language originate?

c. Which period of Bengali has the similarity with the foods and clothes described
in the stimulant ? Explain.

d. ‘The economic structure of Neela's village is the reflection of the then
Bengal.' Do you agree with the statement? Justify your answer.

2. Saurav Banarjee and Pradip Banik are two friends and live in the same city.
Sauray's father is a cloth marchant. Tant sari of Tangail, silk and Jamdani sari of
Rajshahi are sold at his shop. At present he is exporting cotton cloth and silk sari
to foreign countries. Pradip's father deals in rice, sugar, salt, spices etc. He
imports sugar and spices. One day Pradip went to Saurav's house and seeing his
sister, he made a proposal of marriage of his elder brother with her. Saurav's
parents regretted the proposal because Pradip's family was not of the same caste.
a. When was the currency introduced first in Bengal?

b. What was the condition of the people of ancient Bengal?
c. What aspect of the then society of Bengal is reflected in the attitudes
of Saurav's parents towards the marriage proposal of his sister?
d. Do you think the obstacle standing on the way to the marriage of
Pradip's elder brother is the obstacle to the progress of the then society of
Bengal? Why/ Why not?
2
8

Chapter Six
Political History of Bengal in the Middle Age (1204
A.D.-1757 A.D.)

The Middle Age in Bengal begins from the Muslim rule. History requires certain
epoch-making changes to pass from one stage to another. The fact that the Muslim
conquest in Bengal not only brought political changes, but also made revolutionary
changes in the life of the people of this country in different fields including society,
religion, language, literature and art.
At the end of this chapter we will be able to:

© point out significant aspects of the establishment of Muslim rule in Bengal;

e identify the dynasty-wise rule in the Middle age and their political achievements;

e narrate Afghan rule in Bengal and their achievements;

® give an introduction to the Bara Bhuiyans in Bengal;

e analyse the political aspects of the rule of the Subadars and Nawabs

during the Mughal reign;
e learn the political history of the Muslim rulers in Bengal chronologically in the
Middle Age.

Beginning of Muslim rule in Bengal
Ikhtiyar Uddin Muhammad-bin-Bakhtiyar Khilji
At the beginning of the thirteenth century, the Turkish hero Ikhtiyar Uddin
Muhammad-bin-Bakhtiyar Khalji ended the Sena rule in north and North-west part of
Bengal and began the Muslim rule. In history he is mostly known as Bakhtiyar Khalji.
Very little is known about his lineage. He belonged to the Turkish race, the Khilji
family, and was a soldier by profession.
Bakhtiyar Khalji believed in his own ability. Leaving behind his beloved motherland,
he came to Ghazni in 1195A.D. in search of a living. Here he tried to get himself
enrolled in the army of Shihabuddin Ghori, but failed. Bakhtiyar must have failed to
impress the army chief because of his short stature, long arm and ill-flavored
appearance. Such physical features were regarded as inauspicious by the Turks. Being
unsuccessful in Ghazni, Bakhtiyar appeared at the court of Qutubuddin, the Sultan of
Delhi. He failed to get an employment this time too. Then he went to Badaun. The ruler
of that place, Malik Hizbaruddin appointmented him to his army on monthly salary S
basis. The ambitious Bakhtiyar,however, could be stay content to hold the post of a %

Political History of Bengal in the Middle Age (1204 A.D.-1757 A.D.) 65
soldier with so meagre a salary. He left Badaun within a short time and went to
Ajodhya. Under the ruler Husamuddin there he took up the task of supervision.

Being impressed with Bakhtiyar's courage and intelligence, Husamuddin awarded him
two rent-free Parganas to the south cost corner—Bhagbat and Viuly of the present
district of Mirzapur. Here Bakhtiyar found the key to his future prosperity. Bhagbat and
Viuly became his source of power. Gathering a few soldiers, Bakhtiyar began to raid
and plunder the small neighbored Hindu kingdoms. During this time the news of his
heroic deeds spread very rapidly. Many fortune-seeking Muslim soldiers joined his
group. So, the number of Bakhtiyar's soldiers increased. Thus continuing such raids in
the adjacent areas, he came to a castle surrounded by wall in the southern Bihar and
attacked it. His opposition could made little resistance. After conquering the castle, he
found all the people there with shaven head and the castle full of books. After an
enquiry, he came to know that it was a Buddhist monastery (Vihara). It was the Odanta
or Odantapuri Vihara. Since that time the Muslims called the place Bihar. It is known
as Bihar till today.

After the conquest of Bihar, Bakhtiyar called on Sultan Qutubuddin Aibek with lots of
tiches and jewels. Being honoured by the sultan he returned to Bihar. Procuring more
soldiers he attacked Navadwip or Nadia next year. That time the King of Bengal,
Laxsman Sena was staying at Nadia. Gour was his capital and Nadia was his second
capital. The conquest of Bihar by Bakhtiyar terrified the Sen kingdom very much. The
diviners, pundits and Brahmmins advised King Laxsman Sena to leave the capital.
They advised that because there was clear indication of the conquest of Bengal by the
Turkish army in their seriptures. Besides, the description of the conqueror given in the
scriptures strictly coincided with the physical appearance of Bakhtiyar. Despite this
King Lakhsman Sena did not leave Nadia. In order to enter Bengal from Bihar,
two mountain passes Teliagarh and Shikharigar were to be used. These two mountain
passes were well-protected. He did not take the common passage. Advancing through
the paths in the forest, Bakhtiyar's soldiers moved in smaller groups. Escaping the
attention of the enemy when Bakhtiyar got to the entrance of Nadia, he had only 17 or
18 cavaliers with him. How was it possible for Bakhtiar to conquer with so small
number of soldiers? It is said that he advanced with such swiftness that only 17 or 18
soldiers could follow him. The rest of the main army fell behind him.

It was noon when the king was busy at his lunch. The palace guards were relaxing and
the people were doing their daily chores. Bakhtiyar Khalji in the guise of a merchant
reached the entrance of the city. This small group of people suddenly whipped their
swords in front of the palace and killed the palace guards. This sudden attack raised a
hue and cry all around. Leaving the palace unprotected everybody ran away in fear of
death. Meanwhile, the second squad of Bakhtiyar penetrated inside of the city and the
third squad reached the archway. Then the whole city was almost under siege. The
Forma- 9, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

66 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
people were terrified and alarmed. In such a situation King Laxsman Sena got
disheartened. Finding no means to defend himself against the enemy's attack, he along
with his family secretly fled on bare foot through the back door and went by boat to
Bikrampur of Munshiganj district of East Bengal and took shelter there. Within a while,
the soldiers of Bakhtiyar who had fallen behind also arrived. Thus without any
hindrance Nadia and the adjacent areas came to the possession of the Muslims. The
historians have differing opinions relating to the exact date of Bakhtiyar's conquest of
Nadia. At present, however, 1204 A.D is accepted as the year of Nadia conquest.
After this, Bakhtiyar left Nadia and advanced towards Laxsmanabati (Gaur). Taking
possession of Laxsmanabati, he made it his capital. This Laxsmanabati came to be
known as Lakhnauti during the Muslim period. After conquering Gaur, Bakhtiyar
moved to the further east and established his own authority in Barendra or East Bengal.
It is to be mentioned here that Bakhtiyar became the head of an independent Kingdom
after the conquest of Nadia. But he could not establish his dominion in whole Bengal.
In East Bengal, the rule of Laxsman Sena was unaffected. After his death his
descendants ruled East Bengal some time more.
Two years after the conquest of Gaur or Lakhnauti, Bakhtiyar went out on Tibet
mission. This Tibet mission was the last military expedition of his life. But failing in
this mission he went back to Devkota. Here, he fell ill and reached in a dying state in
1206A.D. It is conjectured that he was killed by an Ameer (rich noble man) named Ali
Mardan.
The name of Ikhtiyr Uddin Muhammad-bin-Bakhtiyar Khalji is especially partinent in
the history of Muslim rule in Bengal. The establishment of first Muslim rule in this
country was due to his efforts. This rule lasted almost more than five hundred years and
a half (1204A.D.-1757 A.D.). He was not satisfied only conquering kingdom. He also
took proper steps to set up his administration in the conquered reigns. He has
significant roles in promoting Islam and Muslim culture. During his reign many
Madrshas, Muqtabs and Mosques were established.
History of Turkish rule in Bengal
Bakhtiyar Khalji initiated the Muslim rule in Bengal. The first phase of it was from
1204A.D. to 1338A.D .. It cannot be said that the rulers of this period were entirely
independent. Some of them were Bakhtiyar's co-warriors, Khalji lords. Again, some
were rulers from the Turkish dynasty. All of them were rulers of Bengal under the Delhi
Sultans. Later, many of them rebelled against Delhi and tried to be independent. Their
rebellion did not succeed at last due to the attacks by Delhi. This period of Muslim rule
was full of revolts and chaos. So, the historian Ziauddin Barani named Bangladesh as
‘Bulgakpur' which means City of Rebellion. 2
S
AQ

Political History of Bengal in the Middle Age (1204 A.D.-1757 A.D.) 67
After the death of Bakhtiyar Khalji, conflicts ensured among his co-warriors regarding
power. The names of his three co-warriors are known. They were Muhammad Shiran
Khalji, Ali Mardan Khalji and Husamuddin lwaj Khalji. Many thought that Ali Mardan
Khalji was the murderer of Bakhtiyar Khalji. For this reason, Khalji Ameers and
soldiers chose Muhammad Shiran Khalji as their leader. He was able to bring back
order to some extent. Ali Mardan Khalji was imprisoned. Later on, Ali Mardan fled
away and gained the co-operation of Qutubuddin, the sultan of Delhi. The reign of
Shiran Khalji lasted only one year. After this, Husamuddin Iwaj Khalji took the charge
as the ruler of Devkota in 1208A.D. Ali Mardan Khalji came back after two years with
of Delhi co-operation. Iwaj Khilji willingly handed over power to him. Ali Mardan
Khalji declared independence in 1210A.D. and changed his name to Alauddin Ali
Mardan Khalji. He was a very strict administrator. So, agitation against him escalated
high. The Khalji Maliks unitedly rebelled against him and he was killed by them.

Iwaj Khalji came to power for the second term. At this stage he adopted the new name
Ghiyasuddin Iwaj Khalji and ruled Bengal as an independent Sultan. He had been the
Sultan of Bengal almost 15 years from 1212 A.D. to 1227 A.D ..

Sultan Ghiyasuddin Iwaj Khalji
Sultan Ghiyasuddin Iwaj Khalji was undoubtedly the best among the Khalji Maliks. He
made efforts to strengthen and stabilize the Muslim kingdom of Bengal established by
Bakhtiyar. He transferred his capital from Devakot to Gaur or Lakhnauti for the ease of
administration. He built a fort named Basankote to strengthen the defence for the
capital. Lakhnauti, standing on a river had the advantage of trade and commerce.
Moreover, Iwaj Khalji perceived that the territory of the river oriented Bengal could not
be extended with only the cavalry. For this, a strong naval force was necessary. Naval
force was also needed to sustain the rule of Bengal. So, it can be concluded that of all
the Muslim rulers of Bengal, Iwaj Khalji laid the foundation of the naval force. Wide
and deep tranch was dug round the capital for its security. He dug many canals and built
bridges to save Lakhnauti and adjacent places from the yearly flood. He built roads so
that the soldiers could move and the commodity could be carried from one place to
another easily .The construction of highway not only facilitated the administration of
the kingdom and trade and commerce, but it was also like a blessing to the people
because it protected their house and corn-field from the yearly flood.

Gaiyasuddin Iwaj Khalji can be regarded as a good administrator for the above

mentioned activities. He also concentrated on the extension of his kingdom. The Hindu

Kings of the neighbouring kingdoms like Kamrup, Odisha, Banga (south-east Bengal)
o were compelled to send him tax. The Abbasi Caliph, Al Nasir recognized Gaiyasuddin
s Iwaj Khalji as a valid Sultan in a letter.

68 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
Iltutmish, the Sultan of Delhi, never liked the extension of the power of the muslim
kingdom in Lakhnau under Ghiyasuddin Iwaj Khalji. But at the beginning of his reign,
it was not possible for him to pay attention to Bengal as he had immediate dangers and
problems to solve. When those were gone in 1224 A.D., he paid attention to Bengal. In
1225 A.D. both armies of Iltutmish and Ghiyasuddin came accross each other near the
mountains of Munger or Shokreegoli, Iwaj proposed for a treaty and a treaty was
signed. Being pleased Iltutmish appointed Malik Alauddin Jani as the ruler of Bihar
and kept Iwaj Khalji as the ruler of Bengal. Then he went back to Delhi. But
immediately after the Sultan had returned to Delhi, Iwaj Khalji again declared
independence. He attacked Bihar and drove out its ruler Alauddin Jani. Coming back to
Lakhnauti, Iwaj Khalji could realize that Iltutmish would attack definitely Bengal
again. He stayed in the capital for about one year with preparation and waited for
counter attack. At this time the royal force of Delhi got engaged in managing rebellion
in Ajodhya. Iwaj Khalji thought that the Delhi soldiers were not in a position to attack
Bengal in such circumstances. So, he decided to attack East Bengal in that situation.
His capital Lakhnauti was so to say unprotected. Meanwhile, Sultan Iltutmish directed
his son Nasiruddin Mahmood to attack Lakhnauti. Taking the advantage of Iwaj
Khalji's absence, Nasiruddin Mahmood attacked Lakhnauti, the capital of Bengal.
Hearing this news Iwaj came back to the capital with a small member of soldiers. The
enemy soldiers had already occupied his Basankot Fort. Iwaj Khalji was defeated in the
battle and taken prisoner. Later he was killed. After his defeat and fall Bengal
completely came under the dominion of the Sultan of Delhi. Nasiruddin Mahmud was
appointed the ruler of Bengal.

Iwaj Khalji was a patronizer of art and literature. Under his patronization, the Zuma
mosque of Gaur and several other mosques were built. During his reign, many Muslim
Sufis and Saiyads from Central Asia took shelter in his court. These sufis and
distinguished people greatly co-operated in preaching Islam. Their presence and the
patronization of Iwaj Khalji made Lakhnauti a centre of Muslim education and culture.
Since the death of Iwaj Khalji to 1287 A.D., 60 years, Bengal remained a province
under the Muslim rulers of Delhi. During this time fifteen rulers ruled Bengal. Ten of
them were slaves. The slaves were called 'Mamluk'. For this reason, the sixty years
reign in Bengal is regarded as rule of the slave or 'Mamluk rule' by many people. But
all these fifteen rulers belonged to the Turkish race. This period can be best termed as
‘Turkish Age’. During the Turkish reign there was internal trouble in Delhi. As a result,
it was not possible for the Sultans to concentrate on the distant provinces like Bengal.
So, the Turkish rulers of Bengal could rule pretty independently. The first Turkish
ruler was Nasiruddin Mahmood. He was the son of Iltutmish, the Sultan of Delhi. After 2
the death of Sultan Iltutmish in 1236A.D., there was disturbance in Delhi. Taking &

Political History of Bengal in the Middle Age (1204 A.D.-1757 A.D.) 69
advantage of this situation Aor Khan Aibeq seized power in Lakhnauti. But just after
some time he had a defeat at the hands of the ruler of Bihar, Tughral Tughan
Khan.Tughan Khan ruled Bengal for 9 years up to 1245A.D .. After this, Omar Khan
was in power in Lakhnauti only for two years.
Jalaluddin Masud Jani ruled Bengal from 1247 A.D. to 1251 A.D. He was able to bring
peace in Lakhnauti. The next ruler was Malik Ikhtiar Uddin Uzbak, the ruler of Ajod-
hya. He made territorial extension of his kingdom at the border areas, Gathering suffi-
cient strength Masud Jani assumed the title 'Mughisuddin' in 1255 A.D. and declared
independence. He was murdered in 1257 A.D.
The next two years Malik Uzzauddin Uzbak ruled Lakhnauti independently. Later in
1269, the ruler of Kara province, Tajuddin Arsalan Khan came to the throne of
Lakhnauti. After Arasalan Khan, Bengal was ruled by Tatar Khan. Although he showed
loyalty to Delhi, the relation of Bengal with Delhi was cut off within a few years. Tatar
Khan was followed by Sher Khan who was in power in Bengal for a short period of
time.
The next ruler Tughril was the best among the Mamluk Turks. He took possession of
quite several regions of Dhaka and Faridpur beside North and West Bengal. He built a
fort named Narkilla near Sonargaon. The fort was known to the common people as
Tughril's Kella. Tughril declared independence assuming the title 'Mughisuddin’. As a
result, the Sultan of Delhi, Balban made a violent attack on Tughril. Tughril was
defeated and killed by Balban in 1281 A.D. As the rulers used to revolt, this time
Balban appointed his son Bughra khan the Governor of Bengal. The next six years
Bengal was under Delhi. In 1287 A.D., subsequent to the death of Balban, Bughra
Khan had kept ruling Bengal independently. During this time, the son of Bughra Khan,
Kaikobad was the Sultan of Delhi.
Bughra Khan got disheratened at the news of the death of Kaikobad. Setting his other
son Rukanuddin Kaikaus to the throne of Bengal, he himself pulled out of the situation.
Kaikaus ruled Bengal for ten years (1291 A.D.-1300 A.D). As he had no son, the next
tuler was Malik Firuz ltgin. As the Sultan he adopted the new name 'Sultan
Shamsuddin Firuz Shan’. After the death of Firuz Shah, his son Bahadur Shah succeded
to the throne. Just after a short time, he was defeated and captured by the Sultan of
Delhi Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq. From that time to 1338 A.D., Bengal was under Delhi.

x

&

70 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
History of Independent Sultanate rule in Bengal
The Sultans of Delhi could not keep Bengal under their control from 1338 A.D to 1538
A.D. In the early years the army of the Sultans of Delhi made attacks. They tried to
bring Bengal to their own possession. Being unsuccessful, they gave up at last. So, the
Sultans of Bengal succeeded in ruling Bengal with freedom and ease. Although the
beginning of independence in Bengal was made by Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah, the
Sultans of the Illiyas Shahi dynasty first brought stability to Bengal.
Independent Sultanate Reign (1338A.D.-1538A.D.)
The ruler of Sonarga Bahram Khan died in 1338. The keeper of Bahram Khan's
armourer Fakhrah, was a royal employee. He declared independence after his master's
death and came to the throne of Sonarga with the name ‘Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah’.
Thus began the independent Sultanate period in Bengal. During this time
Muhammad-bin-Tughlak of Delhi had no way to pay attention to the far-off Bengal. As
a result, though the beginning of independence was in Sonarga, the independent
regions got extended more and more. No one could take away this independence in the
next two hundred years.
The rulers of Delhi did not look favorably on the declaration of independence by
Fakhruddin Kader Khan, the ruler of Lakhnauti and Izzauddin, the ruler of Satgaon,
jointly attacked Sonarga. But they did not succeed. Kadar Khan was defeated and killed
by the army of Fakhruddin.
Fakhruddin, as an independent Sultan, issued coin after his own name. According to the
date engraved on his coin, it can be assumed that he ruled Sonarga from 1338 A.D. to
1349 A.D. Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah extended his territory to some extent towards the
South-east. It was he who conquered Chittagong first. It is known that Fakhruddin
Mubarak Shah constructed a highway from Chandpur to Chittagong. Coins with the
name of Ikhtiyar Uddin Gazi Shah engraved on them were issued from Sonarga mint.
Time up to 1352 A.D. is found on the coins with the name of Gazi Shah, So it is
understood that Fakruddin' s son Gazi Shah succeeded to the throne as the independent
Sultan of Sonarga after his father's death and ruled about three years till 1352A.D.

Individual work

1. Point out the causes of conflict between Ghiyasuddin Iwaj Khalji and the

Sultan of Delhi, Iltutmish.
2. Who established the independent Sultanate of Bengal? When and how did he do it?|
Ss
N

Political History of Bengal in the Middle Age (1204 A.D.-1757 A.D.) 71
Illiyas Shahi Dynasty
When Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah was the independent Sultan in Sonarga, Ali Mubarak,
the commander-in-chief usurped the throne of Lakhnauti. Coming to the throne, he
took the title 'Alauddin Ali Shah’. He also established an independent kingdom in
Lakhnauti. Later he shifted his capital to Pandua (Firozabad). Ali Shah had been in
power till 1342 A.D. Hazi Illiyas was his 'Dudhbhai' (a person considered someone's
brother because he was breast fed by his mother). He defeated and killed Ali Shah and
established a dynasty in Bengal. The name of this dynasty is Illiyas Shahi dynasty.
Subsequently, the descendants of Illiyas Shah ruled Bengal for a long time. Hindu
kingdom flourished in the mid period for some time.
Illiyas Shah became the head of North and North-west Bengal in 1342 A.D. through
taking possession of the throne of Firozabad. Sonarga and Satgaon were still then
beyond his rule. Illiyas Shah had the dream to be the ruler of the whole of Bengal. He
first paid attention to West Bengal. Satgaon came under his control before 1346 A.D..
He attacked Nepal in 1350 A.D. and obtained huge treasure. During this time, he
conquered some part of Trihut or North Bihar and took possession of a lot of riches and
jewels. Odisha also came to his dominion. But the most significant success of Iliyas
Shah was his taking possession of East Bengal.
Ikhtiyar Uddin Gazi Shah was defeated by Illiyas Shah in Sonarga in 1352 A.D. As
Sonarga was occupied, the whole Bengal was conquered. Therefore, though
Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah had the main role for the birth of independent Bengal, it was
Illiyas Shah who established the actual independence in 1352 A.D .. Illiyas Shah also
conquered some parts outside Bengal, namely Champaron, Gorakhsapur and Kashi. He
conquered some part of Kamrupa as well. The bottom line is that his territory extended
from Assam to Varanasi. Cutting off the tie with Delhi, Illiyas Shah introduced 'Khutba
Path’ (religious sermon) and new coins with his own name. This made Sultan Firuz
Shah Tughlak much infuriated.
At the beginning the Sultan of Delhi did not accept this liberty of Bengal. Sultan Firuz
Shah Tughlak led a war against Illiyas Shah from 1353 A.D. to 1354 A.D. His effort
was directed to subjugate Bengal to Delhi. But he failed. Illiyas Shah took shelter in the
impenetrable Ekdala fort. On the other hand, there was little possibility of victory in the
rainy season. So, Firuz Shah accepted the independence of Bengal through treaty and
established friendly relation with Illiyas Shah. Then he returned to Delhi.
As a ruler Illiyas Shah was sagacious and popular. There was peace and discipline
during his reign. There was amity between the Hindus and the Muslims. He founded a
city named Hajipur. It was he who constructed a huge 'hammakhana' (kind of
washroom) in Firuzabad. Architecture and cultural activities got much patronization
S during this period. He was a devoted Muslim. He had great respect for religious
‘devotees like 'Fakirs' and 'dervishes'.

72 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
Although Illiyas Shah occupied Bengal as the ruler of Lakhnauti, he established a
greater Bengal joining the two lands. Since this time, all the inhabitants of Bengal came
to be known as Bangali. Illiyas Shah recived the titles 'Shah-i-Bangala’ and’
Shah-i-Bangaleean’.
Individual work: Evaluate Sultan Shamsuddin Iliyas Shah as the founder of Bengalee
nationalism.
After the death of Shamsuddin IIliyas Shah, his son Sikandar Shah (1358 A.D.-1393
A.D.) came to the throne of Bengal. He was an efficient and powerful ruler like his
father. Sultan of Delhi Firoz Shah again attacked Bengal from 1358 A.D. to 1360 A.D.
But Firoz Shah Tughlak failed this time as wall. Sikandar Shah had also to take
shelter in the Ekdala fort like his father. Conflict was resolved through treaty between
the two sides. According to the conditions of the treaty, Zafar Khan was given the
administrative power in Sonarga. But Zafar Khan refused this post. He also returned to
Delhi with Firoz Shah Tughlaq. The authority of Sikandar Shah in Sonarga and
Lakhanti remained as it was before. The independent sultanate rule which Illiyas Shah
had established was set on a stronger footing by Sikandar Shah.
After the death of Sultan Sikandar Shah, his son Ghiyasuddin assumed the title ‘Azam
Shah! and succeeded to the throne (1393A.D.-1411A.D.). Illiyas Shah and Sikandar
Shah showed their efficiency in warfare and defending independence. But Ghiyasuddin
Azam Shah's achievements were different. He gained fame for his pleasing personality
liked by his subjects. During his reign, he led an abortive attack on Asam. He
established a friendly relation with the king of Jainpur, Khan Jahan. The Chinese
Emperor Ianglo sent delegates to his durbar (court). In return he also sent to the
Chinese Emperor rich gifts as a token of regards. The main point is that although Azam
Shah did not engage himself in any war, he was able to sustain the vast kingdom built
by his father and grandfather. Sultan Ghiyasuddin Azam Shah was a righteous judge
too. A brilliant story about his justice has been narrated in the book 'Riaz-us-Salatin'.
Sultan Ghiyasuddin Azam was well-reputed as a great scholar. He admired and
respected the poets and writers. He was fond of poetry and he himself composed poems
in Persian language. He used to communicate through letters with the famous Persian
poet Hafiz.
Ghiyasuddin Azam Shah has a special place in the history of Bengal for developing
Muslim education and culture and the patronization of Bengali literature. It is during
his reign that the first Muslim Bengali poet Shah Muhammad Sageer composed a long
poem 'Yusuf-Julekha’. During the reign of Azam Shah, another famous sufeee devotee
Nur Qutub-ul-Alam set his abode in Pandua. As a result, Pandua had the good
reputation to be the centre of Islamic education and culture in India. The Sultan also 8
8

Political History of Bengal in the Middle Age (1204 A.D.-1757 A.D.) 73
spent money to build mosques and madrasas in Mecca and Medina. Despite some
faults and failures in certain fields, Ghiyasuddin Azam Shah was one of the best
Sultans of Bengal and he was the last Sultan of Illiyas Shah dynasty. Since his death,
the fall of this dynasty began.

King Ganesh and the Habshi Reign

It is generally said that the two hundred years (1338 A.D.-1538 A.D.) is the period of
independent reign of the Muslim Sultans. Yet, sometime in the mid part of this two
hundred years there was a little break. After the death of Ghiyasuddin Azam Shah, his
son Saifuddin Hamza Shah came to the throne. But that time there was conspiracy
among the aristocrats about seizing power. Having ruled one year, he was murdered by
his slave Shihabuddin in 1412 A.D. Being the Sultan, Shaihabuddin adopted the name
‘Shihabuddin Byazid Shah’; But after two years (1414 A.D.-1415 A.D.) he was killed
by some other conspirators. Taking the advantage of this situation, the Hindu
aristocratic king Ganesh seized the power in Bengal.

The Sultans of Bengal appointed the Hindus to most of the high posts. King Ganesh too
was a high-ranking courtier of Azam Shah. It is known that Ganesh was at first a king
of Vatulia region in Dinajpur. He got an employment in the court of the Sultan. Just
after having the employment, he started to gather strength secretly. His desire was to
turn out the Muslims and establish the Hindus in power. With this very aim he came to
power uprooting the Illiyas Shahi dynasty. Ganesh killed many sufee devotees. The
leader of the Muslim devotees Nur Qutub-ul-Alam appealed to the Sultan of Jainpur,
Ibrahim Sarki to protect the Muslims. As Ibrahim Sarki came to Bengal equipped with
army, Ganesh was terrified. At last he made a compromise with the Muslim saint Nur
Qutub-ul-Alam. As per the conditions, Ganesh converted his son Jadu into Muslim and
left the throne of Bengal to his son. After Jadu had become a Muslim, his name was
changed to Jalaluddin Mahmud. Sultan Ibrahim Sharki set Jalaluddin to the throne of
Bengal and returned to his own land- Jaunapur.

Ganesh came to the throne twice. First time he was in power only for a few months. In
the middle of 1415A.D. Ibrahim Sharki placed Jalaluddin Mahmud Shah to the throne.
As Ibrahim Sharki returned, Ganesh felt secured. Through many rites and rituals, he
again converted his son to Hinduism. Ganesh died in 1418A.D. After the death of king
Ganesh, the Hindu courtiers placed Mahendre Dev, another son of Ganesh, to the
throne of Bengal. But shortly Jalaluddin ousted Mahendradeva and came to the throne
for the second time. At this stage he was uninterruptedly in power till 1431. During the
time of this very competent administrator, the territory of Bengal had a great extension.
The whole Bengal, parts of Tripura and south Bihar, except Arakan were within his
kingdom at least for some time. Coins with his name were issued from various mints
Forma- 9, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

74 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
of his kingdom. He shifted his capital from Pandua to Gaur. After the death of
Jalaluddin Mahumud Shah, his eldest son Shamsuddin Ahmad Shah succeded to the
throne. Falling a victim to the plot of the courtiers, he was murdered by the salves Sadi
Khan and Nasir Khan. Thus, the reign of king Ganesh and his descendants came to an
end.

Individual work

1. Prove the fact that Sultan Ghiyasuddin Azam Shah was a patronizer of education

and culture.

2. Analyse the causes of the rise of King Ganesh.
Rule of the Laler Illiyas Shahi Dynasty
After the death of Shamsuddin Ahamad Shah, his murderer, a slave Nasir Khan came
to the throne of Bengal. But the aristocrats who instigated Nasir Khan to kill Ahmad
Shah, did not kindly take to his ascending the throne. Probably the authority of a slave
was humiliating to them. So they unitedly killed Nasir Khan.
After the death of Nasir Khan, the throne of Gaur remained vacant for some time.
Ahmad Shad had no son. Then the aristocrats placed a descendant of Illiyas Shah
named Mahmud in 1452A.D. to the throne of Gaur. He is known as Nasiruddin
Mahmud Shah in history. Thus the descendants again began an independent rule in
Bengal. So this period is called 'Later Iliyas Shahi dynasty’. Nasiruddin was a skilled
commander-in-chief and just ruler. During the reign of Nasiruddin Mahmud, Jessore
and Khulna areas were included in the Muslim kingdom. West Bengal, East Bengal,
North Bengal and parts of Bihar were within his kingdom. He also issued coins with his
own name.
Nasiruddin Mahmud Shah died in 1459 A.D., Then his son Rukanuddin Barbak Shah
succeeded to the throne of Bengal. Since his father's reign, Barbak Shah proved himself
an efficient ruler. That time he was the ruler of Satgaon. During his reign, the territory
of Bengal got extended. The northern part of the Ganges was within his territory.
During his reign. Bhagalpur came under Muslim rule. There was trouble about the
authority of Chittagong. It was under the Arakan kingdom towards the beginning of
Barbak Shah's reign. But Barbak Shah restored it towards the end. Jessore and Khulna
were under his authority too. He also extended his territory towards the south.
It was Barbak Shah who first gathered a lot of Abyssinian slaves (Habshi slaves) and
appointed them to military posts and important posts in the palace. The number of
appointed slaves were eight thousands. Probably he made a group of these Habshis in
order to form his own party. But this step brought jeopardy for the future the 2
Kingdom. BS

Political History of Bengal in the Middle Age (1204 A.D.-1757 A.D.) 75
Sultan Rukanuddin Barbak Shah was a great scholar. In many stone inscriptions
‘Al-Fazil' and 'Al-Kamil' are used. Those proved that Barbak Shah attained the highest
appellation in the field of education. He was not only a scholar, but also a patron of
literature. He patronized the learned and the scholars of both the Hindus and the
Muslims. That he was a king of liberal and non-communial outlook is proved by the
fact that he patronized the Hindu poets and scholars and appointed many Hindus to the
high posts of the royal court. In this regard, a ruler of liberal mind like Barbak Shah is
rare not only in the history of Bengal, but also of India.
Barbak Shah was a true lover of beauty. It was Barbak Shah who construted the
massive and beautiful arch known as 'Dakhil Darwaza' in Gaur. At this times two
mosques were built in Mirzagonj of Chittagong and Patuakhali districts. In the light of
these activities, Barbak Shah can be considered the best among the Sultans of Bengal.
Barbak Shah passed away in 1474 A.D. Then his son Shamsuddin Abu Muzaffar Yusuf
Shah (1474 A.D.-1481 A.D.) became the Sultan of Bengal. The vast kingdom built by
his father and grandfather was unimpaired during his time. His territory was extended
up to Odisha to the West and Sylhet to the east.
The death of Yusuf Shah was followed by his son Sikandar Shah to the throne. As he
fell ill, he was dismissed. Barbak Shah's younger brother Hussain took on the title
‘Jalauddin Fateh Shah’ and came to the throne (1481 A.D.-1487 A.D.). He issued coins
in his own name. But this time, there was trouble in the royal court. The Habshi slaves
became very powerful at this time. Jalauddin Fateh Shah tried to curb their strength.
This made all the Habshi slaves begin conspiracies against the Sultan unitedly. Sultan
Shahjada was the head of the palace guards. Through temptation, the slaves persuaded
Sultan Shahzada and his subordinate pikes to join their group. Shahzada killed
Fateh Shah inside the palace. With the murder of Fateh Shah, the reign of Illiyas Shahi
dynasty in Bengal came to an end. Thus the reign of the Habshi began in Bengal.
Individual Work: Find out the steps taken by Sultan Rukanuddin Barbak Shah
that was beneficial to his kingdom.
Habshi Rule
The Habshi rule in Bengal lasted only six years (1487A.D.-1493 A.D.). The history of
this country during this period abounds with wrongs, injustice, revolt, conspiracy and
disappointment. All the three of the four Habshi Sultans of this period were murdered.
Habshi leader Sultan Shahzada adopted the title 'Barbak Shah' and began to rule
Bengal first. But within a few months, he was killed by Habshi commander-in-chief
Malik Anctil. Malik Andil assumed the title 'Saifuddin Firuz Shah’ and came to the
= throne. Only his three years reign (1487A.D.-1490 A.D.) was a little pre-eminent in
‘history.

76 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
His death was followed by Nasiruddin Mahmud Shah II. But after a short rule (1490
A.D.-1491 A.D.), he was killed. A Habshi leader killed him and came to the throne with
the name 'Shamsuddin Muzaffar Shah' (1491 A.D.-1493 A.D.). He was notorious as a
tyrant and killer. Consequently, the aristocrats of Gaur revolted against Muzaffar Shah.
Sayed Hossain, an adviser to Muzaffar Shah joined the rebels. At last Muzaffar Shah
was killed. With his death, the Habshi rule in Bengal ended.
Hussain Shahi Dynasty
Getting rid of the Habshi rule, Syed Hussain came to the throne of Bengal. As he
became the Sultan, he took the title ‘Alauddin Hussain Shah’. Thus the rule of a new
dynasty named "Hussain Shahi dynasty’ began in Bengal. Of the reigns of the
independent Sultans of Bengal, Hussain Shahi reign (1493 A.D.-1538 A.D.) was the
most glorious period.
Sultan Alauddin Hussain Shah was the best Sultan of the Hussain Shahi period. He
belonged to the Sayed family of Arabia. He came from Mecca to Bengal with his father
Sayed Ashraf-al-Hussain and brother Yusuf. He first set his adobe in the village
Chandpara of Rahr. Later, Hussain Shah went to the capital Gaur and got employment
under Muzaffar Shah. Then he became an adviser. Thus, he came to power in Bengal.
There was anarchy and chaos in the kingdom since Alauddin Hussain Shah ascended
the throne. After taking up the responsibility of the kingdom, he engaged himself in
bringing peace and discipline. There was anarchy in the country due to the
maladministration of the Habsli community. They had the main role in the murder of
every Sultan. Coming to the throne, Hussain Shah gave directions to the Habshis to
stop such activities. But as they disobeyed his order, he gave command to kill them.
This severe measure taken by Hussain Shah made twelve thousand Habshis to lose
their lives. The rest of the Habshis were driven out of the kingdom. The next step of
Alauddin Hussain Shah was to diminish the power of the bodyguard pikes. This
regiment of pikes played the most vital role in all the conspiracies of the palace.
Hussain Shah dissolved the regiment of the pikes. In their place, he formed a new
regiment of guards consisting of aristocratic Hindus and Muslims.
Alauddin Hussain Shah tried to make politics and social systems free from the Habshi
influence for the welfare of the kingdom. He also strengthened the administration by
shifting the capital to a place near Gaur. Of all the Sultans of Bengal only he established
his capital in a place other than in Pandua and Gaur. Severe measures were taken to
punish the aristocrats and courtiers who tried to create anarchy during the Habshi rule.
All the oppressive servants with low birth were dismissed. On the other hand, he
appointed the Sayeds, Mongols, Afghans and Hindus to different important and high
posts of the administration. These measures brought within a short time peace and
discipline in the country. -
S
N

Political History of Bengal in the Middle Age (1204 A.D.-1757 A.D.) 77
During the time of Alauddin Hussain Shah, the boundary of Bengal got maximum
extension. He conquered Kamrupa and Kamta. Some parts of Odisha and Tripura also
came to his possession and so came some parts of South Bihar. He drove out the
Arakanese from Chittagong. At this time he resisted the attack on Bengal made by the
Sultan of Delhi, Sikandar Lodi. Only in Assam mission, he was unsuccessful. Hussain
Shah succeeded in ensuring all kinds of security in his vast kingdom. He ruled long
twenty six years (1493 A.D.-1519 A.D.). with success and died in 1519 A.D.
Alauddin Hussain Shah was a good administrator and a far-sighted politician. He
showed great enthusiasm, sincerity and prudence in reshaping his administrative
system and public welfare. He realized that conquering kingdom is not the final thing
for the king, but a time suiting and justice-based =, ,
administrative system was essential. He was impartial : a ee A
in respect of race and religion in his administration and = Cc OV"
protection of his subjects. His object was to establisha [| ~~ 4 a, —— =
well-organized, impeccable and benevolent ; yr 2) a
administration by promoting a loving and friendly ; | 4 ¥\ i al
relation between the Hindus and the Muslims. For this | |) a» 4
reason, despite being a conservative Sunni, he | nl \ #/}i
appointed different Hindus to administrative posts V TIN EFPALS
according to their merit. He also awarded different | 6 7 WG .
appellations to the Hindus to encourage them. This | te Vie Pg
magnanimity of Hussain Shah to the Hindus was | = as— Z
effective for good administration and helped the Sreechaitanya
Bengalis to build their own tradition. It is also a testimony to his political
farsightedness. This religious broadmindedness of Hussain Shah also inspired his
descendants. During his peaceful reign, his subjects lived in peace and happiness.
The effort of Hussain Shah to create a relation of amity between the Hindus and the
Muslims also made an impact on the social life of the people of that time. During his
time appeared Sreechaitanya the founder of the ‘Vaishnava religion’. Hussain Shah
showed a liberal attitude to him and directed his men to co-operate with him. Worship
on the Sattyapir (true saint) was another significant incident of the Hussain Shah's
reign. Worship of the Sattyapir was a brilliant effort at the establishment of amity
between the Hindus and the Muslims.
The development and manifestation of Bengali literature had made Hussain Shah's
reign immortal. His generous patronization undoubtedly increased the splendor of
Bengli literature. Hussain Shah gave the talented poets and authors rewards in order to
S encourage them. Of the famous poets and writers Rup Goshwami, Sanatan Goshwami,

78 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
Maladhar Basu, Bijoygupta, Bipradas, Paragal Khan and Yashoraj Khan are
mentionworthty. They wrote numerous books with the patronization of Hussain Shah.
Their relentless efforts in literature have enriched the history of Bengal, During this
time Maladhar Basu translated 'Shreemadvagabata' and ‘Purana’ and Parameshwar
"‘Mahavarata' into Bengli. Alauddin Hussain Shah was also a generous patronizer of
Arabic and Persian languages.

Hussain Shah was a devoted Muslim. He had infinite sincerity and devotion to his own
religion and the Sufee devotees. A huge number of mosques were built in different
places of the country. Of these mosques, 'Choto Sona Mosjid' of Gaur is notable. Many
"Khankashs' and Madrashas were built in the kingdom for the development of Islamic
culture. Hussain Shah spent a lot of money for the preservation of the shrine of the
Muslim saint Qutub-ul-Alam of Pandua. He constructed a citadel and an arch in Gaur,
a school and a bridge in Maladaha. These mosques, madrasas, citadel, arch bear
testimony to Hussain Shah's love for architecture. During his twenty six years reign,
knowledge and science and arts had astonishing development in Bengal. For this
reason, his reign is called the 'Golden Era’ in the history of Muslim rule in Bengal.
After the death of Alauddin Hussain Shah, his eldest son Nusrat Shah, adopted the title
‘Nasiruddin Abul Muzaffar Nusrat Shah' (1519 A.D.-1532 A.D.) and came to the throne
of Bengal. Being impressed with his efficiency, Hussain Shah during his own reign
handed over some powers to Nusrat Shah. Coming to the throne he was able to show
skills like his father. This time, the whole Bihar was under his dominion. During his
time the Mughal empire was established in India. The first Mughal Emperor Babar sent
troops for expedition to Bengal. At first Nusrat Shah made friendly relation with
Babar. Later when there was war, he saved the throne of Bengal by making treaty.
Nusrat Shah was killed by some miscreants in 153 1A.D.

Sultan Nusrat Shah was a noteworthy ruler of his time. He was patient and kind to his
people. He dug wells and ponds in many places of his kingdom to remove the water
problem of his subjects. The 'Mitha Pukur' (sweet pond) bears the hallmark of the
achievement till today. The humane qualities of Nusrat Shah made him popular to his
subjects. The Hindus also received justice in his kingdom. The amity between the
Hindus and the Muslims was a characteristic of this time. In this regard, he kept his
father's achievement unfaded.

Many of the architectural work during Nusrat Shah's reign show his enthusiasm and
patronization in the fields of art and culture. He constructed a platform in a cell of the
farmous 'Kadam Rasul' building of Gaur. A black marble altar with artistic design and
the footprint of Hazrat Muhammad (sm) was set on it. The famous "Bara Sona Masjid’
or 'Baraduari Masjid' was a work of his time. He constructed two mosques in
Mongolkota city of Burdwan district and in a place named Bagha in Rajshahi. The ,.
foundation of the glorious shrine of the great devotee Makhdum Akhi Sirajuddin in S
Sadullapur is another example of his great achievements.

Political History of Bengal in the Middle Age (1204 A.D.-1757 A.D.) 79
The great poet Parameshwar translated part of Mahavarata into Bengali following the
orders of Nusrat Shah. During his reign, Shreekar Nandi translated into Bengali
Ashwamedha chapter of Mahavarat. Shreedhar also translated Mahavarata into
Bengali. Nusrat Shah also set up libraries in different parts of the country to expand
knowledge and learning.
The next Sultan of Bengal was Alauddin Firuz Shah, son of Nusrat Shah. He had been
in power for about one year. Since the time of Nusrat Shah, Bengal had conflict with
the kingdom of Ahoma. It continued in the time of Firuz Shah. Since the time of Nustat
Shah, the fall of the independent Sultanate began. The descendants of Nusrat Shah were
weak. His younger brother Ghiyasuddin Mahmud Shah killed his brother's son Firuz
Shah in 1533 A.D. and ascended the throne. But this brought no change to the situation.
Rather the decay which began in the kingdom of Nusrat Shah, during his reign was
rounded off during the reign of Mahmud Shah. The significant incident of his five years
tule was his conflict with the Afghan leader Sher Shah Shur. At last when Sher Shah
took Bengal in 1538 A.D., the independent sultanate era of two hundred years in
Bengal came to an end.
Individual work: Ascertain the truth of the statement that the liberal attitude of
Alauddin Hussain Shah to his administrative policies was beneficial to his country.
Group work: Make a list of works for public welfare and the works of architectur
during the reign of Sultan Nusrat Shah.
Afghan Rule and the Bara Bhiuyans (1538 A.D.-1576 A.D.)
As the independent Sultanate era in Bengal came to an end, foreign powers gradually
grabbed up Bengal. The Mughal emperor Humayun established his authority in Bengal
for some time. But at last he had to accept the defeat at the hands of the Afghan leader
Sher Shah. Bengal and Bihar straightaway came to the authority of the Afghans. The
two sects of the Afghans, namely Shur Afghan and Karrani Afghan ruled Bengal for
quite some time. At last the Mughal Emperor Akbar snatched away the power of
Bengal from the Afgans. Although the Mughals occupied the capital, they failed to
establish actual power inside Bengal. During this time there were many powerful
independent Zamidars in Bengal. These Zamidars Known as ‘Baro Bhuiyans' could not
accept the Mughal authority. During the time of Emperor Akbar, the Mughal Subadars
tried to suppress these Zamndars but failed. The 'Baro Bhuiyans' were suppressed at the
time of Jahangir.
The Afghan Rule
Mughal Emperor Babar and his son Humayun tried to bring Bengal under the Mughal
x authority since the later part of the Hussain Shahi period. But the Mughals could not
® attain this object at the beginning because of the Afghans. Emperor Humayun got

80 History of Bangladesh & World Civilizaion
involved in a war with the afghan leader Sher Khan Shur. Hasan Khan, father of Sher
Khan, was a fief-holder in Sasaram area of Bihar. After his father's death he got
appointed as a fief-holder or Jaigidar. At this time the fief-holder Jalal Khan of Bihar
took the guardianship of minor Sher Khan.

Sher Khan had the dream to be the head of whole India. So, he secretly kept increasing
his strength. With this aim in view, Sher Khan took possession of the strong fort of
Chunar and Bihar. In 1537 A.D. he attacked Gaur, the capital of Bengal twice. This
time the Mughal Emperor Humayun became alert. He chased Sher Khan and captured
Gaur, the capital of Bengal. Being charmed with the wonderful palace and the natural
beauty of Gaur, Hamayun named it 'Jannatbad'. The Emperor engaged himself in
amusement in Gaur for six months. In these circumstances, Sher Khan kept on
increassing his strength. A message from Delhi informed him that Humayun's
step-brother Hindal was plotting to occupy the throne. Having received this message,
Humayun started for Delhi. Sher Khan utilized this opportunity. He lay in waits in
Chausa near Buxar. As Humayun reached this place near the Ganges, Sher Khan
attacked on him. The unprepared Humayun was defeated (1539 A.D.)

Defeating The Mughal Emperor Humayum, Sher Khan took on the title 'Sher Shah’. He
declared himself the independent Sultan of Bihar. Then he paid attention to Bengal. In
1540 A.D. he defeated the Mughal ruler Ali Kuli and occupied Bengal. This year he
finally defeated Humayun in the battle of Bilgram near Kanauj and occupied the throne
of Delhi. Thus after a long time, Begnal was again under the rule of Delhi. The empire
of Sher Shah included the whole Bengal upto Chittagong and Sylhet. As Sher Shah
belonged to the Shur dynasty, the rule of Bengal at this time was the rule of Shur
Afghan dynasty.

After the death of Sher Shah, his son Jalal Khan adopted the name ‘Islam Khan' and
succeeded to the throne of Delhi. He ruled eight years (1545 A.D.-1553 A.D.). But after
the death of Islam Khan, his minor son Firoz Khan came to the throne and immediately
there was grouping in the Shur dynasty. The nephew of Sher Khan, Mubariz Khan
killed Firoz Khan and adopted the name, 'Muhammad Adil' and came to the throne of
Delhi.

Bengal at this time was not detached from the political events of the Indian
subcontinent. So, just after the death of Islam Khan, the Afghan ruler of Bengal,
Muhammad Khan Shur declared independence. He assumed the title "Muhammad Shah
Shur’. Since this time Bengal was independent for the next twenty years. In order to
extend territory in North India, Muhammad Shah Shur engaged himself in a contest
with Adil Shah Shur. Conquering Jaunapur, he advanced towards Agra. But at the final ,,
stage, he was defeated and killed. 3

Political History of Bengal in the Middle Age (1204 A.D.-1757 A.D.) 81
As Muhammad Shah Shur was killed, the emperor of Delhi, Adil Shah appointed
Shahbaz Khan the ruler of Bengal. Muhammad Shah's son Khizir Khan was staying at
Alahabad that time. Immediately after hearing the news of his father's death, he adopt-
ed the title 'Giayasuddin Bahadur Shah' and declared himself the independent Sultan of
Bengal. After a few days, he defeated Shahbaz Khan and ascended to the throne of
Bengal.

During this time, the political situation in Delhi become much complicated. Exploiting
the weakness of Sher Shah's descendants, Sultan Humayun restored his own kingdom.
But though he established his authority in Delhi, he got no chance to do the same in
Bengal. After the death of Humayun, his son Akbar succeeded to the throne of Delhi
and advanced to suppress the Afghan leaders of the Shur dynasty one by one. In the
second battle of Panipath (1556 A.D.), Himu, the Commander in-chief of Adil Shah,
was defeated and killed by the Mughal soldiers. Adil Shah was much debilitated by
this. Then he fled towards Bengal. On the way, he was defeated and killed by Sultan
Ghiyasuddin Bahadur Shah in Fatehpur near Surajgar (1557 A.D.).

Afghan Sultan Ghiyasuddin Bahadur Shah, conqueror of Bengal, when advanced
towards Jaunapur, Mughal commander Khan-i-Zaman barred his movement. The
diplomatic Bahadur Shah made alliance with Khan-i-Zaman and returned to Bengal.
After this, he did not make any expedition outside Bengal. He died in 1560 A.D.

After the death of Ghiyasuddin Bahadur Shah, his brother Jalaluddin Shur took the
tittle ‘Ghiyasuddin II' and succeeded to the throne of Bengal. Like his brother, he also
maintained friendly relation with the Mughal. As he breathed his last in 1563 A.D., his
only son ascended the throne of Bengal. But his name could not be known. After he
tuled for only three months, an Afghan leader named Ghiyasuddin III killed him and
came to the throne of Bengal. But he could not rule long either. Taz Khan, the king of
the Karrani dynasty killed Ghiyasuddin and ascended to the throne of Bengal.

Taz Khan Karrani and Sulayman Shah Karrani were the commander of Sher Khan. Due
to praiseworthy contributions in the battle of Kanauj, Sher Shah gave them rent-free
land Jaigeer in South Bihar. During the reign of Islam Khan, Taz Khan Karrani showed
much efficiency as the commander-in-chief and diplomatic adviser. During the time of
Firuz, the minor son and successor of Islam Shah, Taz Khan was appointed the Wazir.
Killing Firuz, his maternal uncle Muhammad Adil Shur came to the throne. At this
time, Taz Khan Karrani fled away and with the help of his brothers he established his
dominion in South Bihar. In 1557 A.D. Taz Khan Karrani merely acknowledged loyalty
to the Sultan of Bengal, Bahadur Shah Shur. After a certain time, he became totally
independent.

Forma- 11, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

82 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
He had also fascination for the throne of Bengal. He was waiting for an opportunity.
When the unknown Ghiyasuddin occupied the throne of the Shur dynasty, taking
advantage of the situation, Taz Khan and his brothers defeated and killed Ghiyasuddin
and seized Gaur. Thus Taz Khan Karrani established the rule of the Karrani dynasty in
Bengal.
After the death of Taz Khan Karrani in 1565 A.D., his brother Sulayman Khan Karrani
became the Sultan of Bengal. This competent ruler included the Afghan leaders in his
group. Thus most of the places of Bengal and Bihar became parts of his territory.
He maintained good relationship with the Mughal Empereor Akbar at the advice of his
wise adviser Lodi Khan. First of all, he shifted his capital from Gaur to Tanda, situated
15 miles to the south-west of Maldaha. After the death of Sulayman Karrani in 1572
A.D., his son Bayazid ascended the throne. But within a short time, the Afghan leaders
killed this tyrant Sultan. This time Daud Karrani the second son of Sulayman Karrani,
came to the throne. He was the last Afghan ruler in Bengal. Daud Karrani was a very
short-sighted ruler. Seeing the vast empire and abundant wealth, he thought himself
equal to Emperor Akbar. So far, the Afghan rulers of Bengal and Bihar openly
expressed their loyalty to the Mughal Emperors. But like an independent Emperor,
Daud adopted the title ‘Badshah' (the king) and introduced sermonising his name before
prayer and issued coins with his own name.
The Afgans were quite antagonistic to the Mughals for long. Besides Emperor Akbar
was not a ease as the Mughals didn't have any possessions of Bengal and Bihar. He was
also annoyed with the self-indulgent attitude of Daud Karrani. This is why Akbar
initially ordered Munim Kahn, one of his subordinates and the ruler of Jounapur to
attack the kingdom of Karrani. Munim Khan didn't do that instantly. Munim Khan had
good terms with Lodi Khan, the Wazir of Daud Khan Korrani. Being advised by Lodi,
Daud Khan Korrani did some compromise with Munim Khan in exchange of some
wealth and riches for the time being. But this compromise didn't last long. Daud was
misled by some conspirators to suspect his Wazir, Lodi. As a result, he persecuted death
penalty to Lodi. So far Bengal and Bihar were not attacked by the Mughals due to
Lodi's wisdom and friendly relation with Munim Khan. After his death, Munim Khan
was unrestricted. He forced the Afgans out from Bihar in 1573. The Afgans, in the
meantime, got to be a deceased power due to internal conflicts. Munim Khan took the
chance and advanced for Bengal. Afgans fled to Saptagram in Hugli district leaving
Tanda, the capital of Bengal. Capturing Tanda, the Mughal soldiers rushed to
Saptagram under the leadership of Munim Khan. Daud Khan fled to Odisha. Munim FS
N

Political History of Bengal in the Middle Age (1204 A.D.-1757 A.D.) 83
Khan established Tanda as the capital of Mughal Bengal. At this time plague broke out
in Panda and it took away lives of many Mughal soldiers including Munim Khan.
Munim Khan's death created chaos in Bengal. This created opportunities for Daud
Karrani to recapture the west and north of Bengal. On the other hand, one of the
Zamindars of low lying areas in Bengal, Isha Khan, pushed the Mughal soldiers from
East Bengal. They took shelter in Bihar.
When the death news of Munim Khan reached Agra, Emperor Akbar sent Khan Jahan
Hussain Kuli Khan to Bengal as its ruler. King Todarmal was appointed Kuli Khan's
deputy. When Kuli Khan was heading forward, he was resisted by Munim Khan at
Rajmahal, the gateway to Bengal. Muzaffar Khan Turbati, the ruler of Bihar, came
forward to help the Mughals. There was a severe battle between the Mughals and the
Afghans near Rajmahal in 1576 A.D. Daud Karrani suffered the final defeat at the
battle of Rajmahal. Later he was sentenced to death. Thus, the Karrani (Afghan) rule
ended and Mughal rule began. But it is also true that the Mughal rule did not go far in
the face of resistance made by the Bara Bhuiyans.
History of the Baro Bhuiyans
Emperor Akbar could not establish his authority over the whole Bengal. The powerful
Zamindars of Bengal could not accept the dominance of the Mughals. The Zamindars
were independent in their own region. They had powerful army and fleet. They used to
attack the Mughal commanders unitedly to defend independence. These Zamindars are
known as the 'Bara Bhuiyans' in the history of Bengal.
This Bara’ does not mean twelve. It is assumed that this 'Baro' refers to the countless
number of Zaminders. In the history of Bengal, the existence ‘Baro Bhuiyans' are found
from the middle of the sixteenth century to the middle of the seventeenth century.
During that period, those who struggled for freedom against the Mughals are called
‘Baro Bhuyians' from the historical perspective. Besides, there were many more less
Zaminders in Bengal. They also rebelled against the Mughals. But later they accepted
the Mughal authority.

2

8

84 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
The noteworthy Bhuiyans were:
some parts of the distrits of Pabna, Bogra, Rangpur.

At the beginning, the leader of the Baro Bhuiyans was Isha Khan. As the Hussain Shahi

dynasty came to an end. Sulayman Khan, father of Isha Khan, established his

zamindari ( office of the Zaminder) in the locality of Sonarga. Khizirpur fort was the

centre of his strength. Katrabu near Sonarga and Khizirpur was his capital. After the

fall of Daud Karrani, he established his capital at Sonarga.

Emperor Akbar paid particular attention to suppress the Baro Bhuiyans. For this

reason, he sent to Bengal Shahbaz Khan in 1583 A.D., Sadik Khan in 1585, Uzir Khan

in 1586 and King Man Singh in 1594 A.D. as Subadar of Bengal. They were engaged

in war in many times with Isha Khan and other small Zamindars. But it was not possi-

ble to defeat Isha khan completely. As a return for his loyalty to emperor Akbar, he

maintained his own authority. On the other hand, he declared independence against the

Mughals and assumed the title 'Masnad-i-Ala.'

As Isha Khan died in 1599 A.D., his son Musa Khan became the leader of the

Baro Bhuiyans. Man Singh was sent to Bengal for the second time. This time Man

Singh was successful to some extent. Musa Khan was defeated by Man Singh in a naval

war in 1603 A.D. But, before having final victory, news of the illness of Emperor Akbar

came. Called by the Emperor Man Singh returned to Agra.

After the death of Emperor Akbar, his son Selim adopted the name ‘Jahangir’ and

succeeded to the throne of Delhi. He again sent Man Singh to Bengal. After one year

Qutubuddin Koka was appoined Subadar in Bengal in 1606 A.D. Qutubuddin was

killed by Sher Afkun. After one year his successor Subadar Jahangir Kuli Khan died.

Afterwards, Islam Khan was appointed the Subadar of Bengal in 1608 A.D. -
S
N

Political History of Bengal in the Middle Age (1204 A.D.-1757 A.D.) 85
It was Emperor Jahangir's achievement to suppress the Baro Bhuiyans in Bengal and to
establish Mughal rule. Subadar Islam Khan (1608 A.D.-1613 A.D.) deserves
appreciation in this regard. Taking up the administration, he realized that if he could
bring down the Baro Bhuiyan leader Musa Khan, it would be easy to subdue the other
Zamindars. For that reason, he decided to shift his capital from Rajmahal to Dhaka. He
realised the stronghold of Musa Khan at Sonarga which was near Dhaka. Corning from
Rajmahal, the capital of Bengal to Dhaka Islam Khan succeeded to gain loyalty of
some Jaminders.
Islam Khan built powerful fleet to face the Baro Bhuiyans. Fight with Musa Khan took
place first in 1609 at Jatrapur, on the northern bank of river Korotoa. Musa Khan had
fort here. In the battle, Musa Khan and other Zamindars retreated at last. In 1610 A.D.
Dhaka became the capital of Bengal. According to the name of the Emperor. Dhaka
was named as 'Jahangirnagar’.
After this, the fleets of the Zamindars gathered again at The Shitalakhya river under the
leadership of Musa Khan in order to resist the Mughals. Islam Khan sent army and fleet
to different places of its western bank. A battle between Islam Khan and the Zamindars
began in 1611 A.D. The forts including the Kadam Rasul of Musa Khan on the eastern
bank of the river came to the control of the Mughals. As the situation worsened, Musa
Khan went to Sonarga. When the capital was insecured, he took shelter in the
Ibrahimpur Island of the Meghna river. The Mughal army took control of Sonarga. This
compelled the Zamindars to surrender. Finding no other way, Musa Khan also
surrendered to the Mughals finally. Like other Zamindars, Islam Khan also gave Musa
Khan the charge in his estate under the Mughal authority. After this, Musa Khan passed
the rest of his life as the loyal fiedholder of the Emperor. Being disheartened by the
surrender of Musa Khan, other Zamindars accepted the authority of the Emperor. Thus
the rule of Baro Bhuiyans came to an end in Bengal.
tuled mentioned below.
some parts of districts of Pabna, Bogra, Rangpur.
Pair work -1: Investigate how the name of Dhaka was changed to Jahangirnagar.
o | Pair work -2: Investigate why Subadar Islam Khan transferred his capital
S | from Rajmahal to Dhaka.

86 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
The Mughal Rule (1571 A.D.-1757 A.D.)

The Mughal rule in Bengal passed in two phases, namely, Subadari and Nawabi. After
the suppression of the Baro Bhuiyans the rule of the Subadar was established in the
whole of Bengal. The Mughal provinces were known as 'Suba'. Bengal was one of the
Subas of the Mughals. The golden period of the Subadari rule was from the beginning
of the seventeenth century to the beginning of the eighteenth century. After Emperor
Aurangazeb the Mughal rule became powerless during the time of the weak
descendants of Delhi. In such a situation, the Subadars ruled Bengal almost
independently. This period of the Mughal rule is known as the 'Nawabi Era’.

Reign of the Subadars and the Nawabs

Suppressing the Bhuiyans in 1610 A.D., Subadar Islam Khan established Subadari rule
in the whole of Bengal. After his death in 1613 A.D., quite a number of Subadars took
power in Bengal. But no Subadar could play any important role until Subadar Mir
Jumla took the power. Islam Khan Chisti ( 1617 A.D. -1624 A.D.) and the brother of
the Empress of Delhi Nur Jahan, Ibrahim Khan Fateh Jang (1617 A.D.-1624 A.D.)
served as the Subadars of Bengal. Then for a very short time, Darar Khan, Mahabbat
Khan, Mukarram Khan and Fitai Khan were appointed Subadars.

After coming to power, Emperor Shahjahan, appointed Kasim Khan Juiny the Subadar
of Bengal in 1628 A.D. Since the Hussain Shahi period the Portugeese were engaged in
trades in Bengal. During this time, the influence of the Portugese merchants greatly
increased. Gradually it became a threat to Bengal. Kasim Khan Juiny supperssed the
Portugese with an iron hand.

After Kasim Khan, Subadar Islam Khan Mashadi (1653 A.D.-1639 A.D.) ruled for four
years. Then Emperor Shahjahan sent his second son Shah Shuja to Bengal as Subadar.
Shuja had been in charge for twenty years. The reign of Shuja was more or less
peaceful. During this period, the English merchants gained some extra advantages from
the Subadar in comparison to other foreign traders. It increased the strength of the
Englishmen besides their trade. Later when Emperor Shahjahan fell ill in 1657, each of
his four sons revolted to become the emperer. At this time, a conflict began between
Aurangazeb and Shah Shuja and gradually it turned to a battle between the two
brothers. In 1659 A.D. Shuja was defeated. After the defeat, he went to Arakan where
he was killed later along with his family.

The commender of Aurangazeb, Mir Jumla came up to Jahangirnagar, the capital of
Bengal to control Shuja. So, Emperor Aurangazed appointed Mir Jumla the Subadar of
Bengal (1660 A.D.-1663 A.D.). Although his success in his conflict with Ahom in not
so significant, the conquest of Koochbihar and Assam by Mir Zumla bears the
testimony of his military talent. During his time, Koochbihar entirely came under

Political History of Bengal in the Middle Age (1204 A.D.-1757 A.D.) 87
the Mughal empire. Through Assam expedition, he extended the border of the Mughal
empire upto Assam.

After the death of Mir Jumla, first Dilir Khan and then Daud Khan ruled Bengal as the
provisional Subadars. After that Aurangazeb's maternal uncle Shayesta Khan
(1664 A.D.-1688 A.D.) was appointed the Subadar of Bengal.

Shaeysta Khan was an efficient commander and a farsighted yi yr

tuler. He occupied Swandeep and Chittagong and uprooted the yf ~~
Arakanian pirates. Subader Shaeysta Khan established Mughal oe) a faa >.
rule in Koochbihar, Kamrup, Tripura and other places in an | — | we aS $
organized manner. Measures were also taken to ensure security| 9 77) ||)
in the border areas. In fear of him, the king of Assam did not dare of WA
to antagonize the Mughals. Towards the end of the Subadari rule, | (7) INGA} &
Shayesta Khan had conflict with the English East India ) 4 wl j i :
Company. The power of the English increased so much that they © iy Tae, j a.
appeared to be a menace to this country. After efforts for long “7 i 4 iy f
time, Shayesta Khan drove out the English from Bengal. After sim) 2a ©
Sheyasta Khan, Khan-i-Jahan Bahadur, Ibrahim Khan and ‘ Ie
Azimuddin became the Subadars of Bengal respectively. During “* =

their time, the history of Bengal was not very eventful, ” ° siipyeata. Shiatt
Shaeysta Khan is memorable for his various public welfare activities during his reign.
Many inns, roads and bridge were built everywhere in his province. He made immense
development in the fields of economy and agriculture in the province. He attained fame
not only in Bengal but also in the whole of Indian sub-continent for his benevolent
administration. During his time, price of commodity was so cheap that eight maund
(nearly six quintal) of rice would cost only one taka.

Bengal's prosperity in economy during the reign of Shaeysta Khan includes the
expansion of industry, trade and commerce. Besides agriculture, there was sufficient
development of industry, trade and commerce during this period. Shaeysta Khan also
encouraged the foreign merchants in trade and commerce.

The reign of Shacysta Khan is particularly notable for architecture in Bengal. Adorned
with various monuments, magnificent Dhaka of that time is a testimony to his profound
love for architecture. This period can be tamed ‘the golden era’ of the Mughals for the
architectural developments. Of the architectural constructions in his reign, Choto
Katra, Lalbagh Kella, Tomb of Bibi Pari, Hussaini Building, Mosque of Safi Khan,
Mosque of the Ganges, Chalk Mosque and others deserve appreciations. The main
point is that no other Subadar or ruler could leave behind so brilliant an image of
himself like Shaeysta Khan. Practically, Dhaka was the city of Shacysta Khan.

88 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
After that Murshid Kuli Khan came to power in Bengal as / c
the Subadar (1700 A.D.-1727 A.D.). At first, he appointed the Le
revenue collector of Bengal or Diwan, The functions of the Diwan Le |
were to collect reverence of the Suba and control financial affairs.  ¥ hs
During the reign of Emperor Farruk Shiyar, Murshid Kuli Khan was ps
appointed the Subadar of Bengal. When Murshid Kuli Khan came to ' '
Bengal, the political and economic condition of Bengal was Ea
miserable. In the face of such a situation he tried to restore Mughal \ iy i \\
tule in Bengal with great courage. He changed the course of the Vy
history of Bengal by his personality, prudence and intelligence.

Murshid Kuli Khan
After the death of Emperor Aurangazeb, the weak Mughal Emperors could not pay
much attention to the distant Subas. As a result, the Subadars of those places ruled their
provinces with some independence. Murshid Kuli khan also became independent to
some extent. He merely expressed loyalty to the emperor and sent one core three lakh
taka revenue annually. After Murshid Kuli Khan, his son-in-law Sirajuddin succeeded
to the throne of Bengal. Thus the Subadari system of Bengal became hereditary. And in
this way, the independent rule of Bengal again got established.
Since the time of Nawab Murshid Kuli Khan, the Suba of Bengal became almost
independent. During this time, Suba was called ‘Nizamat' and instead of Subadar the
title was ‘Nazim’. The post of Nazim became hereditary. Coming to the throne, the
Subadars and Nazims of Bengal took an approval only from the Emperor. So, the
history of Mughal rule in Bengal during the eighteenth century is known as the period
of the Nizams or Nawabs. The rulers who were almost independent were known as
‘Nawab’.
The reformation of the revenue system is the most memorable achievement of Murshid
Kuli Khan. Surveying land, he fixed the revenue according to the ability of the tenants.
He took proper stepts to ensure and regularize revenue collection. With the help of the
employees, he gathered correct information about the actual productivity of the land
and business tariff. In this system, the middlemen could by no means harass the
subjects.
Murshid Kuli Khan deeply felt the importance of the expansion of trade and commerce
for the economic development of the country. He encouraged the English, French and
Persian businessmen irrespective of race or religion. He gave directives to his %
subordinates to ensure appropriate tariff and justice for the businessmen. Due to his &

Political History of Bengal in the Middle Age (1204 A.D.-1757 A.D.) 89
patronization trades and commerce extended to a great extent. Calcultta, Chuchura and
Chandannagar became centres of business of different foreign merchants.

Murshid Kuli Khan had no son. So, his daughter Jinat-un-Nisa's husband Sujauddin
Khan (1727 A.D.-1739 A.D.) was appointed as the Subadar of Bengal by the Emperor
Farrukh Shiyar. With the dignity of an independent Nawab, Suzauddin came to the
throne. He was a competent ruler. He was the Nawab of all the three provinces of
Bengal, Bihar and Odisha. He gave high posts to his relatives and trustworthy people.
He also made a good relationship with the Zamindars. But the last part of Sujauddin's
life did not pass happily. Many of the palaces officials plotted against him. But he faced
the crisis with an expert hand. After the death of Sujauddin, his son Sarfaraz Khan
became the Nawab of Bengal-Bihar-Odisha. There was chaos all over the country due
to his inefficiency. Thaking advantage of this situation, the Nayeb-i-Nazim Alivardi
Khan attacked Sarfaraz. Sarfaraz was defeaed and killed. Alibardi Khan seized the
power of Bengal not with the approval of the Mughal Emperor, but with his own
strength. Peace was established in Bengal during the reign of Alivardi Khan (1740
A.D.-1756 A.D.).

For a long time, the Marathi robbers known as 'Bargi' had been attacking different parts
of Bengal and plagued people's life. Alivardi Khan resisted them for ten years, from
1742 A.D.-1751 A.D.. Finally he was able to drive out the Bargis from the country. As
the Afghan army revolted during his reign he suppressed them with an iron had. During
the time of Alivardi, many European merchants including the English carried on
commercial activities in different parts of Bengal. At the same time, they went on
gathering military power. Alivardi Khan strongly checked their initiatives.

Alivardi Khan chose Sirajuddaula the son of his youngest daughter Amena Begum, as
his heir. The first daughter of Alivardi, Ghasheti Begum had the expectation that the
son of her second sister, Shawkat Jang would be the Nawab. Consequently, she started
conspiracy against Sirajuddaula. Ghasheti Begum gained support from some
aristocrats. Like Roydurlav, Mir Jafar, Umichand, Rajballav and others can be
mentioned. The shrewd English merchants who came to Bengal for trade, exploited this
conspiracy inside the palace. They joined hands with the conspirators. At last, there
was a battle between the Nawab and the English. On June 23, 1757 A.D. in the battle
of Plassey, the commander-in-chief of the Nawab, Mir Jafar treacherously abstained
himself from taking part in the battle. Sirajuddaula helplessly suffered defeat. Thus,
through the battle of Plassey, the foundation of the English rule was laid in Bengal. And
with this the Middle age ended in Bengal.

Forma- 12, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

90 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Task :
1. Mention what happened to Subadar Shah Suja at last ?
2. Mention the relics of architecture during the time of Subadar Shaeysta Khan.
3. Explain the role of Subadar Murshid Kuli Khan in establishing independent
Nawabi rule.
4. Arrange chronologically the names of the following rulers:
Names to be arranged chronologically
0
2 [iwaj Khai ———SSSC—~iSCC“‘“‘CSUSSOOC~*d
| 3 | ShayestaKhan |
Alauddin HussainShah |
Shamsuddin liyas Shah |
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions :
1. Who named Gaur as 'Jannatabad'?
a. Sher Shah b. Humayun
c. Jahangir d. Akbar
2. In order to suppress the Baro Bhuiyans, the strategy of Subadar Islam Khan
was_
i. building powerful fleet;
ii. shifting capital from Rajmahal to Dhaka;
iii. formation of cavalry.
Which of the following is correct ?
a. iandii b.  iand iii
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii

Read the following and answer questions 3 and 4

The elected Chairman of Hajirhat, Mr. Noman is very popular, People of Hindu and

Muslim communities live in his locality. Despite being a Muslim himself, he entrusted

the Hindus to different responsibilities as per their merit. This liberal attitude of him x

towards religion brought communal harmony in the area. 8

Political History of Bengal in the Middle Age (1204 A.D.-1757 A.D.) 91
3. Which Sultan of the Middle age encouraged Mr. Noman in his work?
a. Alauddin Hussain Shah b. Sikandar Shah
c. Ghiyasuddin Azam Shah d. Alauddin Firoj Shah
4. Asa result of the activities of these Sultans-—-
i. study of literature got a new momentum;
ii. short sighted politics began;
iii. the administrative works were done with skill.
Which of the following in correct?
a i b. iandii
c. iand iii d. i, ii and iii

Creative Questions

1. Sohel was watching a movie on television about the war fought by the ancient
Roman warriors. He saw that as a strategy of the war, the Commander of one
group was planning to attack by dividing the warriors into smaller groups. The
Commander very secretly took these warriors through the forest. Then they
attacked the palace and occupied it.

a. Which part of Dinajpur was king Ganesh’s territory?

b. Why is IIliyas Shah called the first proclaimer of Bengali nationalism in
the history of Muslim Bengal in the Middle age?

c. Which person in the textbook reflect the war strategy of the
Commander mentioned in the above passage? Explain.

d. Do you think that although that man failed in different aspects of life in
the first stage, fortune and diligence jointly brought success for him?
Give arguments.

2.  Himchari is a remote place of the hilly region. Communication system being
difficult there, it is problemetic to market the commodity produced in time.
There was a huge production of banana in the sloping lands of the hills. But it
was not possible to market them in time. Watching the bananas sold at the
cheapest rate, the school-going Durjoy Barua said to his mother, "Huh! It's the
repeatation of history, I see."

a. Who among the Muslim rulers in Bengal founded the navay?

b. Why was Bengal called 'Bulgakpur'?

c. Who did Durjoy remember from the history of Bengal? Explain.
20 d. Do you think it is reasonable to call the reign of that ruler ‘golden period’
BS of architecture?

Chapter Seven
Social, Economic and Cultural History of the Middle Age
of Bengal
The royal power of Bengal came to the Muslims through the fall of the Sena dynasty
and the conquest of Bengal by Ikhtiyaruddin Muhammad-bin Bakhtiyar Khalji. As a
result, the Middle Age of Bengal started. Before the arrival of the Muslims, Hindus and
Buddhists lived in Bengal. From the eleventh century Sufi devotees started to come to
Bengal to preach Islam. Many ordinary Hindus and Buddhists of Bengal became
converted to Islam. Thus in Bengal an Islamic social structure started to form. In this
age in Bengal, Hindus and Muslims were living in parity. So their lifestyle, ways of
thinking, ideas and manners mixed and thus Bengalee culture: flourished in Bengal.
At the end of this chapter we will be able to -
e@ explain the contributions of the Sultan and the Mughal rulers in the
socio-economic and cultural changes in the Middle Age of Bengal;
e evaluate the contributions of the Sultans and the Mughal rulers in flourishing
trades and commerce, architecture and fine arts during this period.
e describe the religious condition of Bengal during the Sultan and the Mughal
tule during this period.
e identify the contributions of the Sultan and the Mughal rulers creating in and
‘flourishing of the Bengali language and literature in the Middle Age;
e realize the positive changes in Bengalee lifestyles and intellectual feculties
with the advent of the Muslims in the Middle Age .
© be interested in visiting places of historical importance realizing the historical
importance of achievements and architectural testimony of the Sultani and the
Mughal regime.
Social and Cultural Life
In the Middle Age, the influence of two religions- Hinduism and Islam prevailed
in the social system of Bengal. In fact, social customs and practices were
introduced centering round these two religions.
2
S

Social, Economic and Cultural History of the Middle Age of Bengal 93
Muslim Society
The sultans had the heighest social esteem during the Middle Age and Muslim rule in
Bengal. The ruler, the Sultan, as the leader of the Muslim society had some special
responsibilities. It was special duty for a Muslim ruler to sermonise (deliver Khutba) in
‘Zuma' and 'Eid' prayer. He had to join different social programs as a leader of the
Muslim society. The rulers would build mosques, madrasas, 'khankas' etc. in their
respective kingdom to spread unity and religious spirit among the Muslims.
Muslim rulers lived in gorgeous palaces. Their capitals were also adorned with
different impressive edifices. In addition to opulence and formalities, a special trait of
the palace was the assembly of wise and qualified people. The rulers were generous
patrons of knowledge and science as well as art and culture.
Muslim society of Bengal had three tires in the middle age- higher middle and lower
class. Sayeed, Ulema and similar classes were quite influential in the society. People
used to respect religious and educated people a lot. The Muslim rulers too had special
respect for them. They were privileged with allowances and lands as tokens of respect
from the rulers.
The Ulemas were experienced in Islamic education. Kazi, Imam, Muajjin and other
religious staff were appointed out of them. The Sheikhs would impart the public
religious and spiritual education. They had remarkable contributions to the progress of
Muslim society in Bengal.
An aristocratic community grew up during this period. They shaped themselves as an
exclusive class of people in comparison to general public by dint of talent and
knowledge. Any person could hold a dignified position of the state by means of
competence and talent. In this case the example of Sultan Ghiyasuddin Iwaj Khalji and
Subadar Murshid Kuli Khan are remarkable. Of course, in the later period there were
exceptions to this rule. The custom of inheriting dignified government positions was
introduced. In this age the aristocratic class consisted of employees of high positions in
military and judicial departments. The middle class consisted of lower-class
government employees. The third class comprised farmers, weavers and different types
of workers. Most of the farmers were Hindus. There were some occupations which
were monopoly muslims.
Some social festivals were celebrated in Muslim society. Till today the Muslims
celebrate these festivals. The birth of a child was a delightful matter that time. The
Muslims used to observe a program called 'Akika' celebrating the naming of the baby.
‘Khatna' (circumcision) was a very familiar custom in the Muslim society. Marriage
was a festive occasion for the Muslims. The Moulavis would perform marriage
formalities according to Muslim customs and practises. The Muslims followed some
e religious and social customs in different times for the sake of the dead. They buried the
s dead body and cited verses from the holy Quran followed by 'Milad' (special prayer) for
the peace of the departed soul.

94 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
The presence of 'Molla' community in religious festivals and in programs like marriage
was indispensable in the village life.'Peer' or 'Fakir' community known as ‘Sufi’ and
‘Saint' had much influence in the Muslim society. General people would use different
kinds of religious amulets given by them to get rid of different problems.
A huge number of Hindus and Buddhists of Bengal were converted to Islam. The
converted people could not give up some of the beliefs and prejudices of previous
religions. Thus, beliefs in the teachings of spiritual leaders (Gurubad) of Hindu society
entered Muslim society. It was a common phenomenon to light candles in the evening
and give 'shinni' (a kind of home-made sweet) at the 'dargah' (graveyard) of the ‘peer’
(religious scholor).
The elite Muslims had fascination for lavish good foods. Their menu was full of
different types of fish, meat and pickles. They would commonly eat delicious foods
such as different types of kabab, rejala, korma, and foods cooked in ghee. The common
Muslims used to take plain rice, fish and vegetables. Some people also used to take
Rooti (hand-made bread). Hotchpotch was also a popular food during that time.
The aristocratic Muslims would put on pajama and round-necked shirt. They also wore
‘pagri' (turbine) on their head and leather shoes embroidered with silk or gold thread.
They wore rings with pearls and stones on their fingers. They used to put on pajama,
shirt and religious cap. Poor and lower-class Muslims would put on 'lungi' and 'tupi'.
The aristocratic muslim ladies put on the use of cosmetics was not a common practice.
The aristocratic muslim ladies put on golden ornaments on their arms and wrists and
golden rings in their fingers.
At the beginning of this age the Muslims earned special fame for their moral qualities
and honesty. In the later period they failed to keep up that strict moral standard in
religious manners. As a result, corruption and non-Islamic activities intruded into
Muslim society. The moral degradation of the Muslims in their social life also effected
their ruling system. The same was responsible to a great extent for the end of the
Nawabi rule in Bengal.

Individual Work:

1. Mention the social festivals and customs of the Muslims of Bengal in the

Middle Age.
2. How were the dresses of the Muslims of Bengal in the Middle Age? ~
S
N

Social, Economic and Cultural History of the Middle Age of Bengal 95
Hindu Society
The influence, customs and trends of the Muslims of Bengal in the Middle Age
influenced the Hindu society. Yet there was no change in the main principles of Hindu
society and its general social system. A caste driven society was prevalent in this age.
This custom was originated from different occupations. There were four remarkable
castes in the society , "Brahmmin’, 'Kayastha’, ‘Baishyo' and 'Shudra'. There was no
social integration among these four castes. The caste system was strictly followed then.
As a result, inter-caste marriage and communication was prohibited. The Brahmmins
had absolutete authority on religious activities.
The Hindus followed different social customs and practices on the occasions of birth,
marriage and death in the Middle Age in Bengal. The social occasions those were in
vogue at that time are also noticed in the conservative Hindu society in the present
time. Just after the birth of a baby, it would be washed with the water brought from the
Ganges. 'Shosti Puja' would be arranged on the sixth day. A Brahmmin would count
‘Kusthi' of the baby. After a month of birth, 'Balok Utthan Parba' would be observed.
There was arrangements of 'Annoprashana' in the sixth month. Most of the Hindu
women would perform 'Upabash' (fasting) and ‘Ekadashi’ (fasting and eating
vegetables on the eleven day of the lunar fortnight).
Marriage is a remarkable social occasion in Hindu society. In the Hindu society of
Bengal most of the families were extended. Families after the death of father, the eldest
son would take the responsibilities of the family. Devotion to husband was a
remarkable trait of Hindu society.
The women of Hindu society did not have adequate rights during this time in Bengal.
The husband considered his wife as his property. Daughters, wives and widows were
respectively dependent on parents, husband and children. Girls could not go out of the
house without the permission of the master of the house. 'Satidaha’ system (a system
where the widow was burned live along with the dead husband.) was in vogue in the
society. But it was not an obligatory social custom everywhere in Bengal. In spite of all
these circumstances, many women of this age were able to develop their independent
entity by dint of own competence and intelligence. The achievement of women of this
age in the cultural field was quite significant. There was regular practice of art and
culture in rich families. The women of this age were skilled in playing "Bina’, 'Tanpura’
and other musical instruments.
Women used clothes made of jute and cotton, rings, necklace, nakpasha, earring,
bracelet made of gold, conch of gold, nose ring, armlet, etc. as dresses and ornaments.
Rich women used ornaments. These ornaments were made of gold, silver, tusk of
x elephants and budded with precious jewels and stones. Married women used
&  vermillion, collyrium, musk mixed with sandal as cosmetics. Many of them used anklet

96 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
with small bells. Only on special occasions these ornaments and cosmetics were used.
Ordinary girls adorned themselves with ordinary attire in their respective houses. Sari
was their everyday attire. The males used to wear dhuti. Aristocratic and educated
persons would use a sheet of cloth worn over the body, and turban. Rich people,
especially the merchants used necklace, earring and rings.
There is no remarkable difference between the foods of Hindu society of Bengal in the
Middle Age and those of present Hindu society. Rice was their staple food. In addition,
fish, meat, vegetables, milk, curd, ghee, and 'kheer' were in their menu. Different pies
made from rice were very popular. Different types of Bengalee Brahmmins used to eat
proteins. Then all kinds of fish were available.
Hilsa fish and dried fish were very popular food in east Bengal. Vegetables such as
brinjal, gourd, pumpkin, jhinge, kakral and arum would be produced. Fruits, such as,
mangoes, jackfruits, bananas, palm, papaya, coconut, sugarcane etc. were available. It
is mentionable that there was not much difference between the menu of the Hindus and
that of the Muslims of that time. But, eating beef was considered as an extreme
irreligious action by the Hindus.
There was 'Kaulinyo' system in the Hindu society. As a result, various bad manners
were intruded in the society. The system was widely prevalent among Brahmmins,
Baiddyas and Kayasthas. The system of polygamy was introduced because of the
Kauliny system. Some social beliefs originated in Hindu and Muslim society in the
Middle Age. The astrologers determined the auspicious time by searching and
researching calendars and books. During this age people believed in necromancy and
black art of magic.
in the Middle Age.
Economic Condition and Trade and Commerce
The land of riverine Bengal was always nurtured with the generous blessings of nature.
The agricultural land of this place was unusually fertile. The produced crops in the
Middle Age included paddy, wheat, cotton, sugarcane, jute, ginger, millet, sesame,
beans, mustard and pulse. Among agricultural products onion, garlic, turmeric,
cucumber etc. were remarkable. Mango, jackfruit, banana, mosabbar, dates etc. were 26
S
AQ

Social, Economic and Cultural History of the Middle Age of Bengal 97
produced in plenty. Betel-leaves, nuts, coconuts were also produced in good quantity.
'Gala' was also produced abundantly. Jute and silk started to be produced in Bengal
from the very Muslim rule.

The main source of economic prosperity of Bengal was agriculture. Though
agricultural products were in abundance in Bengal, the method of cultivation was not
developed. There was no arrangement of irrigation in those days like today. Farmers
had to depend on rainfall for water most of the time. They had nothing to do against
drought.

Bengal being an agriculture country, a large part of its people were farmers . There was
abundance of agricultural products in Bengal. As a result, the surplus products were
exported to other countries. In course of time, these commercial activities expanded
also in industries. During Muslim rule textile industry, sugar industry, boat making
factory were set up in Bengal.

The prosperity in textile industry was especially remarkable in Bengal. Clothes made
here were very famous for quality and standard. So, they had great demand in foreign
countries. Here colored and printed clothes were made for domestic use and white
clothes for exporting abroad.

Dhaka was famous for Moslin, a kind of very fine cloths and its industries. Moslin was
in great demand in Europe. This cloth was so subtle that 20 yards of 'Moslin' could be
put into a snuff box. The achievement of Bengal in making jute and silk clothes was
also remarkable. Sugar, molasses and shipping industry also spread widely in Bengal.
The middle age of Bengal had its own varieties of small industries. During this time the
metal industries were very prominent. It was a time when goods made of iron were
widely in use. The blacksmiths would make different kinds of agricultural tools. They
would also make everyday metal objects such as double edged swords, knives, scissors,
spades etc. People of this country would make cannons at Kasimbazar and Kolkata. In
addition, Bengal was famous for paper, carpets, steel and salt industries. The country
had the community of goldsmiths. They could show their special craftsmanship on the
work of gold, silver, bronze, wood, stones, and elephant-tasks. Dhaka was also very
famous for conch-industries. Shakhari Patti of Dhaka still reminds those memories.
The commercial activities of Bengal during Muslim rule had unprecedented expansion
in foreign countries as a result of the abundance of agricultural and industrial goods of
Bengal and their great demand in foreign countries. Of the export oriented goods of
Bengal cotton cloth, Moslin, silk cloth, rice, sugar, molasses, ginger, chilly etc. were
remarkable. Among the agricultural products rice, tobacco, nuts, jute, fruits etc. were
Forma- 13, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

98 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
exported. Besides various agricultural and industrial products, salt, vine, opium,
different spices, medicine etc. were sent to different places of India and foreign
countries. There was the slave system in the society of Bengal.
Most of the part of trade and commerce was export oriented. A very small amount of
goods was imported. Cotton was imported as raw material due to increasing demand of
cloth in Bengal. The Bengalee merchants would import cotton from Gujrat, silk from
China, luxurious goods from Iran. Gold, silver and precious stones were also imported
in Bengal.
During Muslim rule quite a number of sea ports and river ports were built in Bengal.
Chittagong was a famous sea port that time. Odisha, Sonargoan, Gaur, Bakla (Barisal),
Murshidasbad, Kashimbazar, Hoogly, Patna of Bihar and Piply of Odisha were
remarkable commercial ports.
With the expansion of trade and commerce, there was an increase in transactions of
goods and money as well as keeping accounts. So, in course of time banking system
evolved. During this time transactions were made in foreign countries through ‘Hundi'.
Goods were available and cheap in Bengal during the whole of the middle age.
Famous traveler of the 14th century Ibn-Batuta wrote that goods were most cheaply
available only in Bengal. In spite of that it is known from contemporary literature that
there were a lot of poor people in the country beside the rich. So, though goods were
cheap, the ordinary people could not afford to purchase many of them.
The Hindus had more influence than the Muslims in industry, trade and commerce and
other economic activities of Bengal. The local traders and dealers did not have any
control over trade and commerce. The Arabian and Persian merchants controlled trade
and commerce of this country. They had monopoly over trade by river. In the later
periods, the Portuguese and other European merchants became influential in the field
of business.

Individual work: Make a list of agricultural and industrial goods produced in

Bengal in the Middle Age.

oo
S

Social, Economic and Cultural History of the Middle Age of Bengal 99
Architecture and the art of Painting
The Muslim rulers built many palaces, mosques,
graveyards, dargahs (graves of religiously important . S
people), etc.in different places of Bengal in different times ger “
in order to establish the glory of Islam and make their }
conquests and regimes memorable. The Muslim rulers Py
considered building of mosques as very virtuous job. There & F
are still many reminiscences found in the ruins of the Ben. .
buildings constructed during the regimes of the Sultans. Adis Mingus, Gaus
The capital of the Muslim Sultans of independent Bengal
was first in Gaur, then Pandua and again in Gaur. So, the 7 RY tr
architectural art of Muslim Bengal developed in these two ye ge
cities first. Sultan Sikander Shah built 'Adina Mosque’ in Hy a
1369 A.D. The graveyard of Sikander Shah was built just F |) || | Pp
to the north side of the mosque. ke | me)
There is a graveyard of Ghiyasuddin Azam Shah (1410 ==. 5
A.D.) in Sonarga, 15 miles away from present Dhaka. eo
There are five 'dargahs' and five mosques very near this Graveyard of Ghiyasuddin
graveyard. These are known as 'Panch Peerer Dargah’. Azam Shah, Sonarga
The tomb of Sultan Giasuddin Azam Shah is a nice
testimony of the art of architecture.
A remarkable achievement of the regime of Sultan Shia»
Jalaluddin is 'Eklakhi Mosque' situated in Pandua. It was 7
built between 1418 and 1423 A.D. There is a hearsay that ——————s =,
the mosque was built at the cost of taka one lakh at that 12) 2725 eg ‘cael
time. So, it has been known as 'Eklakhi Mosque’. This og lei i) (ee
mosque is actually a tomb. He, his sons and his wife ae
were buried in this mausoleum. The reflection of Hindu Exklakhi Mosque, Pandua,
architecture is noticed in the arts of this mosque.
Another name of ‘Bara Sona Mosque’ is ‘Baroduari § aga ee |) ei
Mosque’. There were twelve big doors in this mosque. |) j
There was inlay of gold gilt in this mosque. Probably so it [ i sth
was called 'Gold Mosque’. This was the biggest mosque ja tepsmumticcman
of Gaur. Hossain Shah built this mosque to make Assam
conquest memorable. Nusrat Shah finished its ani

© construction in 1527 A.D. Bara Sona Mosque

= (Baroduari Mosque) Gaur.

100 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
'‘Choto Sona Mosque' was built at present Firujibad village
in the last south end of Gaur. This mosque was small in
size. Yet, there was also an inlay of gilt of gold in this
mosque. Probably, it is known as 'Choto Sona Mosque’ for frie
this reason. One Wali Mohammad was the founder of this "="" Bee }
mosque during the time of Alauddin Hossain Shah. ———
Choto Sona Mosque Ganr.

The tomb of Khan Jahan Ali was built in the district i
of Bagerhat. According to legend, a peer’ named [age aa >
Khan Jahan Ali settled down at that place, He died Seas ae
in the very place in 1459A.D. He was » GMM a - €
contemporary of Sultan Nasiruddin Iliyas, =

The Tomb of Khan Jahan Ali, Bagerhat
The 'Shat (Sixty) Gombuj Mosque’ of the district of pgp
Bagerhat has increased the glory of the regime of m :
the Muslims of Bengal. The 'Shat Gombuj Mosque’ ~ iss
is situated three miles south-east of the tomb of ey
Khan Jahan Ali. It is interesting that it has 77 P ie
domes, not 60, It was built in the middle of the 15th ‘ etait j
century. Ulukh Khan Jahan, a Turkish general and me Oh wih eee
an eamest devotee of Islam, built this mosque. This | aus
architectural work has been recognized as a "World ee
Heritage Site' by the UNESCO. iis
was built to show respect to the footprint of the | |g Ta
Prophet. Nusrat Shah built this in 1531 AD. A (PE) | g)ep
piece of stone with the footprint of Hazrat |" 9 ts 3 “BO
Mohammad (Sm) was steadied on a stone of black
inlays in a room of this building. x

Kadam Rasul, Gaur a

Social, Economic and Cultural History of the Middle Age of Bengal 101
‘Baba Adamer Mosque’ is situated in Rampala inp ae < at
Dhaka district. It was built during the reign of ©) iat ee ie
Malik Kafur Fateh Shah in 1483 A.D. In addition to 7 bec Bi ze ‘ ‘
these, there are many mosques and tombs ng Ow, e te
different places of Bengal. Pie te

Baba Adamer Mosque, Rampala, Dhaka
In addition to mosques and mausoleums, different
rooms with gates and minarets constructed in this age
are the excellent testimonies to architectural art of
Bengal, Among them the ‘Dakhil Darwaza'
constructed by Rukunuddin Barbak Shah in Gaur
and tomb-gate of Alauddin Hossain Shah are
specially remarkable. 'Firuj Minar’ of Gaur is
another excellent testimony to architectural art. .
Many think that Habshi Sultan Saifuddin Firuj Dakhil D Gaur
Shah built it.
During Mughal period, the rulers of Bengal made
wonderful contribution to art. Still today there are
inscriptions of fondness of Mughal rulers for art. <a a
Because of their patronage many mosques, tombs, | wily) by yin cr...
mausoleums, majar, forts, columns and gates were esi is ml a a
built. This age is called the golden age of the Mughals | 9) leo Soest bd fe
in Bengal for the development of architectural art. — ae oe 4
During the Mughal period quite a number of buildings named 'Katra’ were built. There
were guest rooms. "Bara Katra' of Dhaka was built by Shah Suja. It was situated on the
bank of Buriganga on the south of Chak Bazar.

x
&

102 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
a SVs
sealable al et
Shahi Mosque of Lalbagh, Dhaka. Choto Katra, Dhaka.
a ied A (
Hajigonj Fort (Khir For), Narayangon)

Hajigonj Fort (at present known as Khijirpur Fort) iad

situated on the north shore of the Sitalakhya in the district “ P

of Narayangonj was probably established by Subadar Mir ee il

Jumla (1660-1663 A.D). The fort was made to prevent |x cal tali alia ors

the attack of the Mog and the Portuguese pirates. be ae A Stig 3 |
ti | | y = YF de

Subadar Shahjada Azam built a number of buildings. le AS ~

He built an enormous ‘Katra' nearing the edge of the | eer:

river Buriganga. During his reign, the Shahi Mosque of | He

Lalbag was built too. Fort of Lalbagh, Dhaka.

The name of Sayesta Khan is especially remarkable in Pe Fy |

the spread of Mughal art in Bengal. Sayesta Khan built = — a

‘Choto Katra' in 1663 A.D. It is situated 200 yards away & — —— i

from ‘Bara Katra'. There is a mosque and a dome inside HAY) | ft AY

it. The Lalbag Kella still reminds us of the rule of (U0) 4) MINS ine

Sayesta Khan. Its construction work started before his “(if rT aan

tule. He took steps to complete it. Its construction work ia fi

started in 1690 A.D. during the rule of Ibrahim Khan. Hoseeni Daian, Dhaka. x

N

Social, Economic and Cultural History of the Middle Age of Bengal 103

The mausoleum of Bibi Pori, the daughter of Sayesta

Khan is inside the Lalbag fort. The marble-made tomb

is still considered the most beautiful Muslim

monuments. Sayesta Khan built Hosseni Dalan in 1676

A.D. The name of Sayesta Khan is also associated with

the mosque at Chakbazar, the mosque of Sayesta Khan ;

situated on the Buriganga and Shatgombuj mosque. oy

Many edifices were also made during the rule of the eB {

Nawabs of Bengal. Gingira Palace is their architectural 4) 07 "Mm. a

achievement. Begum Bazar mosque was made during te paw : “ ss

the time of Murshid Kuli Khan. In Murshidabad he | ie fe ae '..

built a Katra and a mosque. A palace named Chehel (isles d Seana:

Setun was also built in his time. It was an enormous The mausoleum-tomb of Bibi Pori,

building for meetings. In addition to these buildings Dhaka

many forts, eidgahs, hammamkhana, chillakhana and

bridges were contructed during the Mughal regime.

These artistic achievements of Mughal rule cast a

far-reaching influence on the cultural life of Bengal.

Group Work: The table shows some architechrural sights. Their locations are
jumbled. Match the location with the architectural sights.

Religious Condition

Like the present age the Hindus of those days also practised different types of religious

customs and occasions. The Hindus worshiped different Gods and Goddesses in pomp

and gorgeousness. Among them Laxmi, Sharaswati, Ganesh, Shiba, Chandi, Monosa,

Bishnu, Krishna, Surjo, Madan, Narayan, Brahmma, Agni, Shitala, Shasthi, Ganga,
etc. were remarkable. The Durga Puja is particularly remarkable in the social life of
AQ

104 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Bengalee Hindus. The Hindus would consider Dashhara, Ganga Snan, Astomi Snan
and Maghi Saptami Snan sanctimonious. The water of the Ganges was very holy to the
devout Hindus. They would celebrate religious festivals such as Doljatra, Rathjatra,
Holi, etc.
There were a number of religious communities in the Hindu society besides caste
system, such as Shaiba, Shakto, etc. The influence of Baishnob religion on the Hindus
was remarkable during this time. During this time a remarkable trait of Hindu society
was religious intolerance.
The Muslims used to perform various religious customs and occasions as they do it
even at the present time. Eid-ul-Fitre and Eid-ul-Ajha were the main religious festivals
in Muslim society. Every devout Muslim used to keep fasting during the month of holy
Ramadan and pass the night of Shab-e-Barat and Shab-e-Kadr in prayer and oblation.
They dressed themselves in new and clean clothes at different festivals. Exchanging
pleasantries and invitations going to each other's house was a go of the day as symbols
of friendship and brotherhood.
Sultans, Subadars and Nawabs would come close to general people on the occasions of
religious festivals. The Muslims would celebrate the birthday of the Prophet (sm) with
special pomp. 'Moharram' was observed in the Middle Age as it is being observed now.
It is known as a main religious festival of the Shiah community. On this occasion the
Shiah would make 'Tajia’. According to Muslim calendar, the first day of the month of
Maharram would be observed as the 'New Year’. The Muslims would receive the rise of
the moon of Moharram with joy and fervor.
A remarkable trait of the Muslim society was love for religion. The devout Muslims
would perform their prayer five times a day. Besides, they would recite the holy Quran
and Hadith regularly. Special importance would be given to religious education. Both
boys and girls would be sent to Maktab for the purpose of religious education. ‘Molla’
community would be given special importance for religious knowledge and for
conducting religious programs in the society. The ‘mollas' would suggest performing
actions as per the directions of the holy Quran and Hadith in different matters and
solving problems. The presence of 'molla' community in religious festivals and social
programs like marriage was indispensable in the village life.
The peer’ and Yakir' community named ‘sufi’ and ‘saints’ had enough influence on the
Muslim society. They were well versed in religious scriptures and always absorbed in
Spiritual devotion. They built ‘dargahs' at different places to practice religion. They
were respected by the rulers and general people.

ES

8

Social, Economic and Cultural History of the Middle Age of Bengal 105
With the spread of Islam in Bengal, the Muslim society also started to expand. There
were two special classes noticed in the Muslim society in Bengal. One was the Muslims
who came from other countries and the other was the converted Muslims. Despite
differences of customs and heritage between the Muslims of other countries and the
local Muslims, there were no instances of clash among them. This was because of the
generosity of the Muslim rulers and their patronage towards local culture and heritage.

Individual Work:

What were the religious customs and occasions of the Muslims of the Middle Age?
Language, Literature and Education
The contribution of the Sultanate and the Mughal regime to development and
promotion of Bengali literature and language is remarkable. In this field the name that
can be mentioned first is Sultan Giyasuddin Azam Shah (1393-1411) belonging to
Illiyas Shahi dynasty. It was his regime when first Bengali Muslim poet Shah
Mohammad Sagir wrote his 'Yusuf-Julekha' or aromance written in poetic form. It was
a translation from Persian. Some more poets of the Sultan regime also translated
Persian poems. Among them the names of Daulot Uzir Baharam Khan and Dona Gazi
are remarkable.
The contribution of the Muslims as the pioneer in writing historical literature in Bengali
is unforgettable. Many Muslim poets being inspired by the idealism of Islam wrote
poems about invasion and conquest. Among the writers of conquest-verses, Joynuddin
the writer of 'Rasul Bijoy' was famous. The Muslim poets of Bengal also wrote
collections of verses describing different stories. They were called padaboli. Chand
Gazi was the creator of Podaboli of Bengali literature. Many poets of this age wrote
poems in Bengali describing the greatness of the 'peers' (religious guru).The Muslim
leaders also inculcated music in Bengali. Poet Faizullah wrote the first book on music
'Ragmala’, (a collection of ragas) in Bengali literature. Poet Mozammel wrote books
named ‘Neetishastro Barta’ (book on ethics) and 'Satnama’.
The Muslim poets also made great contributions to the prosperity of Bengali language
and beautification of Bengali literature. They used many Arabian and Persian words in
Bengali language. 'Allah', 'Khoda’', ‘Nabi’, 'Poygambar', 'kitab', etc. used by the poets of
those time have enriched Bengali vocabulary.
During the Sultanate period the Hindu poets also made great contribution to literature.
In this case, inspiration and patronage of Muslim rulers inspired the Hindus. The
development and promotion of Bengali literature has immortalized the regime of
Hussain Shah. Undoubtedly, his generous patronage has increased the beauty of
Bengali literature.
Forma- 14, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

106 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Among the Hindus writers and poets of this age Rupgoswami, Sonaton Goswami,
Maladhar Basu, Bijoygupta, Biprodas and Joshoraj Khan were remarkable. During that
time Maladhar Basu translated 'Sreematbhagbat' and 'Purana' into Bengali. Kabindra
Parameswar translated Mahabharata into Bengali with the patronage of Sultan Hussain
Shah and Nasiruddin Nusrat Shah.

The name Brindaban Das as a Baishnab poet is particularly remarkable. It was he who
first wrote biographical book 'Chaitanyo-Bhagbat’, which is a kind of autobioghaphy of
Sreechaitanyodeb. Another poet Chandrabati wrote the verse famous' Monosha
Mongol’ in verse.

The Muslim Sultans had significant contribution on Sanskrit literature also. Sanskrit
and Bengali are closely related languages. That is why many Muslim rulers had interest
in it. Many of them practiced Sanskrit language individually. During Muslim rule
Bengal was a center for the inculcation of Sanskrit literature. Not only Bengali and
Sanskrit, there was an air of exercising Arabian and Persian poetry during the
Sultanate.

There was an obvious development in Bengali literature and culture during the Mughal
period. However unlike the rulers of Sultani era, the Mughal rulers did not extend much
cooperation in the field of language and literature. Rather it was the Zaminders of
Bengal who carried on that tradition by their own attempts.

During the Muslim rule Bengal had political relation with its neibouring country,
Arakan. As a result, Bengali literature started to spread and expand to Arakan. Daulat
Gazi was one of the greatest poets of the royal court of Arakan. Alawal was another
poet of that royal court. Of his six poetry books 'Padmabati' was the best. He translated
some Persian books of poetry in Bengali. Besides, he wrote a book on music named
"Ragnama’.

Besides Baharam Khan wrote the book of poetry, 'Laily-Majnu'. 'Jangnama'’ and
'Hitogyan Banee' were written by Kazi Hayat Mahmud. Poet Shah Garibullah was also
a famous ancient manuscript writer during this era.

Education

The Muslim rule of Bengal had parallel contributions in the field of sociopolitical as
well as in the field of political, social education. During the Muslim rule education was
open to all. The 'Khankahs' of the Sheiks and the houses of the 'Ulemas' became the
centers for education. During the Muslim rule countless number of mosques were built
everywhere in Bengal. There were 'muktabs' and 'madrasas' along with these mosques.
Boys and girls together would study in these 'muktabs' and 'pathshalas'. The learners of
‘muktabs' and 'Madrasas' would receive higher education. Primary education was .,
compulsory for all Muslim boys and girls. Female education was not much that S

Social, Economic and Cultural History of the Middle Age of Bengal 107
common. Secondary education was not also compulsory for girls. As a result, the
general Muslim girls were deprived of higher education. The language of the rulers was
Persian. Therefore, this language had state dignity. Many Hindus received education in
Persian language with a view to getting government jobs.
During this time, Bengali language attained particular prosperity. Many books were
also written in Bengali so that those who were ignorant of Arabic and Persian could
understand the thoughts and ideas of Islam. These works of literature have enriched the
store of Bengali language and literature.
Before the Muslim rule, the Brahmmins had monopoly in the field of knowledge,
wisdom and education in the Hindu society of East Bengal. During the Muslim rule, the
door became open to all. Hindu boys and girls would receive primary education in the
‘pathshalas’. 'Patshalas' would sit in the abode of the guru or in the house of the wealthy
people. Sometimes, 'muktab' and 'pathshala’ would sit under the same roof of a room.
In the morning, ‘munsi' and in the afternoon 'guru' would teach their students
respectively. The wealthy persons would bear the expenses of the 'pathshalas'. In this
case, Hindus boys and girls had to receive education in the ‘pathshalas' for six years.
There was a system of 'toul' for higher education. The learners would have to receive
education through Sanskrit. Nabadwip and Burdwan were remarkable for the
inculcation of Sanskrit literature. Many women had shown their own achievements in
the practise of education and Sanskrit this age. A class of the Brahmmins would always
devote themselves in astrology and astronomy. In addition to different educational
institutions, there were different ways to develop several methods in vogue, such as
religious songs, popular folk and drama-ballads for the purpose of developing
knowledge and intellect among the people.
Questions for Practice

Multiple choice Questions
1. Which poetry is written in Persian?

(a) Rasul Bijoy (b) Ragmala

(c) Yusuf-Julekha (d) Satnama
2. Why did the Hindus receive education in Persian in the Middle age?

(a) to write literature; (b) to get jobs;

S (c) to do administrative jobs; (d) for political purpose.

108 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Read the paragraph below and answer the question 3 and 4
Limon's uncle had been doing his business in a number of countries in Europe and
America for many years. In order to expand his business he has opened a branch office
in Narayangonj in his own country. He makes business transactions through banks. He
uses personal aeroplane for business advantages.
3. Which time of Bengal does the business expansion of Limon's uncle
has the similarity with?
(a) Pala (b) Sena
(c) Sultan (d) Mughal
4. Asaresult of commercial expansion in that age there grew up -
(a) sea port
(b) river port
(c) ground port
Which one of the following is correct?
(a) i (b) ii
(c) iand ii (d) i, ii, and iii
Creative Questions
1. Mr Reja is a big businessman of Chittagong. He has export-import business. He
imports gold, silver, ornaments of precious stones, silk, cotton, various costly
spices from abroad by ships. Besides, he exports tea and jute products. He
arranged polao, kabab, rejala, and sweets on his daughter's birthday last week.
Everybody was very pleased to eat those foods.
(a) Who translated Mahabharata in Bengali?
(b) Why is agriculture called the main source of economic prosperity of Bengal?
(c) What period does the food of Mr Reja's house bear similarity with? Explain.
(d) Do you think the economic condition of Mr Reja was better than the said
period? Justify your answer.
2
Ss
N

Social, Economic and Cultural History of the Middle Age of Bengal 109
2. Ananya, daughter of Sudhin Roy, a village school teacher is a student in class VII.
Her friend Rabeya's father will not send Rabeya to school any more. He thinks,
girls need not receive education more than this. On hearing the comment of
Rabeya's father about education, teacher Sudhin Roy said that the importance of
education is limitless at present time and any person is incomplete without
education. Education was important in all times.
(a) Who did build Hosseni Dalan?
(b) Why is the Middle Age called the 'golden age' of the Mughals?
(c) Is there any similarity between the mentality of Rabeya's father about education
and Muslim education in the Middle Age? Explain.
(d) Due to persons like Sudhin Roy the Hindu boys and girls could go ahead in
respect of education in the Middle Age. Do you agree with the statement? Give
your opinion in the light of your text book.
2
S
N

Chapter Eight

The First Stage of English Rule in Bengal
From ancient time, Indian subcontinent, especially the Bengal region was like a fairy
state full of wealth and riches. The villages of this region was self-sufficient i.e. things
necessary for life were available in these villages. The peasants of these self-sufficient
villages had fields full of crops, granary full of paddy, ponds abounding with fish.
These villages were also rich in cottage industry. The cloth woven by the weavers was
much better than that of Europe. Among them Maslin was world famous. Moreover,
other regions of the sub-continent were famous for various types of commercial
products and spices. Many people came to conduct business with this country due to
the attraction for these products. British East India Company also came to the
sub-continent with the same purpose. In the later period they were able to occupy the
state power. This chapter focused how the East India Company could introduce English
tule in this region by defeating other European companies which came in this country,
and by intriguing against local rulers in various ways.
At the end of this chapter we will be able to -

e explain the background of English rule in Bengal;

e evaluate the causes and effects of the battle of Palassy and Buxer;

e explain the importance of Diwani in establishing English rule;

e explain the background and the effects of Permanent Settlement;

e realize the political changes in Bengal as a result of English rule.
Arrival of the Europeans
From the 74 century the Arabian merchants had monopoly business with this region.
They mainly conducted business by sea. In 1453 A.D. the Automan Turkish occupied
Constantinople. As a result, trade and commerce with the sub-continent by sea came to
an-end. Therefore, discovery of new water ways became necessary for maintaining
business between the East and the West. Basically, this is the reason for which the
European powers started expeditions by sea to come to this sub-continent.
The Portuguese
Among the Portuguese the daring sailor who first came to this country by sea was
Vasco-da-Gama. Hearrived at Kalikot port on the western coast of India on 27 May
in 1498. His arrival in this country introduced anew age in the field of trade
and commerce and communication. In fact, the Portuguese by degrees tended to
expand the empire in this country in guise of trade and commerce. Within a short time wo
these Portuguese merchants had been able to establish offices at Kalikot, Choul, Ss

The First Stage of English Rule in Bengal 111
GANGUDI PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA 3S ARAN
Cillcutta MYANMAR a Hanot i Fong Kong
ea Yangop <* Bll is
al wend)] te sey a
TEAR ee
oe : ie Ne
sae ie “Ga ») Ly
indian Oéeanr — ‘ sor ANstuns aa a fs
| 3 a » RY
| AF tavasea Cb RG tanda Sea
et As a
Vasco-da-Gam's route to India
Bombay, Saalcity, Basin, Kochin, Goa, Dornon, Diu, etc. ports of the western coast of
the subcontinent. In 1538 A.D. they got permission to set up a commercial house in
Chittagong and Satgoan. In 1579 A.D. they built up a colony in Hoogly. Then they
expanded their habitats in Odisha and in some regions of Bengal. Though the
Portuguese played a pioneering role in setting up commercial offices in different
regions of the sub-continent including Bengal, because of their misdeeds and piret like
behaviour Sayesta Khan, the Subadar of Bengal, drove them away by occupying their
bases of Chittagong and Swandwip. Besides, the Portuguese were also defeated by
other European powers in competitions. As a result, they were bound to leave this
country.
The Dutch
The Dutch formed ‘Dutch East India Company’ and came to this subcontinent for the
purpose of business in 1602 A.D. In India, according to the Charter of the company,
they set up their commercial offices in Kalikot, Nagapattam, Chuchura and Bakura of
Bengal. Besides, they also set up offices at Balasore, Kashimbazar and Baranagar.
There started a clash between the Dutch and the other European power, the English,
about trade and commerce. At the same time they were locked in opposition with the
tulers of Bengal. They were miserably defeated by the English in the battle of Bidara
~ in 1759 A.D. It forced them to leave India closing all their commercial centers. First,
3 the Portuguese, then the fall of the Dutch power eased the rise of the English power.

112 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
The Danish
A group of merchants of Denmark formed "Danish East India Company’ in order to do
business. They set up commercial office in Tribankur in the district of Tanjore of South
India in 1620 A.D. and in Sreerampur of Bengal in 1676 A.D. But they failed to make
profits from their business in this country. In 1845 A.D. they sold their commercial
offices to the English and left this country without any commercial success.

Group Work: Make a list of commercial offices set up in the sub-continent

by the Portuguese, the Dutch and the Danish.
The English
The success of the European merchants by sea and the abundance of wealth and
resources in the East also inspired the English merchants to conduct trade and
commerce in this region. This led a group of merchants of England to form an
association named East India Company. This association of merchants received a
certificate from the Queen Elizabeth in 1608 A.D. to conduct monopoly business in the
East for 15 years. The representative of the company appeared at the court of Emperor
Akbar the Great with this certificate with the hope of getting commercial benefits.
After that Captain Hawkins with the recommendation letter from James met Emperor
Jahangir in 1608 A.D. with a view to expanding trade and business with the Royal
permission. Later a commercial unit (banijjyo kuthi) was set up in Surat in 1612. Later
in 1615 A.D. Sir Thomas Roe, a representative of James I, came to the court of
Emperor Jahangir. He succeeded to get commercial benefits from the Emperor for the
English. He left India in 1619 A.D. Meanwhile, the company strengthened their power
by setting up commercial offices in Surat, Agra, Ahmedabad, etc. The company
established their second commercial offices in Maslipattam. Afterwards they set up
another commercial office in Balasore of Bengal. When their power started to increase
by degrees, they became able to build a fort on the Karmandal coast. They built a
commercial office in Hoogly in 1658 A.D. with the approval from Shah Suja, a Subadar
of Bengal. Thus, the company built commercial offices in Kashimbazar, Dhaka and
Maldah.
In 1668 A.D. the King of England Charles II got Bombay as dowry of marriage with
Catherine, the princess of Portugal. For want of money, Charles sold the city to East
India Company at the cost of fifty thousand pounds. In the later periods this city of
Bombay became the main commercial center of the company. Another Englishman
named Job Charnak gained the possession of Zamindari of three villages named,
Kolkata, Sutanati and Govindapur at the cost of Tk. 1200 in 1690 A.D. In the later
periods the city of Kolkata came into being centering round these three villages on the
river Bhagirathi. Just here the company built Fort William after the name of the King
of England, William III in 1700 A.D. Gradually it turned to a powerful center for
keeping the interest of the English and for the expansion of political interest. ES

The first stage of English rule in Bengal 113
The power of the English Company increased further when the Emperor of Delhi
Farukshiyar gave them the right of duty free trade in Bengal, Bombay and Madras. At
the same time the company got the right of introducing their own currency. English
historian Orme referred to this order of the emperor as the Magna Carta of the East
India Company. Gaining this right East India Company started to march forward at an
irresistible speed.

Individual Work:

1. Make a list of three villages centering round which the city of Kolkata came

into being. How old is Kolkata now?
2. Why is the certificate given to the English by the Emperor Farukshiyar
called Magna Carta? Write down the causes.

The French
The last European merchant company that came to the sub-continent is the French East
India Company. This merchant company was formed in 1664 A.D. In 1668 A.D. the
company set up commercial offices first in Surat and in the following year in
Muslimpatnam. In 1673 A.D. French colony was built up in Pandichery.
Since 1674 A.D. they expanded commercial activities in Bengal. The company bought
the village Chandannagar, situated on the bank of the Ganges from Sayesta Khan, the
Subadar of Bengal. Chandannagar turned to a powerful protected French commercial
office between 1690 A.D. and 1692 A.D. The company became able to build a powerful
fort here in 1696 A.D. On the condition of paying duty at a fixed rate, the French got
the right of conducting trade and commerce in Bihar and Odisha in 1693 A.D. In the
later periods they became able to set up a commercial office in Balasore in
Kashimbazar.
When English merchants were running trade in full swing, the French came to this
country. In this state they found it difficult to sustain in competition with the English.
Like other European merchants the French started dreaming about setting up of empire
here. As a result, collision became inevitable between the French and the English. The
French were defeated because of the intrigues, diplomatic strategy and developed
military strategies of the English. They became more exhausted by the success of the
English in the battle of Palassy in 1757 A.D. for supporting the Nawabs of Bengal. As
a result, the French offices in Bengal went under the possession of the English. The
French company left this country after being defeated in the battles of Karnataka of the
Deccan.
The Battle of Plassey
Alibardi Khan was the Nawab of Bengal, Bihar and Odisha from 1740 A.D. to 1756
A.D. He ruled the country successfully despite adverse situations. He became
successful in suppressing the Marathas and the Bargis. He controlled the merchants of
the British East India Company tactfully. But after his death, there appeared extreme
disorder in the politics of Bengal.
Forma- 15, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

114 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Before his death Nawab Alibordi Khan nominated Sirajuddaula, the son of his
youngest daughter, as his heir to be the next Nawab of Bengal. Alibordi Khan died in
1756 A.D. and then Sirajuddaula became the Nawab of Bengal. His first and foremost
problem was to face conspiracies from his own family and relatives. Alibardi Khan had
three daughters. Among them the eldest was Ghaseti Begum. She was especially
disappointed to see Siraj as the Nawab of Bengal and so she started hatching
conspiracies against Siraj. They were being allied by Raja Rajballav, the dewan of
Ghaseti Begum; Sawkat Jang, who was the cousin of Siraj and ruler of Purnia and some
others. Siraj was tactful to keep Ghaseti Begum under constant vigilance. Siraj
captured Purnia by defeating and killing Sawkat following his revolt against Siraj.
Though Nawab could suppress the family conspiracy, another web of conspiracy
spread outside the palace. Merchants of home and abroad, influential lords of the
palace of Nawab and arisctocracy including military general of Nawab, Mirzafar and
others were involved in the conspiray. Everyone conspired against Nawab to gain their
respective interest. The conspirators started making the background of the battle of
Palassy.
The Causes of the Battle of Plassey
The battle of Palassy was such an event for the people of this region that can cause
fearful disaster in the fate of the people of a country. The causes of this event are
mentioned below:
e As per tradition, the English did not send ry ¥ . 7

any gift to new Nawab after Sirjuddoula ae

ascended to the throne of Bengal and did eh i a

not pay a courtesy visit. Nawab became | « ee

very angry at such misconduct of the st ——— e

English. : Fe...
@ The English kept building their fort g z

despite his prohibition. gaa tas ;

ee oe

e The English company having abused the es i

trade conditions, the national merchants . Ag oe

started to be losers. Nawab forbade abusing at a |

the conditions and ordered to abide by. . aa an

The company also defied that order. a * i '
e@ The English refused to pay tax by i.

breaching the agreement with Alibardi Nawab Sirajuddoula

Khan. Besides, they also showed %

arrogance to repress the public. &

The first stage of English rule in Bengal 115
e Krishnodas, son of Raja Rajballab, together with the family members taking a lot
of riches took shelter to the English in Kolkata. Nawab sent messenger to the
English to send him back. But English governor insulted the messenger of the
Nawab and drove him away. Before that during the rebellion of Shawkat Jang the
English supported the rebels against the Nawab.
The manners of arrogance and disobedience of the English one after another infuriated
the Nawab. In order to teach them a good lesson Nawab occupied Kolkata at the
beginning of June, 1756. On the way he also occupied the commercial office of
Kashimbazar. At the abrupt attack of the Nawab, the English fled away leaving Fort
William. A good number of English including Halwell had to surrender. Acquitted of
captivity, Halwell spread a propaganda to debase Nawab which is in history known as
‘Andhakup Hattya’ (Killing in dark well). In the propaganda it was said that 146
English men were kept arrested in a room of 18 feet length and 10.14 feet wide. Out of
them 123 died of suffocation due to tremendous heat. This propaganda traveled up to
Madras. As a result, agitated Watson and Clive came from Madras to occupy Kolkata.
They defeated Manikchand, the commander of the Nawab and occupied Kolkata.
When Nawab sensed that he was surrounded by intrigues and enemy, he became
submissive towards the English and was bound to sign a disgraceful treaty. In history it
is called Alinagar Treaty.
Clive's ambition soared high after getting all types of privileges provided in Alinagar
Treaty. Taking the advantage of the weaknesses of the Nawab, the English occupied
Chandannagar Kuthi belonging to the French on the excuse of a Seven Years War in
Europe. In this state Nawab made alliance with the French to teach the English a good.
lesson. At this Clive became furious and involved himself in conspiracy to depose the
Nawab.
In this conspiracy Clive was supported by extremely rich merchant Jagatsheth,
Raydurlav, Umichand, Raja Rajballav and the chief of army Mirzafar.
The Event of the Battle of Plassey
The battle of Palassy is an important event for Bengal, on even for the sub-continent.
This battle took place in the mango orchard of Palassy on the bank of the Bhagirathi.
By this time, Robert Clive steadied his condition and declared battle against
Sirajuddoula on the excuse of breaching the treaty. Patriot Mirmadan, Mohonlal and
a
S
AQ

116 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
French chief of army Sean Frey 2.0 0 fF Bs
fought heart and soul in favour ofthe J) BE ed |
Nawab. Mirmadan was killed in the | é © DE ‘LiPy ed
battle. Mirzafar intriguingly stopped 7". fr 3. hed. © dee
fighting sensing the imminent victory ||. {{27. 0.0. 2. BRP :
of the Nawab. The death of Mirmadan | 2° (Uf 2 ed “8
and non-cooperation of Mirzafar | ae IMS a
tensed the Nawab. |: eS, ere ah. oe
Mirzafar, the army chief of the = LK “ Da =?
Nawab, acted like a silent spectator © - Lips Pw 2M 2 yf
with his non-cooperation in the battle = SBA Sq » ye
field. Mirzafar did not stop conspiring | -/")  Vgaz i“ mo & ;
despite the Nawab getting him swear ./.f.. -/ Enis cs ae s ar
by touching the holy Quran. When the 0 ee ae
soldiers of Nawab were taking rest, -{\\. #887, °° 8 . gle
the English soldiers descended on * \ 4h) 0°. “* So ge
them at the gesticulation of Mirzafar.  . I] 7 Esaee iv
The inevitable result of which was the |. 3.) f.¢) °° + |eomgme, SS" "| ;
defeat of the Nawab. Wad fi Cee dette se eet “ &
The Battlefield of Palassy
The Causes of the fall of The Nawab
e Treachery and non-cooperation of the army chief of the Nawab and their abettors
in the battle field.
e _ Everyone from the army chief of the Nawab to his courtiers sacrificed the interest
of the country for their own interest.
e Young Nawab was deficient of experience, prudence, intelligence and steadiness.
He failed to take quick decision in the battlefield.
e He depended on Mirzafar again and again despite his knowledge about the
conspiracy of Mirzafar.
e — Sirajuddoula did not evaluate the warning and advice of Alibardi Khan about the
conspiracy of the English and the French.
e The enemies of the Nawab were united and the had better fighting strategy.
e __ Robert Clive had prudence and subtle cunningness.
=
8

The first stage of English rule in Bengal 117

The Results of the Battle of Palassy

e The defeat and the death of Sirajuddoula eased the way to the direct colonial rule.

e  Asaresult of the battle though Mirzafar was made to ascend to the throne though
he was mere a Nawab; Robert Clive held the actual power.

e Asa result of the battle of Palassy the English got the right of conducting
monopoly business in Bengal. The French was bound to leave this country.

e After this battle the socio-economic and political changes of this country started
to take place in favor of the interest of the English.

e The far-reaching effect of the battle of Palassy was the establishment of the rule
of the company in the sub-continent. Thus the independence of Bengal even India
wallowed on the ground.

Therefore, it is seen that though the battle of Palassy was a partial battle, it has

unlimited importance in the politics of Bengal, even for the whole subcontinent.

Individual Work: Justify the relation between the defeat of Nawab in the
battle of Palassy and the failure of the French East India Company.

Group Work: Draw a picture showing the positions of the army of the Nawab
and the English in the battlefield of Palassy.

The Battle of Buxar (1764)

The purpose for which the English merchant company got Mirzafar to ascend to the

throne could not be successful. The new Nawab became bankrupt failing to pay the

Company its due money. He had to depend on Robert Clive again and again to protect

his power also. In contrast, Nawab did not like frequent interference of Clive in the

administration of the state. Mirzafar made entente with another European company, the

Dutch. The matter could not be hidden from the English. Mirzafar was deposed with

the allegation of inefficiency, inability to pay additional money and entente with the

Dutch. In 1760 A.D. English Governor Vancitart deposed Mirzafar and seated Mir

Kashim on the throne on certain conditions. After ascending to power Mir Kashim

opted for independent rule. So he could not avoid the ultimate conflicts with the

English people.

The Causes of the Battle of Buxar

Mir Kashim was an efficient ruler, a prudent politician and a free will person. He was

careful of the welfare of his subjects. He wanted to overcome economic and military

o weaknesses saving the interest of Bengal from English in a respectful way. To this end
S the measures adopted by him at last became the causes of the battle of Buxar.

118 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization

e Mir Kashim first took steps to stop political interference of the English and make
the administration free from their influence. For this purpose he transferred the
capital from Murshidabad to Munger. He built forts and dug trenches around the
capital for safety.

e _ He appointed two European soldiers as trainers to resist probable attack of the
English and to teach the soldiers European military strategies.

e He made arrangements to make canons, rifles, etc. in the capital so that he would
not have to depend on others for arms and ammunitions.

e The ruler of Bihar Ramnarayan having shown interest towards the English, Mir
Kashim terminated him from his post and confiscated his property.

e __ The English started to abuse the privileges given in the declarations (farman) by
the Mughal Emperor in 1717 A.D. to conduct business. The local businessmen
started to be affected as a result of the abuse of the license called 'Dastak’. As a
result, Nawab adopted only one system for all and withdrew all duties from
internal business. Consequently, the employees of the English Company
experienced difficulties in their monopoly profitable business. As The Nawab did
not want to compromise in this matter, collision with the English became
inevitable.

e All the steps taken by the Nawab were for the interest of country and its people
but against the interest of the English. So, the angry English were taking
preparation to get relief of it.

e In 1763 A.D. the chief of 'Patna Kuthi' Elice having been angry attacked Patna
and occupied it. So, Nawab did not have any other alternatives to taking up arms
against the English. Mir Kashim drove away Elice from Patna through successful
resistance. In 1763 A.D. the Kolkata Council declared battle against the Nawab.
Nawab was miserably defeated in the battles of Giria, Katoa and Udaynala by the
English army sent under the command of Major Adams.

By this time, the English made Mirzafar ascend on the throne of Bengal. Though Mir

Kashim was defeated but not disappointed. Nawab started taking preparation to

encounter the English. He made alliance with Nawab Sujauddoula of Ayodhya and

Mughal Emperor Shah Alam and took part in the extreme test of power against the

English in a place of Bihar named Buxar in 1764 A.D. Unfortunately, the allied forces

were extremely defeated by Major Monroe.

Due to the defeat of Mir Kashim the last attempt to recover the sovereignty of Bengal

turned to a failure. The English started to expand their power at an irresistible speed in

Bengal even everywhere in the sub-continent. This is why in the history of the «

sub-continent, the battle of Buxar is much more important than that of Palassy. ES

The first stage of English rule in Bengal 119
Individual Work: Arrange the information in the table correctly .
Participants’ name with country of the Battle of Buxar
Emperor Shah Alam
Sujauddoula
Results of the Battle of Buxar
1. As a result of this battle the last attempt to save the independence by Mir Kashim
turned to a failure.
2. Being defeated in this battle Sujauddoula, Nawab of Ajoddha fled to Rohilakhand.
The emperor of Delhi, Shah Alam, joined the English. Defeated Mir Kashim hid
himself. He died in 1777 A.D.
3. The English became able to get Kara and Elahabad handed over to him from the
Nawab of Ajoddha.
4. As a result of this battle, not only Nawab of Bengal but also his allies Emperor of
India Shah Alam and Nawab of Ajoddha, Sujauddoula were also defeated. The defeat
of this tri-power together increased the dignity and the power of the English.
5. As a result of this battle, Robert Clive formally got the stewardship of Bengal, Bihar
and Orissa from the Emperor of Delhi. Consequently, the rights of the English got
legally recognized in Bengal and they started to become immensely powerful.
The defeat of Mir Kashim in the battle of Boxar not only put an end to Nawabi rule, but
also clearly revealed the weaknesses of the Mughal Emperor to the English. As a result,
the English started to express themselves as a colonial power rapidly.
Receiving of Diwani by the Company
In 1765 after the death of Mirzafar his son, Nazirn-ud-Doula was placed on the throne
of Bengal on condition. The condition was that according to the old own ‘dastak' he,
like his father, would allow the English to make duty-free unrestricted business and
cancel the privilege of unrestricted trade for the local merchants. After the battle of
Boxar, the way to the English rule in Bengal became easy. At this time the English
Company got complete power to collect revenues of Bengal from Mughal Emperor. In
% 1765 after receiving Diwani, the English actually exposed themselves as the true ruler
Sof Bengal.

120 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
During Mughal rule the post of Diwani and Subadari of Bengal respectively bestowed
on different persons. Murshid Kuli Khan broke this custom and he himself alone
occupied the two posts. During his time though revenue was regularly sent to the
center, in later periods many stopped sending that. From the time of Alibardi Khan it
was stopped completely. In this perspective the Emperor requested the Company to
receive stewardship of Bengal, Bihar and Odisha instead of annual gift. But the
company did not care for this request at that time. But after the battle of Buxar in 1765,
Clive’s is coming to India for the second time, the situations changed.

Returning to the country, Clive at first paid attention to the defeated Nawab of Ayodhya

and the Emperor of Delhi. He made alliance with the defeated Nawab of Ayodhya. In

return he took away the districts of Kara and Alahabad. As compensation of the battle
he realized five million taka. On the other hand, he signed two agreements attached
with the conditions of Diwani. One agreement was with Shah Alam, the Emperor of

Delhi. According to the agreement the Diwani of Bengal, Bihar and Odisha was given

to the company. In return, Nawab would send Tk. 26 lac to the Emperor. The company

would be the guarantor of sending this money regularly.

The other treaty was signed with the immature son of Mirzafar, Nazirnuddoula. Nawab

complied with the conditions of getting Diwani with a view to receiving 53 lakh taka

annually. For these treaties the power of the company increased as monopoly. Nawab
was now the pensioner of the company. The Emperor was also like that. The whole
power was occupied by the company. The income of the company as a result of Diwani
would suffice the total expenditure of the company. Therefore, it can be said about the

Importance of Diwani that,

1. Receiving Diwani by the company was not only a great political victory but
also an economic victory.

2. Both Emperor and Nawab turned to powerless rulers. Actually they became
pension - holder employees of the company.

3. As a result of achieving Diwani and because of duty-free trade as per conditions
set by Nawab, the employees of the company became desperate. Their greed
for money increased day by day. The local merchants and the general people
started to be affected. Their economic backbone broke down completely.

4. As a result of receiving Diwani a lot of money was being plundered to England
from Bengal. The amount was so large that the field of industrial revolution of
England was created by dint of this money.

Group Work: 'Receiving Diwani is the most important event in the begining of
English rule.’ (Group Debate) S
XQ

The first stage of English rule in Bengal 121
Dual Administration

Robert Clive gained sole authority of

robbing wealth in the name of Diwani \

certificate. Since the merchant company -

was given this immense power from Delhi, Ly \ j

there created a dual administration. Asa P

result, the company gained authority without

responsibility and the Nawab turned to a af ‘ /

powerless ruler, whereas, the Nawab had Je J e /

to carry on full responsibility. As a result, at ;
there created anunprecedented administrative d >

complexity in Bengal. The general people =

of the country had to pay for that. There Robert Clive

was a fearful famine in the summer of 1770 (1176 in Bangla calender year) which is
known in history as 'Monontor of 76’. In the words of Murshidabad representative of
the company Richard Betcher, 'That the people alive are eating the dead people is not a
rumor, but a fact’. One-third of the people of Bengal had to face death in this famine.
The amount of annual revenue collected from 1765 to 1770 was nearly equivalent to
the revenue collected in the year of famine. As a result, the people of Bengal became
extremely poor and helpless due to extreme exploitation. In the dual system, the Nawab
due to inadequate money, failed completely to run the administration. There started
disorder all over the country. In this situation in 1772 Waren Hestings did away with
the Dual Administration system.

Permanent Settlement
Lord Cornwallis was sent with the charge of Governor-General and army chief in 1786
to make the administration corruption free and organized. He introduced permanent
settlement or permanent land system in 1793. On 22 March of the same year he gave
permanent possession to the Zeminders of Bengal, Bihar and Odisha on their land. This
settlement of land is called 'Permanent Settlement’.

Background

Waren Hestings introduced five year settlement to collect revenue in 1772. Though the
bid of land was at high stage, revenue could not be collected proportionately. Since
there was definite deadline, to collect revenue the Zaminders would realize the money
from the farmers by any means. They did not aim at either developing the land and or
the condition of the farmers. As a result, the farmers in fear of repression would leave
the land and flee away. The land would lie uncultivated for years and the prices of land
would go down. In this situation Waren Hastings introduced settlement for one year
with the Zaminders. This system also failed to benefit the government, Zaminders or
Forma- 16, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

122 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
the subjects. Later the parliament of England realized the necessity of inventing a new
system to solve the revenue problem in Bengal, Bihar and Odisha. In 1789 Cornwallis
took preparation to give ten year settlement to the Zaminders. Having approval from
the authority of England Cornwallis introduced ten year settlement with the Zaminders
in 1789. He also pledged that with the approval of the meeting of the Company
Directors, ten year settlement would turn to the permanent settlement.

The settlement was approved by the Board of Directors in September, 1792. On 22nd

March, 1793 Cornwallis declared ten year settlement as the Permanent Settlement.

Features

e Permanent settlement made the Zaminders permanent possessors of land
ie. the Zeminders got the right of the possession of land.

e@ The amount of revenue being fixed, Zaminders gained permanent right to use the
land in exchange of regular payment of revenue.

e Asa result of the introduction of this system, the administrative power of the
Zaminders became extinct. The government itself took the responsibility of
maintaining peace and safety.

e If the tax was due, it would be collected by selling some parts of the land
of the Zaminders.

Results

Permanent Settlement cast far-reaching influence on the socio-economic structure of

Bengal. Cornwallis himself was a Zaminder. He wanted to form a Zaminder class even

in a country like England. But socio-economic structure of Europe and the

subcontinent and the fashion of its development were not the same. As a result,
disadvantages were more noticed than advantages in this system imposed from outside.

Advantages

e The main advantage of this system was that the government could be sure of the
amount of its income. As a result, implementation of budgets and various plans
became easy for the government.

e Asaresult of the Permanent Settlement, the newly created Zaminder class turned to
be devoted supporters of the company. Consequently, the Zaminders were able to
play an important role in steadying and strengthening the British rule.

e As the permanent possession of the Zaminders on land being recognized, many of
them devoted themselves to do welfare activities in their respective areas.

e They made arrangements to cultivate unused land and the land covered with jungle. 26
With the increase in production, the economic condition of the country developed. &

The first stage of English rule in Bengal 123

Demerits

As a result of the Permanent Settlement, the interest of the Zaminders was well

protected. They gradually turned to a wealthy class. On the other hand, the previous

right of the subjects on land was abolished. A Zaminder could oust them from land. At
the beginning, since there was no law of public rights, people had to depend on the

Zaminders.

e In the Permanent Settlement there was no arrangement for accurate survey.
Sometimes more revenue would be imposed on the tax-free lands. Since there was
no land demarcation, clashes and suits about land was very common.

e Many big Zamindaries were destroyed due to strictness of paying the tax before
sunset on a fixed date formulated in the Sunset Law.

e Being sure about Zamindary income and possession, the Zaminders started to live
in cities leaving the responsibility on their rent-collectors and stewards. In absence
of these Zaminders, the subjects became irritated at the oppression of their
rent-collectors and stewards. As a result, the production of land started to decline,
the economic condition of villages also started to worsen.

© The lands of the subcontinent were a symbol of aristocracy. As a result, many
people of lower classes and general people who had been the owners of vast wealth
by conducting business with the company became busy gaining dignity of
aristocracy by buying Zamindary. Consequently, the possibility of the building up
of local capital and industry was destroyed. On the other hand, the company also
could avoid the probable competition in this country.

As a result of the Permanent Settlement, farmers started to be directly exploited by the

Zaminders. Again with the patronage of this Zaminder class, an educated class was

formed in the rural society who in the later periods became conscious about the country

and nation. At the same time, the British made Zaminder class at the beginning was the
strong foundation of the British Empire. But their subsequent generation educated in
western education jumped into the independence movement to oust British monarchy.
Individual Work: How was the economy of Bengal affected by the Permanent
Settlement?
Questions for practice
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Which Portuguese sailor first came to the sub-continent by sea?
(a) Vasco-da-Gama (b) Captain Hawkins
26
s (c) Sir Thomas Roe (d) Job Charnak

124 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
2. Nawab Sirajuddoula was bound to take up arms against the English in the
field of Palassy because -
i. The English kept building fort defying the order of the Nawab.
ii. The English refused to pay tax to the Nawab infringing the agreement.
iii. The Nawab expressed interest to occupy the wealth of the English.
Which one of the followings is correct?
(a) iandii (b) ii and iti
(c) iand iii (d) i, ii and iii
Read the following passage and answer question 3 and 4
It was long ago. Mr Rahman of Sylhet and his three friends taking a recommendation
letter from the local Zaminder went to Africa and met the authority there with a view to
getting commercial facilities. They took the bid of a village on the bank of a river and
set up a commercial office there. The local authority gave Mr Rahman and his company
right to conduct tax-free business.
3. Which European nation's commercial activities described in your text
book are similar to the activities of Mr Rahman and his friends?
(a) Portuguese (b) Dutch
(c) Danish (d) English
4. The activities of aforesaid nations include
i. appearing at the court of Emperor Akbar
ii. building Fort William
iii. gaining tax-free commercial priviledge
Which one of the followings is correct?
(a) iand ii (b) iand iii
(c) iiand iii (d) i, ii and iii
2
Ss
N

The first stage of English rule in Bengal 125

Creative Questions

1. Mamun and Kamal are two brothers. After their father's death, there was a conflict

between them about the ownership of their business organisation, Star Garments.

Elder brother Mamun took the responsibility of running the Garments and younger

brother Kamal took the responsibility of looking after the family. Disorder appeared

in the family as Kamal could not get money from the income of the garments for

running the family.

(a) Where did Vasco-da-Gama originated from?

(b) Why did many people come to Bengal to do business?

(c) What incident in your textbook is similar to the division of power in the
stimulant?

(d) Do you think the aforesaid incident broke down the backbone of the economy
of Bengal?

2. The annual income of the Polashpur tea garden had been fluctuating for some days.
For this reason the garden authority allocated the production system to some
persons for some years to determine the income of the garden. The new bidders in
the hope of making more profits compelled the tea workers to work more hours
without extra workers. The bidders did not aim at developing the tea garden and the
condition of the workers as well. The garden authority made permanent settlement
with the bidders in order to get rid of this distress.

(a) On which bank of river did the battle of Palassy take place?
(b) What does 'Andhakup Hottya' mean?
(c) Which incident of your text book is similar to the new system of the stimulant?
(d) Do you think the said settlement played a helping role in the field of economic
order?
2
S
N

Chapter Nine
Resistance, Renaissance and Reform Movements
in Bengal during British Rule
Once the farmers of Bengal used to rush to crop fields with ploughs on their shoulders
at dawns. They used to return home keeping the setting sun ahead. There was not
plenty of rice and cloth; all the same there was no want at all. There was no want of joy
and festivals. There were ‘thirteen festivals’ in twelve months. Evening rendezvous and
sittings were sounded with jari, sari, kirton, jatrapala etc. But at the end of 15t century
the aggression of British merchants started to snatch away the smiles of their face, their
joys and festivals. Consequently this turns to rise the English merchants as political
powers.
At first they destroyed the cottage industry of the villages of Bengal. Then they cast
their sight on the fertile land of this country. They kept experimenting one after another
in imposing land tax for the greed of more money. The farmers and the general people
were the cruel sacrifice of these experiments. Due to severe exploitation, helpless
farmers and general people had no other alternative but to revolt. This revolt continued
from the end of the 18*4 century to the second half of the 19 century.
Along with this revolt, a religious reform movement started in the Muslim society of
Bengal which in the later stages turned to a huge farmer's movement. Simultaneously,
the waves of modem thoughts of the west burst into the educated part of the society.
Consequently, as there took place renaissance in the field of art and literature in the
Hindu community. So there started a practice of free thought and free intellect.
Reformation started in the Hindu society averting superstitions and bigotry. The
Muslim society also came forward to modernize Muslim community educating them in
the western education through reformation. Basically, throughout the 184 and the 19th
century a wind of change started to blow in the socio-economic politics of this region.
This change was started by the farmers and the general people of Bengal.
At the end of this chapter we will be able to -
e explain the perspective and significance of the resistance movement in Bengal
during the British rule;
© evaluate the contributions of particular persons to renaissance and reform movements;
© be inspired in patriotism knowing the events of battle and resistance
movement against British rule;
© be inspired in free thought through knowing about different reformers and 2%
reform activities. S

Resistance, Renaissance and Reform Movements in Bengal during British Rule 127
Resistance Movement
Fakir-Sannyasi Movement
The Fakir-Sannyasi andolon (the movement led by the religious devotee the Fakir, and
the Sannyasi) of Bengal was a movement against the British. This movement started
after the Battle of Palassy. Before that Nawab Mir Kashim wanted help from fakirs and
monks in the battle against the English. Responding to this call, fakirs and monks
fought in favour of the Nawab. Though Mir Kashim fled away being defeated in the
battle, fakirs and monks continued their movement against the British. Since they
helped the Nawab, the English kept an eye on their activities.
According to traditional practice, fakirs and monks lived on alms. They would travel
from one place to another on the occasions of religious festivals and pilgrimage. They
had with them light arms for their safety. They had been free and independent before
the establishment of the British rule in Bengal. But the British government kept
interrupting their unrestricted movement. They imposed tax on pilgrimage and
declared begging as illegal. Besides, they called them robbers and pirates. As a result,
fakirs and monks took part in a long-standing movement against the English. The name
of the leader of rebellious fakir groups was Majnu Shah. The name of the leader of the
monks was Bhabani Pathak. The targets of their attacks were Zaminder's court of law
and the houses of tax collectors. The monks first started rebellion against the English in
the district of Bardwan of West Bengal in 1760 A.D.
Majnu Shah started activities against the English in the whole of North Bengal in 1771
A.D. Majnu Shah was locked in many collisions with the English in the districts of
Rangpur, Rajshahi, Dinajpur and Mymensingh from 1777 A.D. to 1786 A.D. And his
fighting strategy was guerilla strategy i.e. sudden attacks and sneak away in safety. It
was never possible to defeat him completely in any fight against the English. He died
in 1787 A.D. Then fakirs Musa Shah, Sohban Shah, Cherag Ali, Karim Shah including
Mother Bakhs took the leadership of the rebellion. These leaders kept English
administration unsettled for some years. In 1800 they were completely defeated. On the
other hand Bhabani Pathak, the leader of monk rebellion was killed along with two
assistants by a group of British soldiers under the leadership of Lieutenant Brenan in
1887 A.D. He was the main leader of monk rebellion. Monk movement came to an end
with his death.
Individual Work: What is the relation bettween strict observation of the
English towards fakirs and monks and the defeat of Mir Kashim? What were its
consequences ?
2
8

128 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
The Straggle of Titumir

Mir Nisar Ali alias Titumir was born in the village aw ~

Chandpur in Barasat sub-division in the district of 24 ——
Parganas. When there was a tide of Wahabi Movemet :

going on in North India and North-west border c ay
province, this movement took a violent shape under | _ x

the leadership of Titumir in the region of Barasat in oa hs

West Bengal. In the 19t century in India a religious |" ©

teformation movement started in Bengal one was ¥

famous Wahabi or Muhammadia Movement and the q .

other was famous as Faraizi Movement. The main = :

purpose of both of the movements were to direct the .
Muslims to the true paths of religious edicts by ee ,
eradicating religious superstitions from the society. Titurmir

The Wahabis organized themselves under the leadership of Titumir. Tarikaye
Muhammadia Movement led by Titumir was imbued with the ideology of Sir Sayed
Ahmed Shaheed of north India.

Titumir went to Mecca to perform Haj. He returned home in 1827 A.D. and devoted
himself to religious activities. His religious reformation movement was responded by
many Muslims especially by many farmers, weavers of 24 Parganas and the district of
Nadia. As a result, the Zaminders put various kinds of injunctions on Muslim tenants
and started oppressive behavior with them. Titumir failed in getting peaceful justice
from the authority against this oppression. At last he and his followers adopted the path
of armed resistance. Titumir set up his first base in the village N arikelbaria in 1831. He
built a strong bamboo fort. He formed a skilled strong battalion of stick-fighters under
the leadership of Golam Rasul.

Farmers, oppressed by the English, Zaminders and indigo planters joined the battalion
of Titumir in groups. Thus, the movement of religious reformation turned into a huge
farmers' movement. As a result, ruling and exploiting Zaminder classes were alarmed
at the unity of the farmers and the increase in the strength of Titumir. At last, the
government sent a large skilled army against Titumir in 1831 A.D. This army led by
Major Scott attacked Titumir's bamboo-fort of Narikelbaria. Titumir's battalion was
defeated fighting with heroism facing guns and canons. He was killed in the battle.
The bamboo-fort was blown away using canons. Thus, an organized farmer movement
came to an end. Titumir was able to form a huge farmer's movement through religious
reformation movement, His bamboo-fort was the symbol of the united resistance
against bullets and blows of the English, indigo-planters and Zaminders which
provided the Bengalees with courage against different oppression and injustice from %
time to time; encouraged them to go ahead on the paths of freedom. &

Resistance, Renaissance and Reform Movements in Bengal during British Rule 129

Individual Work:

1. Which activities of Titumir are the symbols of courage and patriotism?

2. How did religious reformation movement turn into a farmer movement?

Find out the reasons behind it.

Group Work: Take help of your teacher and do a presentation of the Bansher

Kella of Titumir. The presentation would include the structure of the Kella,

its symbolic value, its glorious role to resist the English rulers and its final

consquences.
The Indigo Revolt
The English came to this country to do business. Due to the weaknesses of the rulers of
the sub-continent, they became the rulers of this country. But they were always alert
with their business acumen. Due to this alertness they became greedy about the fertile
land of this country. They became interested in producing commercial crops rather than
food crops in these fertile lands. Indigo was that commercial crop that interested them
the most. At that time indigo business was very lucrative. In fact, with the progress of
industry the demand of indigo in England rose so high in order to dye clothes. Besides,
due to British colonies in America being independent, indigo cultivation by the English
merchants ceased there. As a result, Bengal became the main center of indigo supply.
Indigo cultivation started in Bengal in British rule between 1770 A.D. and 1780 A.D.
The indigo planters would select the best lands of the farmers for indigo cultivation.
They would compel the farmers to take advanced money for indigo cultivation. And the
advanced money once taken, the farmers could never pay off the loan even generation
after generation. If the farmers were not agreed to indigo cultivation they would be
inflicted extreme oppression. The English merchants did the monopoly business of
indigo. Indigo was cultivated widely in Faridpur, Jessore, Dhaka, Pabna, Rajshahi,
Nadia and Murshidabad.
With the increase in prices of things, the cost of indigo production also increased. The
indigo-planters did not bother that. Besides, though in the beginning they supplied
seeds to the farmers free of cost, they stopped supplying that in the later stages. As a
result, indigo production gradually became impossible for the farmers.
There was no means of liberating the farmers from deprivation stated above. Laws
were beyond their reach. Most of the law enforcer were friends of indigo-planters or
they came from the same country. Moreover, many times the indigo planters were
appointed as honorary magistrates. So, the farmers could not take any safeguard or
Justice. Under the circumstances, the indigo planters exposed themselves not only as
Forma- 17, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

130 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
merchants in the villages but also as very powerful strange oppressive Zaminders. They
got so cruel and desperate that they did not even hesitate to kill the disobedient farmers.
As the indigo cultivators having no other means to resist the oppression of the English
they burst into tremendous revolt in 1859 A.D. Farmers in villages started to get
organized and united. All the revolts were led by indigo cultivators themselves. The
leaders of the Indigo revolt in Jessore were two brothers-Nabin Madhab and Beni
Madhab. Baidyanath and Biswanath Sarder led the revolted in Hoogly. Megha Sarker
was in the leadership in Nadia again, two brothers Vishucharan Biswas and
Digwambar biswas were in the leadership of Chowgasa, Nadia.. The fire of revolt
spread in Bengal under local leadership. The farmers took their firm position not to
cultivate indigo. Even they defied the order of English magistrate. The people of
educated middle class started to express their sympathetic attitudes towards the
farmers. Reports on the oppression by the indigo planters on the farmers continued to
be published in different newspapers. The story of the play 'Nildarpan' written by
Dinobandhu Mitra spread too far and wide.
At last the struggling farmers of Bengal won the victory. In 1861 A.D. British
government formed Indigo Commission. Based on the recommendation of the
commission, indigo cultivation was declared as 'under the will’ of the farmers. Besides,
indigo contract was abolished. In this perspective, indigo revolt came to an end. In the
later periods, artificial indigo alternative to original indigo having been invented,
indigo cultivation ceased for good.

Individual Work: 1. Prepare a case study on the perspectives on which indigo revolt took

place.

2. Show the background of the end of indigo cultivation in Bengal forever.
Faraizi Movement
The founder of the Faraizi Movement Hazi Shariatullah was born in the village
Shashail in the district of Faridpur in 1782 A.D. He stayed in Mecca for long twenty
years. He became a profound scholar studying there on Islam.
Returning home, he came to understand that the Muslims of Bengal have moved away
too far from the real teachings of Islam. Non-Islamic practices, superstitions,
malpractices have engulfed them. He was determined to make Islam free from
superstitions and these non-Islamic malpractices. Out of this determination, in the first
half of the 19th century he intitiated a religious and social reformation movement
among the Muslims. The name of this religious reformation movement of Shariatullah
is called the 'Faraizi Movement'.

S

Resistance, Renaissance and Reform Movements in Bengal during British Rule 131
The word 'Faraizi' has come from Arabic word 'Faraz' (compulsory duty). Those who
perform ‘Faraz’ are called the 'Faraizi' and those who were the followers of Hazi
Shariatullah in Bengal are called the 'Faraizi' in history. He called upon the Muslim
society to perform ever what are obligatory to be done in Islam giving up all
non-Islamic beliefs, practices, manners and ceremonies. He could not comply with the
British rule in Bengal that is in India. He looked down upon the English rule. He
declared even India as 'Darul Harab' ( country of atheists). He directed the | Muslims
to give up 'Zuma' and prayer of two Eids in the country ruled by the rulers of other
religion.
The exploited, oppressed poor rayots, farmers, weavers and '‘teli' communities
spontaneously joined this movement. The faith and belief of the poor people on
Shariatullahh and his extraordinary success formed a firm unity among the people of
lower classes. The Zaminders started to put hindrances on the religious ceremonies and
practices of the Muslims. Shariatullah advised the tenants to refrain from paying illegal
tax and took preparation to form resistance against all oppression of Zaminders. While
the country was undergoing famine like situation, he demanded for plain rice with salt.
When the Zaminders started oppressing the Faraizi followers on different excuses, he
decided to form a stick-fighting battalion to protect the tenants. In 1839 A.D. a police
injunction was imposed on him. He died in 1840 A.D. After his death, his worthy son
Muhammad Muhsinuddin Ahmed alias Dudu Mia took the charge of the Faraizi
Movement. He was born in 1819 A.D. Though he was not so erudite like his father, his
organizing capacity was extraordinary.
Individual work: Make a list of 'Faraz' (compulsory duties) on which Hazi Shariatullah|
put on emphasis.
Faraizi Movement under the leadership of Dudu Mia turned into an armed struggle of
freedom from exploitation of the peasantry along with a religious reformation
movement. The farmers upset with extreme economic exploitation of the English rulers
took part in this anti-exploitation movement directly. Thousands of farmers and
hundreds of Zaminders joined the movement in order to survive from the oppression of
indigo-planters.
Dudu Mia was the master of the Faraizis. After the death of his father he resorted armed
struggle giving up his father's peaceful principle. He learned how to move sticks with
a view to strengthen the resistance struggle of the Faraizis. He formed a skilled stick
fighting lathial battalion by employing Jalaluddin Mollah, a stick fighter of his father's
time as the chief of army. Its purpose was to arrange resistance against illegal tax
S imposed by the Zaminders and oppression of indigo-planters. It is mentionable here
NS that Faridpur, Pabna, Rajshahi, Jessore, Murshidabad, Nadia, etc. regions inhabited by

132 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
chiefly Muslims were the best for indigo cultivation. So, the degree of oppression of the
indigo planters were also intolerable. Independent government was formed under his
leadership in villages. An army (stick fighting battalion) of the independent
government was also formed of tenants who were farmers.
East Bengal was divided into some areas in the government system of the Faraizis.
Dudu Mia together with his followers continued struggle for a long time against the
Zaminders and the indigo planters. Local Zaminders in alliance with foreign rulers and
indigo planters kept lodging criminal cases against him. But they had to acquit him for
want of witnesses. At last in 1857 A.D. for the first time the fire of Indian Independence
War having been kindled, the British government was intimidated. The alarmed British
government detained Dudu Mia as political captive in Calcutta Zail. He came out of the
prison in 1860 A.D. and this revolting patriot died in 1862 A.D. After his death, Faraizi
Movement became weak for the want of competent leadership.

Individual Work: Being alarmed during the Independence War of India in 1857

A.D., the British government imprisoned Dudu Mia. Arrange its causes in sequence.
Renaissance and Reform Movement
Renaissance
After the battle of Palassy in 1757 A.D., there was a far-reaching implication of
economic and political changes in this region. Again, the Industrial Revolution at the
later half of the 18 century in England and French Revolution (in 1789) also
influenced politics and economy of this region. At that time some people of Bengal
came in contact with these revolutionary changes. They themselves introduced
renaissance. The influence of European socio-economy and politics introduced
renaissance in the minds of the educated people of Bengal. Under the influence of their
leadership, self-consciousness, sense of self-dignity and sense of individuality were
acutely aroused in the countrymen. At last the influence of renaissance itself laid the
primary foundation of nationalist spirit among the countrymen which finally took the
people of Bengal i.e. the Indians to the way of independence.
New waves of thoughts started flourishing at different aspects of life such as
conventional religious thoughts and practices, literature, social customs, and traditions.
As a consequences, there incepted new religious doctrines (Brahmma religion and new
Hinduism), new education, new literature, new social ideals and practices. The origin
of renaissance in Bengal took place among these very novelties. As a result, Bengal
became the center of modem thoughts and spirit in whole India. The Bengalees turned
to be the custodians of western civilization and culture under the influence of English
education and western trends of thoughts. Many of the intellectuals of Bengal gave up S

Resistance, Renaissance and Reform Movements in Bengal during British Rule 133
the thoughts of the Middle Age and turned into modem humans by embracing
rationalism, individual liberty and scientific outlook. Some generous administrators of
the East India Company had contributions to the spread of the new trend of thoughts.
They showed great interests in the development of local language and literature. Many
of the English administration headed by Hastings, Elfinstone, Malcolm Monroe,
Metkaf thought it their moral and humane responsibility to revive the people of India
with western trends of thoughts and scientific knowledge, and philosophy. Besides,
printing press founded by Christian missionaries also contributed remarkably to the
spread of the thoughts of modem education.
Raja Rammohan Roy P rr <S
Raja Rammohan Roy, the creator of renaissance of ww
Bengal was thefirst modern man of India. He was born ‘Wg, aay
in the village Radhanagarin the district of Hoogly. “{ {fe 4 ‘ua
Rammohan Roy had extraordinary erudition. He ge x
gained great mastery especially over Arabic, French, :
Urdu, Latin and Greek language. He published the eyitey
translations of'Vedantasutra' and 'Vedantasar' including ~~} ' { eee ee
Upanishad. His other writings included 'Tuhfatul {|
Muzahhiddeen' (belief in singleness of God)'Manzaratul : |
Adian' (discussion on different religions), Justice with :
Bhatracharya, imagistic religious practices of the Raja Rammohan Roy
Hindus, Etc. Besides, he was the publisher of three magazines Sambad Kaumodi,
Miratul Akhbar and Brahmmanikal Magazine. Raja Rammohan Roy, the transformer
of modern India, deeply observed the social and political trends of the then society. He
endeavoured to build up a new society in the light of his own trends of thinking.
He made efforts to abolish 'Satidaha', child marriage, caste system, worshipping of
images of God and other superstitions of Hindu society. Besides, he wanted to rebuild
Hinduism based on the ancient belief in the singleness of God by removing all
superstitions. He formed an association named 'Atmio Sabha’ (Meeting of the relatives)
with a view to preaching the reformation of Hinduism, that is his own religious
doctrine. He established the society of Brahmmins on 20 August in 1828 A.D. Then he
founded the prayer house of the society of the Brahmmins .
His establishment of the society of the Brahmmins opened a new age in the religious
history of the subcontinent. He contributed not only to social and religious affairs, but
also to the spread of education. He believed that English was necessary for the
countrymen. For this reason, despite being a scholar in Sanskrit, he opposed the
e proposed establishment of Government Sanskrit College. Raja Rammohan Roy
S established 'Anglo-Hindu School’ in 1822 A.D., where there was arrangement for

134 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
teaching English, Philosophy, and modern science. He wrote a letter to Lord Amhurst
explaining the importance of teaching science and philosophy instead of Sanskrit
education. Besides, he applied to spend Tk. one lac allocated by the Indian government
for the Indians in modern education, instead of Sanskrit and Madrasah education.
This great man, the creator of Indian renaissance, Raja Rammohan Roy died in 1833
A.D. His dream came true two years after his death. The government decision to
educate the Indians in western language was approved.

Work: Make a list of the books written and magazines published by Raja

Rammohan Roy.

Deorozio and the Young Bengal Movement
Henry Louis Deorozio was bom in Calcutta (Kolkata) on 18 April in 1809 A.D. His
father was Portuguese and his mother was Bengalee. Deorozio started to receive
education at Dharmatala Academy of David Dramond, an English school. The
Headteacher of the school, Mr Dramond, was an unprejudiced, progressive man with
secular values, utter sincerity, and humanitarian qualities. The ideals of this teacher
kept Deorozio influenced from his childhood till death. This is why Deorozio because
a competent successor of Raja Rammohan Roy. He was the initiator of Young Bengal’
Movement stirring the young generation in the age of renaissance. He had a deep
knowledge in History, English, Literature and Philophy through he was young His
farsightedness, eloquence and analytical power influenced the then young generation
greatly.
The first half of the 19th century was full of the trendy movements of Raja Rammohan
Roy. The brilliant students of Hindu College kept that trends alive firmly through East
Bengal Movement. Henry Louis Deorozio was the leader of that movement. He taught
his students and followers to express their free opinions.
The members of the East Bengal Movement time and again wanted to mean that they
were being ruled and exploited by the British. This is why these youths completely
opposed the activities that went against the interests of the Indians. For example, they
sharply criticized the Press Law, export oflndian labours to Mauritius, Charter Act of
1833.
In order to change the old thinking of the young generation, Academy Association
established in 1828 A.D. by Deorozio played an important role. The youths of the
Academy were taught that "Irrational belief is equivalent to death." The youths
influenced by the new thinking hit the religious beliefs of old-fashioned Hindus and
Christian bigots. As a result, they got furious with Deorozio and the members of his
Academy. The students of Hindu College inspired by Deorozio published an English
magazine named 'Parthenon' in 1830 A.D. As there was derogatory criticism against
society, religion and various false beliefs in it, the college authority stopped it's 2
publication. He also edited a magazine named 'Hispabash' and published a daily named &

Resistance, Renaissance and Reform Movements in Bengal during British Rule 135

‘East India’ in 1831. He died in December that year at the age of only twenty three.Even

after his death, his followers shaped by himself kept going on his shown paths. After

the death of Deorozio, his student followers kept contributing to different fields. The

remarkable among them were Ramtanu Lahiri, Radhanath Sikder, Pyarichand Mitra,

Krishnomohan Banarjee. Though Michael Modhusudan Dutta was not his student, he

too was deeply influened by his ideals. The movement of the followers of Deorozio

also influenced Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar.

Individual Work: ‘Irrational belief is equivalent to death'_ Evaluate the
activities of Deorozio in the light of this statement.

Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar

Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar could be considered as the most iconic character of the 19th

century in Bengal. As he was unparallel for his scholarship, kind heart, and forceful

personality, he was equally famous for his initiatives to spread education and activities

for social reformation. His erudition could be compared with that of the ancient Indian

saints. He was as courageous as the English though he had a delicate heart like the

affectionate mothers of the Bengal. ; —

This extraordinary epoch maker was born in 1820 A.D. *

in the village of Birsingha in the district of Medinipur.

He inherited his spirit and truthfulness from his indigent (

Brahmmin father, Thakurdas Banarjee. On the other hand

he inherited soft-heartedness from his mother {

Bhagabati Devi. Due to poverty he had not the ability = = _—

to study lighting the lamp. As a result, child eel

Ishwarchandra would study under the lamp-post of the :

road after evening till late at night. He learned counting Be

English numbers on the way to Koltkata from his village eee

with his father, counting the roadside milestones. Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar

Vidyasagar He acquired unfathomable knowledge in Sanskrit literature, grammar,

ethics, Vedanta, the Smriti, rhetoric, etc. only at the age of twenty one by dint of his

extraordinary genius and perseverance. He took the post of Pandit in Fort William

College at this age. At the same time, he performed the responsibility of School

Inspector.

As soon as he entered his professional life, he took more initiatives to the study of

literature. Noticing scarcity of quality textbooks in Bangla, he started writing Bangla

prose. In fact, he gave a new life to Bangla prose as a result of which he is rightly called
= the father of this genre (Bangla prose). Introduction to Bangla Letters, part 1 and part 2
N

136 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
were composed by him with a view to making child education easier, He also wrote a
preface for Sanskrit grammar to simplify the learning of Sanskrit language.
Additionally he translated a number of books m Bangla.
Not only in literature, his achisvernent is extraordinary in the spread of education.
Infact he has indestructible achievement in reformation of Sanskrit education,
foundation of Bengali education and pionsering role in the spread of female education.
Not only that, he built twenty model schools and thirty five girls' schools in villages and
towns during his tenure as a School Inspector. Metropoliton Institution, was the most is
remarkable among the academic institutions established by him. It is now famous as
Vidyasagar College.
He was also a successfol social reformer, He made resistance against different types of
prejadices the country. He was involved in struggle against killing baby girls and the
custom of polygamy. He took strict position in favour of widow mariage m Hindu
society. The law of widow marriage was passed in 1856 A.D. by the ascent of
Governor-General due to his diligent efforts.
Vidyasagar was famous for charity. This is why he is alao called the sea of kindness,
Though he was not adequately solvent, many students would pursue education staying
Vidyasagar supported him with huge financial help. Post Nabin Chandra Sen received
his education in his youth with the financial support of Vidyasagar.
His devotion to mother was extraordinary. He built charitable hogpitals and schools at
the will of his mother. Responding to the call of his mother, he once rushed to her by
crossing the Damodor River at night swimming im 4 full rainy season.
This social worker and great scholar died in 1891 A.D. at the age of 71.

Individual Work: Look into the canses of calling Vidyasagar the father of

prose literature.
Hazi Muhammad Mohsin P .
Hazi Muhammad Mohsin was born in 1732 A.D in Hoogly .
m West Bengal. His father's name was Muhammad
Faizullah. His mother's name was Jaynab Khanam. Their
original abode was m Persis. The predecessors of Hazi
Muhammad Mohsin came to Hoogly in search of good
Tuck and started living there.
The educational life of Mohsin started in Hoogly. His
private tutor Aga Siraji was @ scholar, He learned Arabic ‘
and French from him. He leamed playing 'setar’ (athree- — peei Muhammad Mohsin

Resistance, Renaissance and Reform Movements in Bengal during British Rule 137
stringed musical instrument) and music from a musician named Ostad Bholanath. His
higher education started in Murshidabad. After the death of his father he returned to
Hoogly and went out to travel different countries. He went to Mecca and Madina and
performed Haj. He returned home after traveling Arabia, Egypt and Persia for 27 years.
He had profound knoledge in Arabic, French, Urdu, English and History as well as
Algebra.
His only sister having died in 1803 A.D., and he became the possessor of vast property.
He led a very simple life. Then the Muslims of Bengal were in extreme hard up. They
had no ability to pursue their education by spending money. He spent all his money in
the spread of education and for the poor.
He built a school in Hoogly. He gave a lot of money to develop 'madrashas' in different
places like Dhaka, Chittagong, Jessore, etc. Six years before his death in 1806
A.D. forming a fund he bestowed all his property for welfare activities. With the money
from Mohsin Fund after his death in 1836 A.D. Hoogly Mohsin College Fund, Hoogly
Charitable Hospital and in 1848 A.D. Imambara in Hoogly were established.
Thousands of Muslim youths got the opportunity of higher education at the money
from Mohsin Fund. Among them was also Sir Amir Ali, one of the pioneers of the
Muslim society of Bengal to show the way of western education. Thus, even after his
death he paved the way of education for the Muslims of Bengal. This generous, great
man who was a real patron of education died in Hoogly on 29 November in 1812.
Work: Make a list in which welfare activities the money of Hazi Muhammad
Mohsin has been spent.
Nawab Abdul Latif
Abdul Latif was born in the district of Faridpur in 1828. He received English education
in Kolkata Madrasha. After the completion of his education, he taught at first in Dhaka
Collegiate School and then Kolkata Madrasha. He joined the position of Deputy
Magistrate in 1849 A.D. He was promoted to the post of Kokata Presidency Magistrate
in 1877 A.D. He retired from government service in 1884 A.D. Government conferred
on him the titles at first Khan Bahadur and then Nawab for his achievement in his
professional life.
He could understand the necessity of the spread of English education among the
Muslims of Bengal and the importance of their English education. So, he made efforts
for their welfare educating the Muslims of Bengal in modern education. To this end, he
arranged an essay competition entitled 'The benefits of English education for Muslim
students’ in 1853 A.D. in order to form public opinion. Anglo-Persian Department was
opened in Kolkata Madrasah at his attempts. An arrangement of learning Urdu and
Bengal was also made there. He placed to the government the problems of Muslim
Forma- 18, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

138 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
students in receiving higher education. Hindu College having been transformed into
Presidency College at his attempts, the Muslim students got the opportunity of
pursuing their education there. He built madrashas in different places like Dhaka,
Rajshahi, Chittagong, etc. The decision that money from Mohsin Fund would be spent
only for the Muslims of Bengal was approved in 1873 A.D. at the efforts of Abdul
Latif. In the madrasah established by him, English and modem western education were
introduced together with religious education. The remarkable achievement of Abdul
Latif is Mohammedan Literary Society established in 1863.
The main purposes of the life-long activities of Abdul Latif were three:
1. To remove malice of British Government against the Muslims;
2. To take necessary steps for the development and progress of the Muslim society;

and

3. To establish alliance between the Hindu and the Muslim community.

Individual Work: Narrate, in brief, the purposes of the activities of Abdul Latif.
Syed Ameer Ali
In the last half of 19th century the person who made the most important contributions
to the renaissance of the Muslim society of Bengal was Sir Syed Amir Ali. He wanted
to make social and individual development of the Muslims of Bengal through western
education. Besides, he wanted to make them politically conscious.
Syed Ameer Ali was born in a noble Muslim family in Hoogly in 1849 A.D. He
obtained M.A. and B.L. from Calcutta University. He passed Bar-at-Law from
Lincolns Inn of London in 1873 A.D. and returned home. He was positioned in
different responsible posts in his working life. He was employed as a judge of Kolkata
High Court in 1890 A.D. He became a member of Privy Council in London in
1909A.D.
He was the first Muslim leader in Bengal, in other words, in India who believed that
there should be a political organization for the Muslims. He believed that there should
be a respective political organization for the interests of the Muslims to draw attention
of the government to their demands. For this purpose, he formed an association named
Central Mohammedan Association in Kolkata in 1877 A.D.
He wrote in different dailies and magazines about the Muslims falling back in
education and in different fields. As a result, the government took some steps for the
progress of education of the Muslims in 1885 A.D. This is why he encouraged English
education at the college level at Kolkata Madrasah and established a college in Karachi %
in 1884 A.D. 8

Resistance, Renaissance and Reform Movements in Bengal during British Rule 139

Scientific explanation and the past glary of Islam have been upheld in his toro famous

booka The Spirit of Islam’ and 'A Short History of Saracens', He believed that Hindy

and Muslim., both the communities are required to work together for the development

of modem India. He welcomed the cstablishment of Muslim League in 1906 A.D. He

wae clected Secretary of Muslim League in 1912. Syed Ameer Ali waa also conscious

shout the rights of women.

of the i

Begum Rokeya

At the beginning of the 20th century when the light of =

education was advancing, the Muslim girls of Bengal fj

were still fallen back. The girle of Muslim society

shnost restricted for them. They would be kept aa .

of social customs and religion. § ey

girls from their captivity, was Begum Rokeya. She was i \

bom m the village Payrabendh m the upazila of

Mithapukur in the district of Rangpur in 1880 A.D, Her

father’s name waa Jabiruddin Mohammad Abn Ali Begum Rokeys

Saber, Her mother's name was Met, Bahatanesa Sahera Chowdhurani, In this

region, Saber family was very noble and conservetive. The girls were very careful of

Ibrahim Saber and elder sists Karimunnesa. She had to study very late at night so that

nobody could senee that. She learned Urdu, Arabic, French, Benguli and Engtish at the

sincere encouragement of her elder beothes, Though she could not receive education at

school, she achieved much proficiency in Bangla. She concentrated on the practice of

litermture from her Youth.

The theme ofher literary practice was women folk. She had witnessed the superstitions

of the society, the pathetic picturea of deprivation and negligence of women folk.

She expressed in her writings what ehe realized. She wanted to point to the saciety the

pathetic condition of women and discriminatory trestment towards them. Her books

‘Aborodhhasini’, 'Padmoraag’, ‘Matichmr’, 'Sultanar Swapeio’, etc, bear those pictures,

In her matrimonial life, she got encouragement from her husband to practise

knowledge. After the death of her hushand, she parsed rest of her life for female
3 education and social work. She built a primary girls' school in Bhagalpur in the name

140 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
of her husband. She established Shakhawat Memorial Urdu Primary School in Kolkata
in 1911 A.D. It was raised to Girls' English High School in 1931 A.D. Till her death she
simultaneously carried out the responsibilities of head teacher and superintendent.
For the establishment of the rights of women she established 'Anjuman Khauatine
Islam' (Muslim Women Association) in Kolkata in 1916 A.D. The association was able
to play a strong role in female education, employment and in establishing legal rights
under her leadership.
The pioneer of women freedom, Begum Rokeya had an acute tone of revolt in her heart
against various oppressions and intolerance of the society towards women. She
expressed these in her works. This great woman died in Kolkata in 1932 A.D.
Individual Work: Make a list of books written by Begum Rokeya mentioning
the pathetic condition of women.
Extempore Speech: Extempore speech about reformers of the Renaissance
Movement (selection through lottery).
Questions for Practice

Multiple Choice Questions:
1. Who was the publisher of the magazine 'Sambad Kaumodi'?

(a) Michael Modhusudan Dutta (b) Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar

(c) Raja Rammohan Roy (d) Hazi Shariatullahh
2. Fakirs and Monks were involved in long-standing movement against the

British, because the British_

(a) considered them dacoits and pirates;

(b) imposed tax on visiting the places of pilgrimage;

(c) hindered their movement and activities.

Which one of the followings is correct?

(a) iand ii (b) iand iii

(c) ii and iii (d) i, ii and iii
Read the stimulant and answer question 3 and 4
The people of the village Rasulpur have become used to different types of superstitions
and non-Islamic practices due to the lack of conscious vess and religiously
well-educated persons. A man named Abdullah came forward to inform the
superstitious people of this area of the right paths. S

Resistance, Renaissance and Reform Movements in Bengal during British Rule 141

3. By using whose learning of life did Abdullah come forward to build
up a superstition-free society?

(a) Hazi Shariatullahh (b) Dudu Mia

(c) Titumir (d) Golam Masum
4. The type of movement involved in the said person was_

(i) social

(ii) religious

(ii) political

Which one of the followings is correct?

(a) iand ii (b) ii and iii

(c) iand iii (d) i, ii and iii

Creative Question:

1. The poor farmers of Ruppur area did not have a solvent lifestyle. The people of
different tobacco companies taking the advantage of the insolvent lifestyle are
giving them loans at high rate through unequal agreement and compelled them in
tobacco cultivation. The available price of the farmers having been less than the
production cost, tobacco farmers failing to free themselves from greedy clutches of
the company started to protest. Moreover, having heard about health hazard of
tobacco, the tobacco farmers of that area got united under the leadership of Karim
and Jalil and protested against such activities of the company.

(a) Who is called the first modem man in India?
(b) What was the main purpose of the Faraizi Movement?
(c) Which events of your text book are very similar to the information given in the
stimulant Explain.
(d) How much justified do you think the said event was in the interest of farmers.
Express your opinion?

2

Ss

N

142 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
2. Sultanpur area is a very remote village area. There are many social superstitions
still prevailing there. Going out was restricted for the girls of this village. The
senior most of the village Jamila Begum put restriction on education for girls. He
would consider going out of girls as opposed to religious edicts and a misdeed.
(a) Who is the writer of 'The Spirit of Islam'?
(b) What was the purpose of forming ‘Central National Mohammedan
Association’?
(c) Which charater of your book has contrast with Jamila Begum in the Stimulant
Explain.
(d) Do you think the contribution of the said great woman in the progress of
female education is undeniable? Justify.
hao)
Ss
N

Chapter Ten
Movement for Right to Self-determination in
Bengal during British Period
The Bengalee never accepted the foreign English rulers. As a result, the peasants of this
country grew rebellious immediately after the war at Palassy. The soldiers and the
native kings of the country declared the independence of the country after a hundred
years. Afterwards the young people educated in the west raised a great movement for
independence and right to self-determination. The young people of Bengal shook the
foundation of English rulers by introducing a sort of armed struggle. In the struggles for
independence and self-governance of the sub-continent, they played the most dignified
role. This Chapter discusses the history of the pride and sacrifice of the Bengalee as
well as that of the Indians in the first struggle for independence in 1857 A.D. and in the
subsiquent movements.
At the end of this chapter we will be able to -
e@ evaluate the struggles for the achievements of the political movement and right
to selt determination in Bengal and its consequent results;
e learn about different movements;
@ exchange views on the social and political rights.
The Independent Struggle in 1857
The great armed movement led mainly by the common soldiers in the Northern and
Eastern parts of India a hundred years after the battle at Palassy is considered the First
Independence Movement of India. The long political and economic injustice, social
dishonour, violation of the religious sentiment and above all the disparity towards the
Indian soldiers created the background of great mutiny or the first independence
struggle. The reasons behind the first independence struggle are explained below.
Political: Since the war at Palassy, the imperialistic attitudes of the East India
Company, such as acquiring the native states one after another under different pretexts
gave birth of fear, dissatisfaction and sheer agitation among the native kings.
According to the policy of "Doctrine of Lapse’, Lord Dalhousie included the native
states like Satara, Jhasi, Nagpur, Sambalpur, Vagat, Udaypur, etc. within the territory of
the British empire. According to the 'Doctrine of Lapse' an adopted son was not
considered the lawful heir to the crown or wealth. Ayodhya was brought under the
so empire on the excuse of misuse of powers. All these annoyed the native Kings very
S
N\ much.

144 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Economic: An extreme economic aggression developed as soon as the rule of the East
India Company developed. The Company had destroyed the native industries before
afquiring political power. After the acquisition of power by the East India Company,
the economic backbone of the peasants was also destroyed in the name of the Land
Revenue Policy. Many Zamindars or the feudal lords were thus damaged and socially
undermined.
There was excessive imposition of tax upon the peasants. They became the victims of
the extreme exploitation of the land-lords and the revenue collectors. The peasants
became ruined by borrowing from the money lenders.
Tn one hand, there was destruction of the local industries in the name of capturing the
market. On the other hand, with a view to acquiring more profits, lands were given
lease. As a result, the economic structure of Bengal ruined absolutely. The common
people who were the victims of this circumstance became rebellious against the rule
and torture of the company.
Social and Religious: Social and religious issues played important roles behind the
mass upsurge in the subcontinent. Though the influence of the west and the social
reformations were benevolent for the people during the last part of the 18th and the
early 19th century, the conservative Hindus and Muslims could not approve these
reforms. English education, the extinction of the Satidaha, re-marriage of the Hindu
widows, the preaching of the Christian priests, etc. made the Hindu and Muslim
conservatives afraid. Various social and religious reformations also infuriated the
believers in both of the religions.
Military issues: The distinction between the Indian and the British soldiers in the army
was one of the main reasons behind the struggle. There was a vast gap in salary and
rank between the Indian and the British soldiers in the army. The Indians were less
privileged. Besides they were also deprived of their promotions. Moreover the
partiality and disproportionate behavior of the British officers inflamed the fire of
mutiny among the soldiers.

ES

8

Movement for Right to Self Determination in Bengal During British Period 145
Besides, a new type of rifles called Enfield was introduced for the use of both Hindu
and Muslim soldiers. The bullets of this weapon were to be inserted into the gun after
the cartridges were removed by the teeth. A rumour went in rampant that those
cartridges were mixed with the fat of the cows and the pigs. As a result, soldiers of both
the religions grew rebellious as they believed that the act was sacrilegious.
Struggle for Independence: The first flame of independence grew at Barrackpur in West
Bengal. A sepoy named Mongol Pandey started the mutiny by firing a gun shot. It
extended in the whole Indian sub-continent including Mirat, Kanpur, Panjab, Uttar
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar and Bengal. In Bengal the mutiny took place in
Dhaka, Chittagong, Jessore, Sylhet, Rangpur, Dinajpur and Rajshahi.

Individual Work: Draw a map of Bangladesh and show the places where this

movement spread.
The mutineers occupying Delhi declared Mughal
Emperor Bahadur Shah II as the emperor of =
India. Many aggrieved and deprived Indians like ¥ hope Paleet:
Nana Shahib, the Queen of Jhansi Laxmi Bai, iii <9 Tat ia
Begum Hazrat Mahol of Aodhya, Moulovi © “F la aS Se +.
Ahmadullah and other native feudal lords also ~ | y a; /\
took part in this war. The Indian sepoys and rebel ; % . 3 9
soldiers were defeated after fighting hard. Most pot . he vol
of the participants in the war were either killed or FRR) Gea i E oe
hanged. ~~“ “a, ~ &
Mughal Emperor Bahadur Shah II was exiled in 13 Cees 3 4 A
Rengun (Myanmar). Queen Laxmi Bai was killed RU ie Bk
in the war. Nana Shaheb disappeared after the § = ae Deas ps
defeat.The defeated soldiers faced inhuman SS a
tortures. The dead bodies of the defeated soldiers -——————— ;
were seen hanging at the Bahadur Shah Park in =. |
Dhaka. The rulers created such a brutal event Bahadur Shah Park
with a view to creating terror among the people. Thus, the first struggle for Indian
independence ended amid cruelty and torture. Everything ended within July 1858
though the event left a far reaching impact.
The Significance of the First Struggle for Independence: This struggle had an
instant significance. This ended the rule of the Company. The British government took
over the responsibility of ruling India itself.
The Doctrine of Lapse and its related rules were declared null and void on 1 November
1858 A.D. by a proclamation of Queen Victoria. It also ensured the employment of the
Forma- 19, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

146 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Indians and their religious freedom as well as an amnesty for the mutineers.
The long term impact of this struggle was that the grievance did not stop. People
became conscious due to this mutiny and the English rule ended in 1947 after various
movements and struggles.

Individual Work: Point out the reasons for which the sepoys revoled in

India in 1857.
Partition of Bengal (1905 -1911)
The impact of the Partition of Bengal was far reaching in the political history of
Bengal. The communal harmony between the Hindus and Muslims was destroyed
forever because of the separation of Bengal. They began to consider each other as
enemies. The level of disbelief increased between the two. Though the liberal efforts of
the leaders, various combined programs, etc. often brightened the prospect of the
re-establishment of unity, ultimately the divide and rule policy of the British
government succeeded. The disbelief and enmity between of the two communities
ended with the partition of India in 1947.
Background of the Partition of Bengal: The Governor General of India Lord Curzon
divided Bengal on October 16 in 1905. This division is known as the Partition of
Bengal in history. Before the partition, the Bengal Province or the Bangla Presidency
consisted of Bengal, Bihar, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh and some parts of Assam. The
plan to divide Bengal started much earlier. Since the area of Bengal Presidency was too
large, various proposals for the resheduling its area was presented from 1853 to 1903
to the British government. In the true sense, the plan to divide Bengal was accepted in
1903. The Secretary for India approved it in 1904 and the plan became public in July
of 1904. The plan was implemented in October in the same year. According to this plan
East Bengal and Assam province was created with Dhaka, Rajshahi, Chittagong of
Bangladesh, Assam, Jolpaiguri, Tripura Hills and Maldoho. Dhaka became the capital
of this province. On the other hand, West Bengal, Bihar, Odisha made West Bengal
which had its capital in Kolkata.
Causes of the Partition of Bengal: There were a number of reasons behind the
partition, which are stated below.
Administrative Reasons: During the period of Lord Curzon, the division of Bengal
was an administrative reformation. One-third of the population of India lived in Bengal
Presidency. It was hard to run the law and order situation and lead administration in the
eastern part properly from Kolkata. This was why Curzon considered it an irrational
task to keep such a vast area in a single administrative unit. So, he planned to divide sc
Bengal in two parts in 1903 and it was implemented in 1905. 8

Movement for Right to Self Determination in Bengal During British Period 147
Socio-economic Reasons: There were also other reasons behind the Partition of
Bengal, one of which was economic and the other one was social. During that time
Kolkata became the centre for socio-economic activities. Mills and factories, trade and
commerce, courts-offices, education institutions., everything was established centring
Kolkata. But there was no appropriate transportation system for the raw materials. As
a result, the economic condition of Bengal hampered gradually. The population of this
area remained uneducated as they failed to receive education or higher education due
to the scarsity of educational institutions they needed. So, unemployment grew up day
by day. Considering these the partition of Bengal was inevitable.
Political Reasons: Lord Curzon did not divide Bengal only considering the
advantages of administration or the welfare of the people of East Bengal, it also
involved a far reaching political interest of the British government. The middle class
Bangalee intellectuals were gradually becoming conscious of nationalism and politics.
The issue could not escape the consideration of Lord Curzon. The Congress leaders led
the all India movement from Kolkata. Therefore, its main objective was to stop all
anti-British movements that centered upon Kolkata. The united strength of the
Hindu-Muslim solidarity and the united Bengal were threats for the British rulers.
Therefore, he wanted to kill two birds with one stone. As the strength of the Bangalees
was made weak, again, the Muslim community was also made happy in the name of the
development of East Bengal. Thus, Curzon divided Bengal more to sustain the British
tule than to do welfare for East Bengal according to his 'divide and rule' policy. In this
way, arrangements were made to weaken the Indian national unity.
The Reactions to the Partition: There was a mixed reaction among the people against
the partition. The Muslims in East Bengal led by Nawab Salimullah welcomed the
partition. Even the Muslim newspapers also expressed their satisfaction in the partition
of Bengal. The majority of the population in the new province was Muslims. Therefore,
they gave an absolute support to the partition with the view that the undeveloped
Muslim community of East Bengal would get advantage in education as well as in
administrative and economic sectors.
On the other hand, there was an extreme reaction among the Hindus against the
Partition of Bengal. Led by the Indian National Congress they raised strong united
movement against the partition of Bengal. Some historians suggest that the elevated
class of the Hindu community i.e. the capitalists, lawyers, owners of the newspapers,
politicians opposed the partition because the move would hamper their interests.
However, the anti-partition movement became irresistible no matter whether they were
guided by their personal interests or by the ideals of national unity. Leaders like
Surendranath Banerjee, Bipin Chandra Pal, Arbinda Ghosh, Ashwini Kumar Datta,
o Balgongadhar Tilak and even the liberal leaders like Gokhle also took part in the
s movement. Suendranath Banerjee defined the partition as a national calamity. The

148 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
anti-partition movement gradually assumed the character of Swadeshi movements.
Armed activities were also involved in this movement because of some extremist
leaders. Failing to dispel the movement the government at last withdrew the declaration
of the Partition of Bengal in 1911. King George V declared the abolition of the Partition
of Bengal in Delhi in 1911 while he was in a visit in India.
The abolition of the partition made the Hindus happy while the Congress considered it
a victory of their policy. But, the Muslim community was much disappointed. They lost
their confidence upon the British government and the Congress. They started to believe
firmly that the Congress was not concerned with the welfare of the Muslims. The
Muslim leaders of the Bengal marked the act as the worst example of treachery.
The relation between the Hindus and the Muslims got a crack after this incident.
Communal riots also started after this event. The political aims of the Hindus and the
Muslims became different after the foundation of Muslim League in 1906 AD. The
Muslims gradually began to feel an extreme urge for an individual national identity.
Individual Work: Mark the political objectives of the British government
behind the Partition of Bengal .
Swadeshi Movement
The movement developed by the extremists among the Congress leadership after the
failure of the lawful movement against partition of Bangal by the British Goverment is
called the Swadeshi Movement. This movement focused on two types of
activities- boycotting and being nativist.
The boycott movement aimed at giving up the English goods. Gradually the word
boycott assumed a broader use. The activity not only boycotted the English goods, but
also included a program like refusing English education system. Thus, the Swadeshi
movement assumed the spirit of a national education movement. Many students were
expelled from schools and colleges for taking part in the movement which raised the
necessity of establishing national education institutions. For the national education
movement there grew a number of national schools and a few vocational institutions at
different parts of the country.
The Swadeshi movement soon spread at different parts of Bengal. Various actions were
taken to boycott English goods like boycotting English education. Oaths were taken
through meetings and seminars at different parts in the country to boycott English
goods and education. Congress leaders openly encouraged people in the remote areas
to bum English goods and to use native products. So, the demand of English goods
decreased. During this time native cotton, soap, salt, sugar and leather industries
developed at different places of the country. 3
N

Movement for Right to Self Determination in Bengal During British Period 149
Different classes of people became involved in the Swadeshi movement. Various
organizations were formed to increase the popularity of the movement among which
Anushilon in Dhaka, Jugantar Samity in Kolkata, Swadeshi Bandhob in Barisal, Brati
in Faridpur, Shadhona in Mymenshingh were remarkable. Writers and poets wrote
various articles in magazines to excite patriotic spirits among people. In this regard
Rabindranath Tagore, Dijendralal Roy and Rajanikanta Sen played pioneer roles. Bard
Mukunda Chandra Dev of Barisal succeeded in exciting the patriotic feelings among
the villagers singing songs in the villages. Different magazines also contributed a lot in
the anti-partition and Swadeshi movements. Newspapers like the Bengali, the
Sanjiboni, the Jugantor, the Amritbazar, the Sayandha, the Hitobadhi and many other
English-Bengali newspapers published various articles highlighting the spirits of
Bengalee nationalism. The women folk also began to take part in the political activities
through their participation in the Swadeshi movement.
Though the Swadeshi movement was conflicting to the Muslim interest in East Bengal,
a few leaders from the majority Muslim community initially supported it. However,
they ultimately withdrew their support. The Swadeshi movement was also influenced
by the Hindu rituals and customs for which the Muslim community kept a distance
from this movement. The Hindu Zamindar class supported the movement strongly
because the majority of the peasants in Bengal were Muslims. They were highly
exploited by a faulty land management system. They were also tortured by the
Zamindar class and their aides. That is why the peasants were aggrieved with the
Zamindars who were mostly Hindus. Even some of the Hindu peasants being fed up
with the repressions also supported the partition of Bengal.

Group Work: Make a list of the newspapers and journals which opposed the

partition of Bengal. Mention the areas where the revolutionary groups developed

for the Swadeshi movement.
Swadeshi movement failed to assume a national character because of the distance
maintained by the Muslims. The boycott of English products also could not achieve
success from this movement. Hence, the Marwari business community of Kolkata and
the rural business community were not involved in this movement. Above all, common
people also kept distance when the movement gradually advanced towards a secret
armed revolution. Therefore, the movement without mass participation failed to reach
the goal.
The movement also failed to mature because of the distance of the Muslim community
from it. Common people, even the poor class, peasants also did not try to understand
the spirit of this movement. So, neither the movement could take a national shape nor
could it be an universal movement. Moreover, there were extreme tortures of the

x British government and the police on the supporters and activists of the Swadeshi
movement, All these caused the ultimate failure of the movement.

150 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Though the Swadeshi movement could not achieve any instant success it could create
a long term impact. This movement created mass awareness. This movement pioneered
the anti-British movement and hence the independence movement. As a result of the
student's involvement in this movement, as the importance of the students became
significant; they also grew politically conscious. It also opened avenues for students to
be involved in other movements in India later on. This movement had economic
significance too. It increased the enthusiasm for establishing native industries, mills
and factories. The native rich people began to establish mills and factories. For
example, various mills and factories were establised at in different parts of the country
for the production of native cotton, soap, salt, sugar, paper and leather goods. Modern
industries like The Bengal Chemical Company were established during this time. The
famous Tata Company also founded Tata factory in 1910 AD. Many other small
industries were also founded during this time. Literally there was significant increase
of nourishing local values in the fields of science, education, language and literature,
culture, etc. The patriotic and nationalistic songs of Rabindranath Tagore, Dijendralal
Roy, Rajanikant, Mukunda Das were composed during that period. This time
Rabindranath composed his famous song ‘amar sonar bangla ami tomai valobashi'
(My Bengal of gold, I love you) which is our national anthem.
The frustrating aspect of the Swadeshi movement is that there developed bitterness in
the harmonious relation between the Hindus and the Muslims. This bitterness gradually
increased through various events and accidents. The bitterness which generated during
the anti-partition movement became bitterer in the Swadeshi movement. It left an
all-out negative influence upon political, social and national activities which ended
with the dividing of India in two countries.

Individual Work: Make a list of the mills and factories which were established

as a result of the Swadeshi movement.

Khilafat and Non-cooperation Movements
Khilafat and Non-cooperation Movements: In the political history of India the
combined struggles of the Hindus and the Muslims in the Khilafat and the
Non-cooperation movements are quite significant. These are the first wide and
nation-wide mass movement. This combined movement of the Hindus and the
Muslims shook the foundation of the British empire. The Indian Muslim community
started this movement in order to uphold the dignity of the Turkish Caliph and the
integrity of Turkey. On the other hand, the aim of the Non-cooperation movement was
to achieve self-governance in India.
Reasons behind the Khilafat Movement: The Muslims of India respected the Caliph &
of Turkey as the Caliph or religious leader of the Muslim world. But the Indian §

Movement for Right to Self Determination in Bengal During British Period 151
Muslims were embarrassed when the Sultan of Turkey had supported the anti-British
power Germany. Historically they were loyal to the Caliph for religious obedience and
to the British government on political grounds. The Muslims extended their support for
the British government as their own government in the First World War. But they had
the condition that the British government would do no harm against the Caliph of
Turkey. When Germany was defeated in the war, misfortune also fell upon Turkey. As
a punishment for supporting Germany in the war, it was planned that Turkey would be
divided into various parts according to the Treatly of Severs. The Indian Muslims were
distressed with this decision and raised a great movement in order to uphold the dignity
of the Turkish Caliph and the integrity of Turkey. This movement is known as the
Khilafat movement in the history of India. The two brothers Maulana Mohammad Ali
and Maulana Shawkat Ali led this movement.

The Khilafat and Non-cooperation Movements in Bengal: A meeting was held in
Dhaka on December' 18, 1919 in order to form the Khilafat committee. The meeting
demanded the release of Moulana Mohammad Ali and Moulana Shawkat Ali. It was
also decided that a six member delegation would be sent to Amritsar in order to
participate in the all India Khilafat committee. The Khilafat Ishtehar (declaration of the
Khilafat committee) was published in 1920 along with a call for the non-cooperation
movement. The leaders of the Khilafat movement Moulana Shawkat Ali and Maulana
Abul Kalam Azad came to Dhaka in March, 1920. The people of Dhaka welcomed
them chanting the slogans like “Allahu Akbar" and "Bonde Mataram". The Muslims
also observed 'Roza' (fasting) and the Hidus also kept 'uposh' (fasting) on March 19, the
day scheduled for observing hartal. A public meeting was also held in Dhaka on this
day. The meeting declared that it was impossible for the Muslims to remain loyal to the
British government unless the Khilafat was safe. A meeting was held on April 13 in
1920 to remember the Jaliwanwalabag massacre. Other programs taken in the light of
the Khilafat and Non-cooperation Movements were also observed simultaneously.
Non-cooperation Movement: There were several reasons behind the movement of
Congress against the British government. Mahatma Gandhi called for a
Non-cooperation movement in 1920 AD. The Reform Act of 1919 failed to meet the
expectations of the Indians. In addition, the extreme repressive measures of the British
Government gave birth toa new mode of anti-British movements. In 1990 the

S

152 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
government passed the Raolat Act. This Act empowered the police to arrest anyone
without any warrant and sentence anyone in the court. The act aggrieved all classes of
people in India. A hartal was observed on April 6, 1919 as a protest against this
deterrent act called by Mahatma Gandhi. Like many other places this movements also
spread in Punjab. In Amritsar of Punjab, many unarmed people were killed on April 13
on General Diear's order. This brutal killing has been termed as Jalianwalabag
Massacre. Congress formed an investigation committee with a number of distinguished
leaders. Rabindranath boycotted his Knight title in a protest against the massacre.
Censorship upon the newspapers also went on in rampant along with the policy of
repression. This situation was further fuelled by the price hike owing to the economic
recession caused by World War II. In this circumstance, Gandhiji was successful to
unite the Hindu and the Muslim leaders and called for a total movement in 1923 AD.
The leaders of the Khilafat and the Non-cooperation Movements harnessed an all-out
movement through their united programmes. This movement assumed the spirit of all
India mass movement until 1921-22.

Significance of the Khilafat and the Non-cooperation Movements

The Khilafat and the Non-cooperation Movements are significant for various reasons.
The Muslims in India for the first time participated in the anti-British movements,
Similarlys both the Hindus and the Muslims for the first time made a united movement.
Due to this joint movement the British policy of ‘divide and rule' failed to function for
a while. It paved the way of a political and communal solidarity between the Hindus
and the Muslims. In contrast, this solidarity frightened the British government. This
movement succeeded in spreading the political spirit not only among the young
Muslims but also among the whole Indian community. But both the movement and the
unity were temporary. Distance between two communities began to increase as soon as
the movement ended.

The Armed Movement in Bengal (1911 A.D.- 1930 A.D.)

The failure in the boycott and Swadeshi movements led the young people of the Bengal
to the ways of armed revolution. The secret armed activities taken with a view to
liberating the country were known as the Armed Movement in Bengal. This movement
gradually became frequent by the activities like sudden bomb attacks, killings of high
government officers, small battles in the guerrilla style, etc.

Though the movement sustained from 1911 to 1930, it had started much earlier. The
armed revolutionary activities exposed through the bomb attack by of Khudiram in
1908 to kill English Magistrate Kingsford. The movement originally ended in 1930.
But there were such attacks even after the time. &

Movement for Right to Self Determination in Bengal During British Period 153
The first phase of the Armed Movement in Bengal weakened even before the Partition
of Bengal was nullified in 1911. The top leaders of the first phase of this movement
were Arbinda Ghosh, Rabindra Ghosh, Bhupendra Nath Datta and so on. Pulin Bihari
Das was the leading organizer of the Onushilon Samity in Dhaka. They were involved
in various revolutionary activities including making bombs to collecting arms of
various types. They made the government restless with armed attacks and secret
killings. An effort was also taken to kill Lieutenant Governor Fuller. Prafulla Chaki, an
associate of Khudiram to kill English Magistrate Kingsford, committed suicide.
Khudiram was hanged after he was being arrested. This time a number of
revolutionaries were hanged at different charges including the bomb attack in
Maniktola and other places. A number of revolutionaries were also given banishment
in the distant islands and many were imprisoned. For such an extreme policy of
repression the first phase of the armed revolution became timid. The second phase of
the revolutionary movement started in 1912. Though the movement was Kolkata
based, it broke out at different parts in East Bengal as well. This time the
revolutionaries resumed killing, bomb attack robbery, etc. With this objective an
explosive factory was founded in Kolkata. In the meantime, a number of robbery took
place in Kolkata, and in different parts in the East Bengal such as Jessore, Khulna, etc.
By the end of 1912 Lord Harding was bomb attacked in Delhi under the plan of
Rasbihari Basu. Harding escaped the attack but the English government declared an
award of taka one lakh to capture Rasbihari Basu.

Many revolutionaries of Bengal dared to collect arms from the foreign countries in the
context of the First World War. Their objective was to achieve independence through a
battle against the English power. They included Bagha Jatin (Jatindranath Roy),
Dr Jadu Gopal Mukhopadhyay, Norendranath Bhattacharya and some others. They
were promised by Germany, the enemy of England, to get arms. The government
arrested all including Bagha Jatin when the secret was exposed to the government. A
revolutionary, Chittopriyo was killed in a battle against police when the revolutionaries
confronted them. Bagha Jatin was arrested along with three other revolutionaries. He
died during the trial. Two of his comrades were hanged and another one received
lifelong imprisonment.

Death sentences, lifelong imprisonment, brutal torture-nothing could remove the
revolutionaries from their objectives. The plan to kill all natives and English higher
officers sustained. Confrontations with the police, sudden attacks, bombing continued.
The Deputy Police Super Bashanta Chattopadhay was killed on January 30, 1916 in
Bhabanipur. When the number of such confrontations increased the government
arrested many revolutionaries in the Defense act in 1916-17. As soon as Mahatma
Gandhi withdrew the Non-cooperation program in 1922, arrests and police torture
increased considerably. The activities of the revolutionaries increased equally too. The
Forma: 20, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

154 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
revolutionaries published a pamphlet with the title 'Lalpatra' (The Red paper) calling to
kill the tyrant police members. In 1924 a revolutionary, Gopinath Saha, killed an
Englishman in lieu of killing the police Comissioner of Kolkata. Gopinath was hanged
for this murder. While visiting the prison the Jail Super of the Alipur Zone was killed
by a revolutionary Promod Chowdhury who attacked him with a rod. The English
government introduced the Bengal Ordinance in 1924. The revolutionary activities
became weak when a huge number of revolutionaries were arrested under this
Ordinance.
Mahtma Gandhi started a law violating movement in 1930, The revolutionary activities
in Bengal increased much with this movement. It is notable that the revolutionary
activity was the strongest in Bengal and the Bengalees revolutionaries kept the English
administration restless. The young Bengalees always leaped into the armed revolution
without caring for their lives.
Such a brave revolutionary was Masterda, who was originally Surya Sen (1894-1934)
by name. He came across the revolutionaries when he was a student in a college. After
graduation, he joined Umatara Higher English School as a teacher. In the meantime he
was popularly known as Masterda. This time he formed a revolutionary organization
with the help of Ambika Chakrabarti, Anurup Sen, Nogen Sen and others. He himself
and his organization were repeatedly arrested as a result of their involvement in the
revolutionary activities, but they were released every time for the lack of any proof.
Masterda formed The Chittagong Revolutionary Force to free Chittagong from the
English rule. This was later turned into Chittagong Revolutionary Army. This force
captured government offices in Chittagong one after another. Last of all they robbed the
Chittagong Arms Depot. They also declared =
"Independent Chittagong Government’ as well as a
war against the British government. This was a :
war between two unequal force. The English A me.
government engaged a huge force against Surya %
Sen and his allies. The last war took place in the ay
Jalalabad Hills. A number of young people were —_
killed in this battle and many other. The i
revolutionaries took shelter in the houses of the ' ‘
peasants. Surjya Sen was arrested in 1933 and he
was sentenced to death after a summary trial. After
some brutal tortures, he was hanged on January 12
in 1934 and his dead body was drowned in the sea.
Surya Sen
=
g

Moyement for Right tp Self Determination in Bengal During Britich Period 155
Surje Sen's revolutionary xy also had women solliecs. Among them the most
atudent Pritilota stood first in the Intermediate Examination in 1900 and parsed B.A.
Examination with distinctions, In the moenntims, she involved herself im the
revolutionary activities end came scroms the omemization of Surys Sen. An
uncommonly brave woman Pritilota was assigned to lead fhe atieck on Pahartoli
Enropean Cloh' because of her efficiency. After a succeesfal operation ther, she
captured. Pritilots bas been an icon in the history of all revolutionary movements in
Bengal.
Smmity in Kolkata wns also very active. The efforts to kill }
Chadies Tegurt in the Dalbousi Square in Kolkata failed in
1930, In the same year Inepecter-Gemerel of Prison |
Simpson was killed in the Writer's Building in Kolkata. : -_
Before thet tyrant police officer Loman was killed by bg
Binoy Bam. Binoy and Badal, two accomplices in this —
The effort to kill the Governor of Bengal, Jeckson, was | * /
piven a lifelong imprieanment Three consecutive as ey
revolutionaries. Though the ——— activities Pritilot, Waddeder
subsided by 1930, the rerohnionaries in Chittagong continued their operations ons
after another, The revoluticnarics micceeded tp make people aware of their mxistienre
by an operation on the Cricket Ground im Chitiagong on January 7, 1934. Two
Reasons Behind the Failure of the Armed Movement
One of the reasons behind the failure of the armed revolution was its disintegration
people, armed attack, bombing, killing - all theas meant terroriem and violence. Por this
they atayed far from them.
The majotity popmlation of Bengal remained at « distance from this movement Since
there ware geome Hincn ritals like taking oath by touching the Geeta, reciting verees in
front of the goddess Kali were mandatory for revolutionaries, the Muslims felt
obstacles to take part in the revolution.
s¢ The revohrtionary groups had to work in emall units for the sake of security and
3 confidentiality. No groups could know the activities of others.So, there grew a distance

156 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
leadership. This separation among the revolutionaries caused the failure of the
revolution.
Moreover, the firmness of the government in tackling the movement and the
disintegration of the revolutionaries with the common people made them helpless and
cornered. Not only that, as division and enmity among the group leaders made the
armed revolution weak, it also gave birth to extreme disliking for each other. In this
context a number of revolutionaries joined Communist Party when it was formed in
India.
Though the revolutionary movement could not be successful, the self-sacrifice of the
revolutionaries, their patriotism, courage captivated Bangalees or even the Indians
more for freedom. Though the movement was not a complete success, the ideals of the
revolutionaries lit the ways of the farther movements.
Individual Work 1. Make a list of the leaders related to armed revolutionary movement.
2. Write a report on the life and activities of Pritilota?
Swaraj and Bengal Pact
Many Congress leaders were released from the jail after Gandhi had withdrawn his
non-cooperation program. This time he faced differences in opinion with the released
leaders Chittaranjan Das (C.R. Das) and Motilal Nehru regarding the future activities
of Congress. C.R. Das and his followers decided to join the councils formed by
election. They took that decision because after the failure of the Non-cooperation
movement there was no situation to go for law violating movement. Furthermore, they
had an objective to foil the Reform Act of 1911 after joining the legislative council. But
their efforts went in vain in the Goa Conference of Congress. In this context Swaraj
Party was formed in 1922 by C.R. Das with the support of a section of the Congress
leadership. C.R. Das became the President of the party while Motilal Nehru became
one of the Secretaries.
Those who supported Swaraj Party to achieve self-governance were called
pro-changers and those opposed the Swaraj Party were known as no-changers. These
two groups had no other difference in their objectives other than determining the means
to achieve independence.
The opponents of Swaraj Party were rigid in continuing the non-cooperation movement
towards forming a law violating movement. On the other hand, many revolutionaries
like Subhash Chandra Basu, Hossein Shahid Suharawardi and other young leaders
joined the Swaraj Party.
:

Movement for Right to Self Determination in Bengal During British Period 157

The Programs of Swaraj Party

1. To oppose government activities in the legislative council sessions and
make the Reformation Act of 1919 null and void;

2. To refuge government budget and make the cabinet fall;

3. To strengthen nationalist spirit and activities through the introduction of various
proposals and bills; and

4. To make the foreign rule impossible.

The Activities of Swaraj Party

An election was held in 1923 for the second time according to the India Rule Act or the

Montegne Chamesford Act of 1923. Swaraj Party participated in the election and

achieved success beyond their expectations. Particularly in Bengal and in

Madhyaprodesh this party bagged the majority of seats in the central legislative

council. The foundation of Swaraj Party became strong for the support of the Muslims

and it became possible to make obstacles against various steps taken by the

government. The credit of success in Bengal went to the party chief C.R. Das. His

non-communal spirit, liberal policy succeeded to achieve the confidence of the Muslim

community. Their support strengthened him and his party.

Bengal Pact (December, 1923)

Swaraj Party leader Chittaranjan Das successfully realized the Hindu-Muslim crisis

deeply. This is why the foresighted leader made a treaty which is known historically as

the Bengal Pact or Bengal Treaty. So far the Bengal Pact was the most significant

incident in the history of Bengal. Undoubtedly his efforts paved the ways for the unity

of Hindus and Muslims in India.

The most famous leaders who played a significant role to formulate the famous pact

popularly known as C.R. Das formula were Abdul Karim, Mujibur Rahman, Akram

Khan, and Moniruzzaman Islamabadi. Sir Abdur Rahim, A.K.Fazlul Hag, Rossen

Shahid Suharawardi also helped formulate the treaty and signed in it. Bengal Congress

leader Subhash Chandra Bose also signed in the pact. The Bengal Pact was approved

by their combined efforts.

The treaty signed on December 16, 1923 focused on providing various advantages for

the Muslim community. They were.,

1. All religious groups would enjoy their rights once autonomy would have enacted.
In a separate electoral process Bengal Legislative Council will elect their

= representatives according to the ratio of population.
N

158 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
2. 60% representations will come from the majority group and 40% representations
will come from the minority groups in all local autonomous institutions in each
district.
3. 55% of appointments in government offices would be preserved for the Muslims.
4. If any law related to any religion would be enacted, three-fourth majority of the
representatives of that religion should support that to pass the bill.
5. No slogan or rallies with music could pass any mosque and there would be no
intervention in slaughtering of cows.
Individual Work: Arrange the non-communal spirits reflected in the Bengal
Pact choronologically.
The End of the Bengal Pact
The Bengal Pact or the Bengal Treaty was a document in favour of religious harmony
between the Hindus and the Muslims. Swaraj Party was successful to bag the majority
in the election for the confidence of the Muslims upon them due to the content of this
document. Not only that when Hossein Shahid Suharawardi was elected the Deputy
Mayor of Kolkata, the Muslims got employment in the Corporation. Thus, the Bengal
Pact or the Bengal Treaty which was initiated by C. R. Das to solve the problem of
Hindu-Muslim crisis was equally pragmatic and praiseworthy. But unfortunately, some
conservative newspapers, religious community, Gandhi supporters in Congress and
other opponent parties opposed the Bengal Pact strongly. On the other hand,
movements like 'Sudhdhi’ and 'Sangothon' backed by the Hindu Mahasava and
‘Tableague' and 'Tamjid' movements of the Muslims were responsible for the
destruction of communal harmony. Additionally all means of the Hindu-Muslim unity
came to an end for ever with the untimely death of Chittaranjan Das on June 16, 1925.
The Congress leaders and others kept silent about the Bengal Pact afterwards. All
means to implement this treaty shut down after the communal riots in Kolkata and then
in Dhaka the next year (i.e.1926).
Individual Work: Whose death did shut the doors of Hindu-Muslim unity? Make
a list of his contributions for this unity.
The Background of Lahore Resolution
The prospect of Hindu-Muslim unity extinguished following the failure of the Bengal
Pact. The efforts suggested by Nehru to make negotiations between the Hindus and the
Muslims also failed in 1928 on the issue of election for the minorities. Failing in his ,,
efforts to establish a Hindu-Muslim harmony Jinnah presented his famous 14 Points in s

Movement for Right to Self Determination in Bengal During British Period 159
1929, where Muslim interests had special priority. All these intensified communalism
and distance between the two communities. Under these circumstances all political
parties refused the Symon Commission report in 1930. Three consecutive round-table
conferences in London between 1930 to 1932 ended without any decision as no
consensus was reached in those meetings regarding the reservation of seats for the
minority communities. This time leaders of different communities created pressure on
the British Prime Minister to solve this crisis. In this context, the British Prime Minister
Ramsey Macdonald declared the 'Communal A ward' to solve the crisis. In that charter
there was a provision to hold separate elections keeping a number of seats reserved.
The ‘Communal A ward’ created a sharp reaction among different communities and
parties. Though the Muslims too were critical about the award, they decided to go with
the idea. Afterwards the British parliament accepted the India Act of 1935 which
included federal system of government and provincial autonomy. Though the Act was
an important document in the administrative history of India, the federal government
system could not be enacted according to it. Jinnah made a harsh criticism of the
proposed federal system. Congress President Rajendraprasad also criticizing it bitterly
commented that there was no sign of natural development towards the autonomy of the
provinces. Both the parties demanded extended legislative and political reforms. On
the other hand, Hindu Mohasova opposed the Act. Despite the adverse reactions of the
political parties the proposed provincial autonomy became effective under this act in
1937. In the provincial elections Congress bagged the majority of seats in most of the
provinces. In this circumstance, Congress formed provincial governments in the
Muslim majority provinces without any dialogue with Muslim League. Later Congress
President Jawharlal Nehru in his post electoral comments told that in India the
existence of two powers were obvious-one was Congress and the other was the
government. Such remark caused a harsh and adverse reaction among the Muslim
leaders. Mr. Jinnah, who had a long effort to ensure the communal harmony between
Hindus and Muslims, adopted a new way in politics due to the statement of the
Congress President. In 1938 in a meeting of the provincial Muslim League in Sindh, he
termed the Muslims and the Hindus two different nations. Thus, before the Lahore
resolution was presented, the view that the Muslims and the Hindus were two different
nations paved the idea of creating two separate states for them. The practical example
of this view was the Lahore Resolution.
Lahore Resolution
Allahma Iqbal, who was a poet, mentioned the prospect of a different state for the
Muslims much earlier than the presentation of the Lahore Resolution. Chowdhury
Rahmat Ali, a student of the Cambridge University, drew the picture of an independent
state called Pakistan to be created comprising the Muslim majority states in the
x north-western India. Mohammad Ali Jinnah did not speak of a separate state for the
N Muslims till 1937-38. But the bitter experiences in the election of 1937 and also for the

160 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization

winner Congress President he realized that the interest and hopes of the Muslim

community would never reach its goal under the Hindu leadership. Considering over

all political situation, the bitter experiences of the past and the interest of the Muslims,

Jinnah stated his much discussed and criticized Two Nations Theory in 1939. The

Lahore Resolution m 1940 only gave direction to achieve the practical form of his

theory.

Since this proposal was accepted in the Lahore Council c™

of Muslim League in 1940 it was known as the :

Lahore Resolution in history, which is an extremely > hae

significant issue in the political history of the \  t

sub-continent Muslims. Mohammad Ali Jinnah Fd

chaired this session. It was A. K. Fazhl Haque ; 5a

who presented his proposal in the sesgion on

March 23. Lahore resolution stated that no

constitutional plan could fimetion unless that was sy

based upon the basic principles of the Lahore Resolution. ‘

The Principal Clauses of the Lahore Resolution Sher-e-Bengls A. K. Fazlul Haque

a, Independent states to be formed with the Muslim majority regions in the North-
Wester and Easter India.

b, These independent states will be autonomous and sovereign,

c. Sufficient measures must be taken in the constitution to ensure the rights and
interests of the minority groups after discussing with them.

ad Powersofdefense,foreign affairs, communication would be bestowed upon
the concerned subsidiary states,

In the above mentioned clauses, there is no mention of Pakistan, But, in that times,

newspaper published Lahore Resolution as “the Pakistan resolution” therefore, it

became popular as the Pakistan reslntion.

In the Lahore Resolution it was suggested to form states with the Muslim majority

regions, For this the Bengalee Muslims dreamt of an ‘independent Bengal state’. But on

April 9, 1946 in Delhi Mr. Jinnah presented a different proposal in a convention of the

Muslim League Legislative Council Members. There he made some amendments to the

‘Lahore Resolution’. In this proposal suggeation came for forming a aingle state with

the Muslim majority provinces. Therefore it can be said that Pakistan was born not on

the basis of the Lahore Resolution of 1949, rather it was born on the basis of the Delhi

proposal in 1946,

The Importance of the Lahore Resolution

There was a sharp reaction among the Congress leaders on Lahore Resolution. Pandit .,,

Jawharlal Nehru condemned the proposal bitterly. But historically it is true that the 8

Movement for Right to Self Determination in Bengal During British Period 161
Muslims began to dream for an independent homeland after the Lahore Resolution. A
new stream in Indian politico-constitutional movement began to flow because of this
proposal. Mohammad Ali Jinnah began to identify the Muslims as a different nation.
For that the establishment of a new state for the Muslims became a matter of time only.
From this time the politics of Jinnah and Muslim League ran towards the establishment
of an independent state, which had its ultimate result in the division of the country in
August in 1947. As a practical consequence of the two nations theory two countries
called Pakistan and India were born respectively on August 14 and on August 15.
Pre-Partition Politics of East Bengal (1937-1947)

The death of Chittaranjan Das in 1925 and the Kolkata riot in 1926 created an adverse
situation for the Hindu-Muslim relation. In this circumstance Muslim leaders like
Moulana Akram Khan and Tamij Uddin Khan left Congress.

A decision was taken to form a party named Nikhil Bongo Proja Samity in 1929 after
the provincial legislative election. The principal objective of this party was to improve
the condition of the poor peasants of Bengal. As a result, there grew a new stream in
peasants movement and politics. In 1935 A.K.Fazlul Hoque was elected the President
ofNikhil Bongo Proja Samity in the council in Mymensingh.

The party had a new name 'Krishok Proja Party’ in the next year. Krishok Proja Party
was absolutely an individual and provincial political party. There was a very close
competition between Krishok Proja Party and Muslim league in the general election in
March 1937. But both of the parties failed to bag required number of seats to form a
government. As a result, Muslim League accepted the proposal of forming the
government with A. K. Fazlul Hoque as the Chief Minister. Fazlul Hoque was elected
the Chief Minister and took the charge of Education Ministry. This coalition
government was weak. Thus Krishok Proja Party also became weak.

Fazlul Hoque resigned from Muslim League in 1941 following disagreements with
Jinnah. Since Fazlul Hoque had the support of the majority, he formed his second
cabinet in December in the same year. This new cabinet was an assembly of various
political parties. Fazlul Hoque initiated a new political trend in Bengal by forming such
a cabinet. This new trend aimed to solve the crisis trough establishing a communal
harmony between the Hindus and the Muslims in Bengal. Fazlul Hoque's new cabinet
was in power from 1941 to 1943. He had to resign because of his failure to solve the
crisis created by a great famine in 1943.

Khawja Nazimuddin formed his cabinet on April 13, 1943 in the context of the state
wide famine. It is thought that more than three million of people died in this devastating
famine. Nazimuddin cabinet fell down in 1945.

Forma- 21, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

162 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
The Muslim League of Bengal was divided in two factions in 1946 on the issues like
the provincial election and the leadership of the party. At last Suharawardy became the
leader of the Muslim League of Bengal. Muslim League bagged 114 seats in the
election which in other means reflected the desire of the Muslims of Bengal very
clearly.
In the political history of Bengal this election and its result was very much significant.
Suhrawardi formed the government on April 24, 1946. In the true sense the tenure of
Suhrawardi cabinet marked the transition in the history of Bengal and India. The end of
the British rule, riot in Kolkata in the context of dividing India, the attempts to form a
united Bengal, and the Pertition of India were the significant events of this time.
Attempts to Form a United Bengal
The Hindu-Muslim relation turned to a severe riot in 1947. The British government
completely failed to manage the crisis in such an extreme situation and expressed
desire to transfer power to the Indians. In this situation the Chief Minister of Bengal
Hossain Shahid Suhrawardi presented the proposal to form a Joint Bengal state. Sharat
Chandra Basu took a strong stance in favour of the proposal. The proposal was known
as the Basu-Suharawrady pact in the history of this subcontinent.
In a press conference in Delhi on April 27, in 1947 Hossain .
Shahid Suhrawardi announced the issue of forming an ’
independent and sovereign undivided Bengal state in his speech f =
and also expressed strong arguments in favour of this proposal.
Muslim League leader Abul Hashim formulated a framework v“
for this greater Bengal state too. Later in a speech Sharat 4
Chandra Basu called upon to make Bengal a Socialist Republic. j
Basu-Suhrawrady Pact Hossain Shahid Suhrawardi
A meeting was held in the house of Congress leader Sharat Basu on May 20, 1947 in
favour of a united Bengal. A pact was signed to form an independent sovereign united
Bengal in that meeting. For the greater Bengal state the pact was signed by Abul Hasim
on behalf of Muslim League and Sharat Chandra Basu on behalf of Congress. Muslim
league leaders like Hossain Shahid Suhrawardy, Abul Hashim, Fazlur Rahman,
Mohammad Ali, A.M. Malik were present in that meeting. On the other hand, Sharat
Chandra Basu, Kiron Shankar Roy and Satya Ranjan Bakhshi were present among the
Hindu leaders. Here is the summary of the pact. x
N

Movement for Right to Self Determination in Bengal During British Period 163

1. Bengal would be an independent and sovereign state. The state itself will decide the
type of its relation with the other parts of India.

2. The seats of the legislative council will be decided on the ratio of the number of
Hindu and Muslim population and the council will be elected by the votes of the
adult people.

3. Once the proposal for independent Bengal had been accepted, the present cabinet
would be dissolved. An interim cabinet would be formed. The posts in that cabinet
will be equally distributed between the Hindu and the Muslim communities except
the position of the Prime Minister.

4. Hindus and Muslims would be equal in number in all services including the
Military and Police departments. Such jobs would be restricted only for the
Bengalees.

5. There would a representatives’ council consisting of 30 members to formulate the
constitution. Among them 16 members would be Muslim and 14 would be Hindus.

The Failure of the Proposal of a United Bengal

There was an adverse reaction among the Congress and the Muslim League leaders.

Initially the fundamentalist conservative Muslim league leaders were in favour of the

treaty. At the primary level even Mahatma Gandhi and Mohammad Ali Jinnah also kept

silence in support of this proposal. But the issue became complex for the opposition of
the top ranking Congress and Muslim League leaders. As a result, both Mahatma

Gandhi and Mohammad Ali Jinnah changed their attitude. Though the Muslim League

leaders were initially its supporters, later they, in particular Khawja Nazimuddin and

Akram Khan started demanding to make united Bengal a part of Pakistan. Akram Khan

after attending a meeting with Mohammad Ali Jinnah on May 16 in Delhi said that the

Muslim League did not support the idea of the united independent Bengal. Thus, the

Basu-Suhrawrady Pact lost the support of the Muslim League.

The idea of formeng a united independent Bengal or the Basu-Suhrawrady Pact faced

equal strong opposition from the Congress hierarchy from the very beginning. Many

Congress leaders including Jawharlal Nehru and Sardar Ballovbhai Patel opposed the

plan. They were not prepared to lose Kolkata in independent India. They also didn't

want to lose Assam which was rich in petrol and other mineral resources. Furthermore,

Congress was concerned with the security of the Hindu community in the Muslim

majority state of the united Bengal. Shyamaprasad of the Hindu Mohasava was in

extreme opposition against the united Bengal. As a result, the idea of united Bengal lost
the support of the Congress. Again, some newspapers and magazines made continuous
S propaganda against the united Bengal.West Bengal based Bengalee and non-Bengali
“business community, traders, capitalists took a strong stand against this proposal.

164 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Even, the Hindu intellectuals in Dhaka were also active against it. In this circumstance
the central leadership of Congress refused the independent Bengal plan. On the other
side, Lord Mountbatten presented his plan to divide Bengal and the Punjab on June 03
in his declaration of dividing India. As most of the members in the Bengal legislative
council voted in favour of the division of Bengal on June 20, the division became
inevitable. The Indian Independence Act, 1947 stated the division of Bengal and the
Punjab. Accordingly India was divided on August 14, 1947 when an artificial state
Pakistan was born. The next day, on 15th August India got freedom. East Bengal
became a part of Pakistan which later on came to be known as East Pakistan. West
Bengal was attached to India. In this way the dream for forming a united independent
Bengal came to an end.

Individual Work: Find out the reasons behind the opposition against the united

Bengal by its opponents.
The End of the British Rule
The Birth of India and Pakistan
When all concerned refused to accept the Cripps Mission proposal in1942, a serious
dissatisfaction developed in whole India. There came deep frustration even in politics.
Outside India the world was facing the destructions of the Second World War. The
Indians felt a panic on the prospect of an attack upon India by Japan, a close allies of
Germany. Gandhiji marked the presence of British government in India as the reason
behind the supposed cause of the Japanese attack. Therefore, in the Allahabad
conference of the Congress he proposed the British government to leave India in the
view that it might change Japan's objective to attack India. Congress started ‘Quit India
Movement’. People became involved in this movement. The movement spread
throughout India and assumed the nature of a strong anti-British attitude. Mahatma
Gandhi declared in the historical session of All India Congress Conference in Bombay
(presently Mumbai), 'I want freedom. Even I want it within this night, if possible before
the dawn" on August 08 in 1942. He also said, "We will achieve independence by
struggles. And this will be our last struggle".
But the English government was not prepared then to hand over power to the Indians.
Rather the government resolved to stop the movement in an iron hand. Many top
ranking Congress leaders like Gandhi, Moulana Abul Kalam Azad, Jawharlal Nehru
were arrested overnight. The government declared Congress an illegal organization and
almost all leaders were arrested within a week.
The non-violent movement turned violent. Hartals and general strikes were observed in 2%
mills-factories and in schools and colleges to press the demand of the release of the

Movement for Right to Self Determination in Bengal During British Period 165
imprisoned leaders. Agitated people became involved themselves in the terrorist
activities like picking up railway lines, throwing stones upon the running trains, setting
fire on the government establishment and railway stations etc. A movement without
leadership developed in whole India beyond any control of the authority. Somewhere
people formed interim governments or even the national governments in their own
discretion. A perilous situation took place while Tamluk police station was captured.
An old Indian woman named Matongini Hazra got martyrdom because she strongly
upheld the flag of India despite being shot by the police. Immediately after this
movement people became aimless for the fake famine in 1943. Besides, an extreme
inflation, corruptions, price hike all together caused the destruction of the economic
conditions. As a result the anti-British sentiment spread among the frustrated
population.
When there was an extreme frustration in the domestic political circle in India and all
life-risk struggles had failed, an organization named Azad Hind Fouz or Indian
National Army (INA) was formed outside the country. Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose
led this Army. Another Bengalee revolutionary Rasbihari Basu helped form this army.
An erstwhile President of Congress and the founder of the Forward Block Party
Shubhash Chandra Bose opposed the compromising attitude of the Congress politics.
He differed with Mahatma Gandhi from the beginning in determining the means to
achieve independence. Subhash Bose opposed Gandi's nonviolent movement since his
adolescent days. Though Gandhi himself had nominated Sub hash Chandra Bose to
become the President of Congress in 1937, it is Gandhi himself who did not nominate
Subhash Bose for the Presidential candidate for the second term. Subhash Bose
competed for the post denying the sanction by Gandhi and was re-elected as the
President of Congress. The winner in such a challenge against Gandhi later failed to
win Gandhi's support in Congress politics. Being frustrated, Subhash Bose formed the
Forward Block Party. His politics advanced towards an uncompromising destination.
The British government arrested him repeatedly from a sense of fear. At last he left the
country in the innocence of all in 1941 after being free from jail. It was the time of the
Second World War. He first went to Germany, the enemy land of the British
government. There he liaised with the German government and tried to form an army.
He was the first Indian politician who tried to achieve independence with the help of a
foreign power. Since the situation was not in his favour he came to Japan by an
adventurous submarine journey crossing the Atlantic and the Indian oceans. There he
formed the Azad Hind Fouz with the war prisoner Indian soldiers together with another
« exiled brave leader Rasbihari Basu. He took the leadership of this force in 1943 and in
S the same year formed the exiled Azad Hind Government or the exiled Independent

166 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Indian Government. This force fought bravely against the English power in different
frontiers in India till 1945. Azad Hind Fouz and Subhash Chandra Bose were
nightmares to the British government during that period. The armed movement of
Subhash Chandra Bose shook the foundation of the British government. Azad Hind
Fouz entered India in 1944 from Burma (presently Myanmar) led by this great
commander. Azad Hind Fouz captured Kohima-Imphol regions by fighting bravely in
those frontiers. Unfortunately when the Japaneese had to retreat following their failure
to face the extreme attacks from the English force, Azad Hind Fouz also had to retreat
from this place. The departure of the Japanese forces from Rangoon (presently
Yangoon) in 1945 and the victory of the Allied Force caused the stopping of the
advancement of Azad Hind Fouz.
Thus, a brave and patriot Bengalee's effort ended to rescue the lost freedom of the
motherland. Indian history of struggles for independence would have been written
differently if Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose had been successful. It could have been
another proud history of the patriotism and bravery of the Bengalees.
Subhash Bose's Azad Hind Government was non-communal. This government had
many potential officers and soldiers who were Muslims. He had a very faithful
commander named Shahnewaz. This progressive Bengalee commander with
non-communal spirit disappeared after the end of the Second World War. Though there
are a number of rumours regarding his disappearance, the undiscovered truth behind
his disappearance is still subject of research. Though his adventure failed, it excited the
feelings of confidence and courage among the common people in India. As he was
successful to bring a division among the native soldiers in British-Indian army,
similarly he was successful in inspiring them to revolt against the foreign rule.

Group work: Make a chronological list of the countries Netaji had to go

for the independence of India.
A marine mutiny grew in Bombay in 1946 after the failure of the Azad Hind Fouz.
These evidences prove that it was going beyond the British government to sustain its
control upon the Indians. To overcome such adversities the British government took
many initiatives. Attempts were also taken to solve crisis during the Second World War.
Governor-General Lord Wavelle presented a plan in the presence of Indian leaders in
1945 in Simla which is known as 'Wavelle Plan’. The Wavelle Plan failed because of the
sharp contrast in opinion between the leaders of Congress and Muslim League
regarding the number of representatives from each community in the interim
Government.
The Labour Party won in the British general elections after the end of the Second World
War. The change in British politics left an influence upon the Indian politics as well The 2
Labour Party was sympathetic towards giving independence to India and to the desire S

Movement for Right to Self Determination in Bengal During British Period 167
of the Indians for self-control. Thinking this object the new Prime Minister of England
Atlee declared a general election in India in 1946. The Provincial Muslim League of
Bengal became divided into two factions ahead the election. Khawja Nazimuddin was
the leader of the business community and the conservative section. On the other hand,
Abul Hashim and Hossain Shahid Suharawrdy were the leaders of progressive young
group of Bengal. Ultimately Suharawardy became the leader of the Bengal Muslim
League. Muslim young community supported Muslim League in this election. Muslim
League bagged an unpredicted success in the election by giving priority to the demand
for the establishment of Pakistan. This election was very much significant in the history
of this country. Hence through the opinion of Bengalee Muslims in favour of Pakistan
was clearly expressed and Muslim League also successfully proved itself as the only
party to represent the Muslims of Bengal. It is noteworthy that Muslim League could
not bag majority votes in the present Pakistan part. It means that the proposal for
Pakistan was approved by the vote of Bengali Muslims. Hossain Shahid Suharawadi
and Bangabondhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman contributed most to this victory.
The prospect of a different situation in the politics in this sub-continent became
prominent in the post-election period. The wise government of Atlee realized that it
would not be possible for Britain to rule India for long with honour. Therefore, a
delegation led by Pathic Lawrence, the Secretary for India, came to India in 1946. This
delegation is called the Cabinet Mission. This time the Delhi convention of Muslim
League asked the Cabinet Mission to solve the situation by accepting the demand for
Pakistan. Discussing with the Muslim League and Congress leaders the Cabinet
Mission presented some definite proposals in May on the future Constitution of India.
The proposed plan of the Cabinet mission suggested establishing a federal state with
three tires. For example-
a. To form an interim central government.
b. To form an autonomous Indian union with the British Indian native states.
c. To divide the provinces in three categories, such as, Hindu majority group,
Muslim majority group and Bengal and Assam group and to form a legislature
for each of the groups. But conditions were imposed that if this proposal would
be accepted it must be accepted as a whole. Part of it could not be accepted.
Though the demand for Pakistan was ignored in the Cabinet Mission plan, Muslim
League accepted the proposal. Muslim League realized that the prospect of the
establishment of Pakistan existed in the plan. Congress also saw the reflection of
creating an undivided India through forming a common central government in this
plan. Congress was ready to accept the plan in its own perception of it. But Muslim
co League refused the plan when Congress had refused it at last. As a result the proposals
§ of the Cabinet Mission to solve the political crisis became null and void.

168 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Governor-General Wavell asked the Muslim League and the Congress to join the
interim government. Muslim League cancelled its previous decision to join the interim
government on account of a comment made by the newly elected Congress President
Jawharlal Nehru. But Nehru took the initiative to form a government according to the
call of Wavell. In its protest Muslim League declared August 16 as 'the Direct Action
Day'. Thousands of innocent people died on this day in the riot. The British
government announced its decision to transfer power to the Indians following the riot
and the serious deterioration of the relation between the Hindus and the Muslims.
British Prime Minister Atlee announced in the month of February in 1947 that power
would be transferred to the Indians before June, 1948. To discharge the responsibility
of transferring power Lord Mountbatten was sent to India as the Governor General in
the place of Lord Wavell.
Lord Mountbatten decided to divide India on the basis of his dialogues with the
Congress and the Muslim League leaders. In order to protect the country from
communal riots the leaders at last agreed to divide India. Mountbatten announced the
plan of dividing India on June 03 clearly. He also announced that power would be
transferred to the Indians sharply before 1948. Muslim League expressed their
satisfaction for accepting the demand of Pakistan.
An announcement of the House of Commons in London suggested on July 15, 1947
that two dominions would be established in the names of India and Pakistan. To
ascertain the border areas of the two countries a committee was formed under the
leadership of Sir Radcliff. Radcliff submitted his report of finalizing the border areas
to the Viceroy on August 09 after completing his task. But for some mysterious reasons
the report did not see the light of the day. 'Indian Independence Act' was formulated on
July 18, 1947 which determined the end of the British rule in India. Two new countries
named Pakistan and India were born respectively on August 14 and 15, 1947.
Group Work: Why were two countries born on the basis of Indian Independence
Act'?. Show the reasons .
Exercise Questions
Multiple choice questions
1. Who separated Bengal in 1905?
a. Lord Cornwalis b. Lord Curzon
°9
c. Lord Chamesford d. Lord Reeding ES

Movement for Right to Self Determination in Bengal During British Period 169
2. Masterda Surjya Sen's revolutionary activities included —
i. forming a revolutionary army in Chittagong;
ii. declaration of Independent Chittagong government;
iii. forming a Chittagong Republican Army.
Which one of the followings is correct?
a. iandii b. iiand iii
c. iand iii d. i, ii and iii
Read the text and answer question nos. 3 and 4.
The labourers of the Nishapur tea garden were demonstrating on the street to protest
against their low wage. When their violence like destructions and blockades went
on, the labour leader Kiran asked them to give up violence for a regular movement.
3. Who influenced the labour leader Kiran?
a. Khudiram b. Masterda Surya Sen
c. Mahatma Gandhi c. Pulin Bihari Das
4. That leader's activities included -
i. strengthening Hindu-Muslim harmony;
ii. protesting the repressive acts;
iii. demanding the release of the determined prisoners.
Which of the followings is correct?
a iandii b. ii and iii
c. iand iii d. i, ii and iii
Creative Questions
1. Salehpur Union is near the river. Crops and roads were damaged widely in the last
year's flood. Since it covered a large area, problems arose in the development works
including distributing relief goods during the time of the flood. In order to solve this
crisis the union was divided into two units.
a. Where was Emperor Bahadur Shah II exiled?
Forma- 22, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

170 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization

b. What do you mean by the Doctrine of Lapse ?

c. What reason behind the Partition of Bengal has been reflected in the text?

d. Do you think that was the only reason behind the Partition of Bengal? Give
reasons in favour of your opinion.

2. Keya and Kona are two sisters. They went to Eid shopping. Though Keya listed
some foreign goods in her preference, Kona consented to give up foreign goods for
buying own products. At last Kona succeeded to convince her sister Keya and both
returnes home with local products.

a. Who abolished the rank of the Emperor of Delhi?
b. Why did the Enfield Rifle made soldiers revolt?
c. What aspest of the movements against the British encouraged Kona to buy
local products. Explain.
d. Do you think that Keya's attitudes are adverse to our economic progress?
Give reasons.
26
S
AQ

Chapter Eleven

The Language Movement and Afterwards Political Episode
Language Movement was the movement for the Bangalee's cultural rights to self
determenation. Subsequently this movement shaped itself as the economic and political
movement. This agitation was the first step to evolve Bengalee nationalistic feeling.
The then ruling class from West Pakistan vested themselves to exploit East Pakistan in
suppressive manner from the very first day of independence in August 1947. They had
tried to impose Urdu as the state language; which was spoken only by a minor 3.27%
people ignoring the vast majority of 56% of its total population speaking Bangla. The
rulers (West Pakistan) in 1948 declared Urdu as the state language of Pakistan ignoring
the opinion of the majority group. The scholars of Bengal erupted opposely the
decision. They strongly protested this discriminatory decision. In this way, the
Language Movement started to get its momentum. The agitation reached its peak in
1952. Movement developed throughout the country. For the first time in world history
Salam, Barkat, Rafique, Jabbar and many others sacrificed their lives for the love of
mother tongue. Language movement had sowed the seed of independence within the
dream of a Bengalee nation. This motivated the long thriving struggle and revolution to
give birth of a new country. our beloved Bangladesh.
At the end of this chapter we will be able to -

e explain the importance of Language Movement;

e describe the background of declaring 218t February as the International

Mother Language Day and its honor;

e describe the necessity of forming new political organizations;

e evaluate the formation United Front Coalition and subsequent proceedings;

e honor the language martyrs through honoring the Language Movement;

e _ be interested in sharing political feeling with others and encourage others as

well.
The Background of the Language Movement
Partition of the Indian sub-continent in 1947 resulted the formation of Pakistan. The
then East Bengal became a dominion of the newly formed state Pakistan. The two part
of Pakistan had no similarity in respect of history, tradition, culture, language. Despite
West Pakistan and East Pakistan (East Bengal) having situated 1000 miles apart, they
become one on the basis of only religion. As a result, the ruling class of this newly
formed country 'Pakistan' stroke the first bolt on its language as a measure of their
o intention to exploit eastern dominion. The question of ‘what would be the state
s language of Pakistan?’ arose before the creation of Pakistan in 1947. At that time the

172 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
influential leaders from Muslim League and scholars opined favoring Urdu to be the
state language of Pakistan. Instantly, the scholars and writers including veteran
language specialist of the sub-continent, Dr. Muhammad Shahidullah protested the
idea. Just after creation of Pakistan, Tamaddun Majlish, a Bengalee Islamic Cultural
Organization was formed by Abul Kashem, a Professor of Physics Department
University of Dhaka. This was the first organization for language movement. The first
published pamphlet by this organization was ‘The State Language of Pakistan is
Bangla or Urdu' was published on September 15 1947. The publication stated logics in
it favoring Bangla to be the state language. With the initiative of the Tamuddun
Majlish, National Language Action Committee which was convened by Professor
Nurul Haque Bhuiyan of University of Dhaka was formed in October 1947 to frame it
as a political movement. Along with this organization many other organizations, such
as, Democratic Youth League, East Bengal Scholar Society, Journalists' Forum started
to chorus their voice in various meetings, gatherings and summits to make Bengali as
the national language. Paying no attention to these urges, Urdu had been suggested to
the Constituent Assembly as the State Language in the Education Summit held in
Karachi in December 1948.

From the very beginning of 1948, the educated society of Bengal there was voiced with
the demand of Bengali Language. In a meeting of National Language Action
Committee, a proposal was made to make Bangla as the medium of education for the
primary to secondary level. On 23 February 1948 when the proceedings of the first
Constituent Assembly of Pakistan began simultaneously in Urdu and English, a
member of the Assembly and East Bengal Congress Party from Comilla, Dhirendranath
Datta, opposed it and proposed the legislation for allowing Bangla to be spoken by the
members and authorized it to be an official language too. But, all the members from
Muslim League defied the proposal. The students of East Bengal made a huge protest
against it. Strike had been observed in all the educational institutions in Dhaka on 26
and 29 February. On 2"! March National Language Action Committee was formed for
the second time by the student wing in presence of the scholars of East Bengal.

The new committee for the National Language Action called for strike on 11 March.
Their demand was to declare Bangla as one of the State Language of Pakistan and
official language for East Pakistan Government. During the procession for the demand
of Bangla as the national language, many people were injured by the police brutality for
battening and lobbing of tear shell. Many of them were arrested including
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, Shamsul Haque, Oli Ahad, Kazi Golam
Mahbub. As a result of this, strike was again observed on 13-15 of March. At this time,
not only Dhaka, but also the whole country observed the strike. On the height of the ,,
severe civic unrest, the then Chief Minister Khaja Nazimuddin signed a contract with S

The Language Movement and Afterwards Political Episode 173
the student leaders. In this contract various issues including releasing the arrestees,
forming an investigation committee, accepting Bangla the medium of education, and
one of the state languages had been included.
The Governor-General of Pakistan Mohammad Ali Jinnah had arrived Dhaka on 19th
March, 1948. He made speech on the Race Course (presently Suhrawardy Uddan)
Ground at Ramna at a civic reception on 21 March and at Curzon Hall at the
Convocation of University of Dhaka on 24 March. In both the occasions, he declared
Urdu as the National Language of Pakistan defying the demand for Bangla. During his
speech at convocation he declared, “Urdu, and only Urdu shall be the national language
of Pakistan". The students present there erupted in denial saying 'No'. The language
movement spread all over East Bengal. During the visit of Prime Minister Liakat Ali
Khan in 1948, he again declared urdu as the sole state language. Students protested
again with rejection.
In 1948 at the All Pakistan Education Summit it was proposed to write the Bangla
language in Arabic letter. Dr. Mohammad Shahidullah protested it. With the conspiracy
to write Bangla in Arabic letter 'East Bengal Language Committee’ was formed on
March, 1949. Strong protest came from the University of Dhaka. On 11h March, 1950
"University of Dhaka National Language Action Committee’ was formed with Mr.
Abdul Matin as the Convener. In the National Assembly held in 1950 it was suggested
by the Principal Committee to make only Urdu as the state language of Pakistan.
Countrywide rallies- procession were being held. When in 1951, Liakat Ali Khan was
assassinated, Khaja Nazimudin became the Prime Minister of Pakistan. In 1952 at
Dhaka Nazimuddin echoed Jinnah's statement regarding the state language. It added a
new impetus in the language movement and gave it a final shape.
The Final Stage of the Language Movement
On 27 January at Paltan Ground; the new Prime Minister Khaja Nazimuddin declared
that Urdu shall be the state language of Pakistan. Resultantly, Language Movement was
fueled freshly. Dhaka University National Language Action Committee called for a
meeting and student strike on 30 January. On 31 January, All Party Central Language
Action Committee’ was formed chaired by the Awami Muslim League President Abdul
Hamid Khan Bhshani. Kazi Golam Mahabub was the Convenor of that Committee. In
this meeting, the whole country was called for hartal, metting and procession. At this
time, suddenly the Chief Minister of East Pakistan imposed Section-144 banning all
kind of gathering, protest, etc. With this declaration Dhaka erupted like a volcano in
protest. The students could not in no way accept the legislative ban imposed by section
144.

vo On the 20 February, a meeting of the All-party Rashtrobhasha Shongrm Parishad was

§ held at the central office of Awami Muslaim League. A contradiction rose against the

174 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
breaking of section 144. Most of the members initially did not think of violating section
144. But, Abdul Matin, Oli Ahad, Golam Mahbub.isuch leaders were resolute to defy
the section 144. At last decision was taken in fovour of breaking the section 144.
On the morning of 21 February at 11.00 a.m. the Amtola of University of Dhaka
{at present Dhaka Medical College) students gathering became a sea of mass.
Thousands of students from various schools and colleges of Dhaka city gathered there.
Some of the leaders urged the students not to defy section 144. But, the student leaders
were determined on their decision. In the meeting they decided to break section 144 in
rallies of small groups. When students begun their rally enchanting, ‘Rashtro Bhasha
Bangla Chai' (Bangla as state language) police started battening and lobbing of tear
shell.
In return, students also started to throw pebbles and stones to the police. Agitated
students gathered near the Dhaka Medical College and started to advance towards the
East Bengal Legislative Assembly. Police opened fire at the students. Abdus Salam,
Abul Barkat, Rafique Uddin Ahmed, Abdul Jabbar took martyrdom on the spot. At that
time the Legislative Assembly was on going. Hearing about the fire, along with some
legislative members Abdur Rashid Tawrkabagish left the assembly and reached the
place of incident.
Ay; .} . } ~ ef r

ues eta ae
ST Atetey wees wea 86 GraetT || aeRO
The next day on 22 February, a mass protest broke
out against the brutality. Public brought out
mourning rallies for the martyrs. Police and
military again battened the mass, opened fire and
used bayonet. As a result, many died including [i | \ at | ! ere
Shaifur Rahman. Many were arrested. Other an ped UL es
students made a monument (Shahid Meenar) ral 1 ae —
during the night before 23 February at the place Mp
where the students were killed. Later, police (900
demolished the monument. In 1963, Shahid Central Shahid Meenar
Meenar was constructed with the design and planning of artist Hamidur Rahman in
place of the temporary Shahid Meenar. During the Liberation War, the Pakistani army
again demolished the Shahid Meenar. It was again reconstructed in 1972 as per the &
same design. 8

The Language Movement and Afterwards Political Episode 175
Language Movement was still in action. Bengali was included as the national language
for Pakistan in the Pakistan National Assembly in face of severe protest and campaign.
A bill was passed accepting Bangla as the National Language along with Urdu from a
proposal made by a member of National Assembly, Adel Uddin Ahmed. Bengali
language had been honored by its inclusion as one of the national language by the
constitution of 1956.
Women in the Language Movement
Women in our country were intricately involved in the activities and happenings before
and after the Language Movement from 1948 to 1952. They participated in rally
and meeting along with men.
During the Language Movement in 1948 students of different schools and colleges,
especially the students of Qamrunnesa School and Eden College had glorious
contributions. They were very vocal in meetings and seminars in favour of the dignity
of Bangla language. Nadira Chowdhury and some other women leders were involved
in writing posters and festoons as a part of the movement.
Women outside Dhaka also took courageous and unique roles in this regard. Hamida
Rahman was one of such women leaders in Jessore. Rahima Khatun, Saleha Khatun
(Saleha Chakraborty) and some others were quite prominent in Bogra. The women in
Sylhet had also praiseworthy roles in this regard. Hajera Mahmud, Zobeda Khatun
Chowdhury, Sahera Banu, Sayeda Lutfunnesa Khatun, Sayada Najirunnessa Khatun,
Rabeya Khatun along with some others took leading roles in this Movement. Another
women-leader, Lilly Chakraborty kept the movement ongoing through poster and
leaflets. As a result, she was arrested on 13 August 1949. Apart from all these
revolutionary activities, many women at places individually contributed to the
Language Movement.Among the Nibedita Nag, Sara Toifur Mahmud and Sahera Vanu
are praiseworthy.
Anwara Khatun was one of them who abstained out from the East Bengal Legislative
Council on 21st February 1952 as a protest. She stood strongly in favour of Bangli
language. Equally the girls of Dhaka University contributed significantly in the
Language Movement of 1952. Shamsunnahar, Rawshan Ara Bacchu, Sufi.a Ibrahim
and some others had the courage to break even Article 144 on 21 February. Besides, the
arrest of Mumtaz Begum, another Language Movement leader in Narayanganj sparked
a conflicting sitution between the civilians and the police.
The Significance of the Language Movement
The language movement is an extraordinary event in the history of Bangladesh. This
was the first protest against the discrimination of Pakistan. This incident was the first
o impetus of the Bangalees for Bangalee nationalism. The Bangalees had a long history
Sof deprivation and exploitation by the west Pakistani government since the creation of

176 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Pakistan in 1947. Disrespect of their own mother tongue, Bangla, stirred the sentiment
of the whole nation. People understood that their language, culture and economy - in a
word, nothing was safe in the hands of the Pakistanis. In this way, the seed of the
Bangalee nationalism was sown among the Bangalees.
Importance of Shahid Day and International Mother Language Day
The 218t February has been commemorated each year as Shahid Dibosh for the
Bengalee form the following year of the Language Movement in 1952. Every year in
the midnight at 12.01 am on 21st February all the people including the President and
the Prime Minister of the country lay flowers and bouquets on the Shahid Meenar to
pay homage to the martyrs of the language. Processions (Provat Fery, singing special
song for Ekusheey) has become an indispensable part of the Bengalee culture. After the
independence of Bangladesh, 21S' February has been declared as Public Holiday. On
this auspicious day, various cultural events are held to commemorate the importance of
Shahid Dibosh with a view to maintaining a continuous consciousness of Bengalee
nationality.
The honour of mother language had been secluded by blood of the Bengalee nation in
21st February, 1952. Shahid Dibosh. has been accredited by the international
community as an extraordinary incident in the world history. 218t February' has been
declared as ‘International Mother Language Day' on 17 November, 1999 in the General
Assembly of the UNESCO in Paris. Since 2000, this day has been observed in the
internationaly with proper honour and Solemnity. The small ethnic groups and diverge
cluster of people in our country has their identical language and culture.

Indivichual work:

1. Identify the political significance of the Language Movement.

2. Find out the reasons for declaring Shahid Dibosh as International Mother Language

Day.
Political Activities
There were mainly three political parties or ideology during the creation of Pakistan
in 1947.
1. Muslim League representing political conduct on the basis of religious ideology
2. National Congress of noncommunal and democratic philosophy
3. Communist Party of the revotionary and sociolistic ideology 09
S
AQ

Language Movements and Afterwards Political Episode 177
Muslim League and Its Undemocratic Activities

After the independence of Pakistan in 1947, the All India Muslim League was renamed
as Pakistan Muslim League. Muslim League started its journey as the ruling party of a
new government. From the very beginning, the party was fully controlled by the Urdu
speaking West Pakistani leaders. The Muslim League leaders from West Pakistan
adopted the policy of disparity against the Bengalees and started to oppress them in
various issues forgetting the efforts, initiatives and self-sacrifice made by Bengalee
leaders during the partition for a separate state. The dedicated Bengalee leaders of
Muslim League such as AK Fazlul Haque, Hossain Shahid Suhrawardy, Abul Hasim
had been ignored. Gradually, Muslim League was alienated from the mass.

During the period after 1947, the Muslim League in Bengal became entangled in
internal conflict. The party became divided into two different ideologies. One was the
follower of Suhrawardi-Hashim and the other one was the follower of Khaja
Nazimuddin -Akram Khan. Follower of the first ideology was generous, democratic,
reformative and the later one was the submissive associates of the conservative West
Pakistanis. This internal conflict made the party weak as an organization. Besides, the
ruler West Pakistan always tried to repress and oppress these leaders in desiring of
reformation.

Severe crisis out broke in the country due to the faulty policy of the Muslim League.
The government was not interested in the development of East Bengal at all. Gradually,
their differentiating attitude towards East Bengal got prominent. The disparity was
remarkable in every sector of economy, politics, culture, etc. Public support favoring
Muslim League started to deplete rapidly after 1948.

Newly formed Political Parties

A number of leaders became very upset realizing the undemocratic attitude,
suppressive measures, huge disparity between West Pakistan and East Bengal and
dishonoring the Bengali language by the Muslim League. The oppositions of Muslim
League came forward to create new political party. In addition to the existing Congress
and Communist Party, various parties like People's Freedom League, Gono Azadi
League, Pakistan Democratic Youth League, Nezam-E-Islam, Khilfat-E-Rabbani,
Krishok-Shramik Party were formed. But, the major blow for the Muslim League was
the partition within itself. The leaders of the reformative group formed Awami Muslim
League. Under these circumstances in East Bengal, more than one political party were
formed against Muslim League.

Forma- 23, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

178 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Awami League from Awami Muslim League
The group in the Muslim League believing in democracy and reformation were
oppressed and deprived by the other group of leaders from West Pakistan. This reactive
part of the ruling party was gradually detached from the mass people because of their
incapability to run the state. On the other hand, public support for the deprived group
of the Muslim League was increasing. Among the national leaders; Suhrawardi, Abul
Hashim, Maulana Abdul Hamid Khan Bhashani started to protest against the traditional
policy of the Muslim League and they felt the necessity to organize a new political
party. In May 1948, Suhrawardi called a meeting for the creation of an opposition party.
In continuation to this, discussion related to formation of a new party had been going
on with the leaders of West Pakistan opposing the Muslim League. After these
initiatives and preparations, a workers' conference was organized at the Rose Garden in
Dhaka on 23-24 June in 1949. 300 top level representatives participated in that
conference. Here it was decided unanimously to form a new political party named ‘East
Pakistan Awami Muslim League’. A forty member committee was also formed having
Maulana Bhashani as Chairman, Shamsul Haque as Secretary, Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman as Joint-secretary. The first public meeting of this newly formed
political party was held at Armanitola, Dhaka.
From the inception of the Awami Muslim League, they took a 42 point platform with
emphasis on provincial autonomy. Among the main agenda were accepting Bangla as
state language, one vote of one person, democracy, framing of the constitution,
parliamentary government, regional autonomy and reduction of disparity between West
and East Pakistan. Awami Muslim League was the first successful opposition party in
the history of East Bengal. Formation of this party filled the gap of the opposition party.
The party gained public support because of its strong voice against the Muslim League
and ill treatment from the Pakistani rulers. This party played a vital role in formation of
a united front coalition in 1954 and its unprecedented victory over Muslim League.
After this, Muslim League became only a party in name.
From the very beginning Awami Muslim League believed in non-communal and
secular philosophy. As a consequence, the party removed the word 'Muslim' from its
name and became 'Awami League' in 1955 and opened its door for the people of other
religious beliefs. The party became real party for the mass people by raising Six Point
Agenda in 1966. After this, the full political control of East Pakistan became
concentrated on Awami League. 2
S
AQ

Language Movements and Afterwards Political Episode 179
The election of 1970 and winning the majority seats proves the vast popularity of the
party. It is the Awami League that led the nation to achieve victory in the Liberation
War in 1971 and earn independence.
United Front Coalition & Provincial Election (1954)
The United Front Coalition was another important milestone in political history of
Bengal. In fact, the election was a ‘revolution through ballot’ against the exploitation of
the ruler and their alliance of Pakistan. It became necessary to form a new political
organization due to grouping within the Muslim League, internal conflict, failure in
administration, differentiated policy for individual regions since the very beginning of
Pakistan. Because of the acute failure of Muslim League in the eastern dominion
various parties were formed such as Awami Muslim League, Peasants-Workers Party,
East Pakistan Communist Party, Nizam-E-Islami, Pakistan National Congress etc.
Though, it was decided previously to hold the election for the East Pakistan Constituent
Assembly in 1951, the Muslim League Government postponed the date of election time
on vague grounds from their anxiety of defeat. At last the date for the election in East
Pakistan was fixed on 8th March 1954.
The Background of Formation of United Front Coalition (Juktafront)
and its 21-Points Charter
Muslim League was the oldest and largest among the political parties in East Bengal
before the election of 1954, Besides, Muslim League was leading the provincial
government of East Bengal. As a result, the newly formed parties in East Pakistan
planned to form a coalition as a strategy to defeat Muslim League in the election of
1954. Resultantly, the decision to form United Front Coalition was taken at the council
of Awami Muslim League in Mymensing on 14th November, 1953. The coalition
consisted of four main opposition parties; Awami Muslim League led by Maulana
Abdul Hamid Khan Bhashani, Krishak Sromik Party led by AK Fazlul Haque,
Nezam-E-Islami of Maulana Atahar Ali and the leftist Democratic Party of Hazi
Danesh. The electoral symbol for the United Front Coalition was 'Boat'. The coalition
declared 21-point charter of election manifesto by selecting the main demands made on
the 42 point election manifesto of Awami Muslim League. Abul Mansur Ahmed was
the main person to write the 21-point charter with the view to reflect the hopes and
2 expectations from the mass people of East Bengal. The main points are briefly
% mentioned below:

180 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
1. To Establish Bangla as one of the state language of Pakistan;
2. To dissolute the Zamidari System without compensation and distribute the
surplus land among the landless people;
3. To nationalize the Jute Industry;
4. To establish co-operative agricultural system to develop agriculture;
5. To introduce free and mandatory primary education;
6. Education through mother tongue (language),
7. To construct a monument commemorating the martyrs of 52's Language
Movement;
g, To declare 21°' February as government holiday considering it as Shahid
Dibosh;
9. To provide full autonomy to East Bengal as per 1940-Lahore Resolution;
10. Inno way the validity of the Legislative Assembly is to be extended;
11. Ifany seats in the Legislative Assembl become vacant, it should be filled in
within three months through by-election.
Result of the Election
The election of 8 March in 1954 was the first general election held in East Bengal with
exercise of unrestrained and universal voting right. 37.19% voter voted in the election.
Officially the result of the election was declared on 2™ April. The coalition attained 223
seats out of the total 309 seats. The ruling party Muslim League obtained 9 seats,
The Significance of the Election
The election of 1954 was the united protest by the Bengalee against the lawlessness,
discrimination and administrative failure of the Muslim League. The general public of
East Bengal gave a message to the Muslim League that they would no longer cherish
them. The immense popularity of the leaders of the coalition, especially the young
2
Ss
N

Language Movements and Afterwards Political Episode 181
leaders, the way of opportunity widened for creation of future leaders of East Bengal.
Because, many experienced leaders of Muslim League was defeated against the young
leaders of the coalition. On the other hand, the Awami Muslim League having
maximum seats ensured their strong leadership in East Bengal in future. Through this
election, secularism was established in the politics of East Bengal. Huge unreliability
on the Muslim League and non-Bangalee leaders took place among the mind of the
people of East Bengal. They realized that their freedom is not possible by the West
Pakistani and their associates in this country. For this reason, the inhabitants of East
Bengal fully supported the autonomy on the basis of their ideology of Bengali
nationality.
The Afterward Episodes of the Election
A fourteen member cabinet of ministers was formed by the United Front Coalition
under the leadership of A K Fazlul Haque. In addition to Chief Ministry, he undertook
the Finance, Revenue and State ministries. Among other members, Abu Hossain Serker
got Judicial, Health and Local Government; Syed Azizul Haque got Education and
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman had been assigned for Agriculture,
Co-operative & Village Development Department.
Cancellation of the Cabinet of ‘United Front Coalition’ and Administration
of the Central Government in East Bengal
The unprecedented victory of the United Front Coalition was not perceived positively
by the Muslim League. They started conspiring against the coalition government. The
central government became annoyed at the sentimental speech of A. K. Fazlul Haque
about two Bengal during his visit to Kolkata. The declaration of 218t February as Public
Holiday and Burdawan House as Bangla Language Research Centre also annoyed the
central government. They were searching for the opportunity to topple the coalition
cabinet. Meantime, there occurred bloody riot in front of the Central Jail between the
Jail authority and the local people and huge clash broke out at Adamjee Jute Mill
between the Bengalee and Bihar workes. As a result the central government started
condemning the coalition cabinet for their failure to maintain law and order situation.
During the time a interview of A.K. Fazlul Haque was distorted published in the
Newyork Times mentioning that he wants the independence of East Bengal. On this
ground, the Muslim League government declared him a traitor to the state. At last, the
central Muslim League government initiated the Governor's rule in East Bengal
cancelling the cabinet of United Front Coalition on 30 May, 1954 on the basis of
Section 92(Ka) under India Administration Act 1935. The administration of the
coalition cabinet lasted till 284 June 1955. The rule of the United Front Coalition
s cabinet came to an end after 56 days mainly, because of the conspiracy of the Muslim
& League and the Central Government and internal clash within the coalition. The

182 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
government tends to change frequently. Within four years, the cabinet was changed for
seven times. The central government declared Governor's rule for three times. The
democratic system could not be evolved due to the clash for power in the coalition and
conspiracy from the central government.

The Constitution of 1956

Constitution is the supreme law of a country. The administration of a country is run by
its constitution. The demand was raised at different stages for drafting the constitution
immediately after the birth of Pakistan in 1947. The demand was more prominent from
East Bengal. There were claims and expectations from the mass people of East Bengal
for a new constitution so that the provincial autonomy could be achieved. But, the
ruling Muslim League wanted to change East Bengal into a colony to them. Initially,
the new country, Pakistan was run by the Government of India Act 1947. Pakistan
Constituent Assembly was formed by the public representatives elected in 1946. The
assembly was responsible to act as the new parliament and frame the constitution of
Pakistan. But, the task of the assembly used to be disrupted by the disinclination of the
ruling bodies. At last, to frame the constitution of Pakistan, the Constituent Assembly
formed a Committee of Basic Principle on March 1949. In this committee there were
few representatives from East Bengal. After much delay, the committee submitted its
proposition and report after long eighteen months. On the various suggestions in the
report again the people of East Bengal were deprived in different aspects. As a result,
when the report was published in September 1950, it caused huge protest in East
Bengal and they denied the suggestions made by the report. Afterwards, the committee
submitted its second report in 1952 and the third report in 1953. But, the adoption of
the constitution remained unresolved. At last, the Governor General of Pakistan took
the responsibility to draft the constitution for the country. The leaders from both of the
dominion were able to reach an accord in this regard. On the basis of this the
constitution was written in 1956. After adoption, the constitution was active for only
two years. In 1958, when Ayub Khan proclaimed Martial Law in the country, the
constitution was declared unworkable and with this the constitutional rule came to an,
end in Pakistan. s

Language Movements and Afterwards Political Episode 183
Exercise
Multiple Choice of Question:
1. Under whose leadership the first organization for Language Movement
'Tamuddin Mazlish' was formed?
a) Dr. Kazi Motahar Hossain b) Professor Abul Hashem
c) Mr. Abul Mansur Ahmed d) Dr. Mohammad Shahidullah
2. In 1948 Language Movement Action Committee was formed for the second
time —
i) to give the language movement a political shape;
ii) to include Bangla in the Pakistan Constituent Assembly;
iii) to protest writing Bengali in Arabic alphabet.
Which of the following is correct?
a) i b) ii
c) iGiii d) ii & iii
Read the following paragraph and answer question 3 and 4
A program on folk song was being aired in the television. Mithila was watching the
program with interest. But, his younger brother Mithun; was trying to change the
channel to watch an English cartoon. According to him only village people are the
listener of those songs. Her sister's fondness of this type of song does not match her.
3. What movement inspired Mithila?
a) NonCo-operationmovement b) Khilafat Movement
c) Language Movement d) Movement for right to selt determination
4. Motivated by the above perception Mithila could be —
i) apatriot
ii) nationalist
a re
Ss iii) protester

184 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization

Creative Question

1. In the election of Sabujnagar small political parties made alliance to defeat the
ruling influential leder. People announced a manifesto with many commitments to
fulfill the people's expectations. People extended their full support to them
keeping overall trust over the allied party. As a consequnce of this the allied party
won by massive victory and leader of the said rulling party lost by a big margin .

a. Who was the first President of the Awami League ?

b Why was the Awami Muslim League formed ?

c. Which election result of pre-Independence of Bangladesh influenced the
small political parties of Shobujnagar to be united?

d. Election can't be won only by power and influence. Justify the statement in
the light of the content.

2.  Palash texted his friend's birthday writing 'SHUVA JANMODIN' through mobile
phone. David, grown up in western culture did not support this work. David
anticipated the traditional ‘Happy Birthday' in English.

a. Who announce "Urdu as the state languge of Pakistan' at Dhaka University
Convocation on 24 march of 1948 ?
b. Why was East Bengal Language Committee, 1949 formed ?
c. The impact of which movement is seen into the mind of Palash ?
d. Do you consider David's thinking worse against flourishing of Bengali
language ? Give reasons.
°9
Ss

Chapter Twelve
Military Rule and the Movement for Right of Self-
determination (1958 - 1969)

Since its emergence, the administrative system in Pakistan was always seemed to be
overpowered by autocracy and bureaucracy. Apart from this, the influence of army was
also evident and this gradually intensified. Army was looking for the opportunity to
grab power. General Iskander Mirza was selected as the first President of the Islamic
Republic of Pakistan on 23 March, 1956. During his regime the army started
overshadowing the politics in Pakistan. Iskander Mirza obstructed democratic
practices in various ways. His conspiracy prompted the central cabinet to fall several
times. The confrontation between the Awami League and the Krishak Sramik Party
reached to its peak in East Pakistan. At one stage Deputy Speaker Shahed Ali
succumbed to death due to a head injury from the opposition the Krishak Sramik Party
members during a session of the Assembly in East Pakistan. His death resulted chaos
in the politics of pakistan and paved way Iskander Mirza the opportunity to proclaim
the Martial Law.
At the end of this chapter we will be able to -

e describe the situation ensued from military intervention;

e describe the contexts and effects of India-Pakistan war in 1965;

© explain the disparities between East and West Pakistan;

@ analyze the impact of Six Points demand in Bangalees movement for autonomy;

e explain the significance of the historic Agartala Case;

e describe the 11 Points;

e describe the background and effects of Mass Upsurge in 1969;

© be aware of protecting the interests and rights of the country.
Martial Law in 1958
President Iskander Mirza proclaimed Martial Law by compelling the parliamentary
government of Malik Feroz Khan to step down on 7 October, 1958. He abolished the
constitution, central and provincial assemblies and dismissed the cabinet. He banned
the political parties. He appointed General Ayub Khan as the Chief Martial Law
Administrator. Major General Omrao Khan was appointed the Martial Law
Administrator in East Pakistan But within a few days General Ayub Khan assumed the
Presidency through a coup against Iskander Mirza.
Basic Democracy of Ayub Khan
After consolidating the power in 1958, General Ayub Khan initiated to bring about
absolute changes in the administrative system and politics in Pakistan. He abandoned
Forma- 24, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

186 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
the traditional democratic practices and introduced a strange and new electoral process.
It was based on a concept called 'Basic Democracy'. Basic Democracy is a kind of
restricted democracy in which a few number of people would enjoy the privilege of
electing the President. An ordinance was proclaimed to introduce Basic Democracy in
1959. Initially Basic Democracy had four tires, such as:
1. Union Council (in the villages) and Town and Union Committees (in urban areas);
2. Thana Council in East Pakistan and Tahsil Council in West Pakistan;
3. District Council;
4. Divisional Council.
The Councils were consisted of elected and nominated members as well.
There were 40000 basic democrats in each part of Pakistan totaling the number to
80000 in the country. The members of this Basic Democracy were the Basic Democrats
or BD members. People's participation was limited in electing BD members. BD
members were the valid electors. None but these BD members could elect the President
and the members of the National and Provincial Legislative Councils. Ayub Khan
became the President for the following five years after winning the confidence votes of
these members. Thus, he also gained the authority to formulate a constitution for the
country. The new constitution was made to public on 1 March 1962 and the Martial
Law was withdrawn on 8 June.

Individual work: Prepare a concept of Ayub Khan's Basic Democracy?
Movement against Military Rule
Suhrawardy was taken into custody on 30 January 1964 for his alleged anti-state
conspiracy. The news of Suhrawardy's arrest sparked students’ reactions in East
Pakistan. They called for strike on 1 February and brought out processions. The strike
continued at a stretch till 5 February. This student program originated anti-Ayub
movement in East Pakistan. The government closed the University of Dhaka sine die.
Students confronted huge policing activities on them including arrests and tortures.
When Ayub Khan announced the enactment of a new constitution on March 1, the
student communities in East Pakistan staged demonstrations and abstained from
attending classes. Intellectuals, teachers, politicians and others extended their support
to the students’ movement opposing the new constitution. Ayub Khan and the East
Pakistan Governor Monaem Khan took strict oppressive measures to control the
student movement.
Student movement got momentum when the Sharif Commission Report on education
was published in August 1962. The recommendations in the report poised threat S

Military Rule and the Movement for Right of Self Determination (1958-1969) 187
of jeopardizing students' interests and rights. This resulted in a massive student
movement. This movement is known as the 'Education Movement, 62'. There were
demonstrations every day from 15 August to 10 September. While a hartal was being
observed on 17 September, several persons were killed and hundreds of people were
injured in police shootouts. This movement forced the government to suspend the
recommendations of the Sharif Commission. As a result of this incident, students
turned to a very vital force in anti-Ayub movement.
When the Martial Law was suspended on 8 June 1962, rights for politics under the
banner of political parties revived. Ayub Khan himself formed a political party named
the Convention Muslim League. At the same time Suhrawardy urged all the opposition
parties to be united to form a coalition. As a result, National Democratic Front or NDF
was formed comprising Awami League, Nezam-e-Islami, National Awami Party,
Council Muslim League and Muslim League of Nurul Amin. The aim of this front was
to regain democracy and to switch back to the constitution of 1956. This front became
popular very quickly.
Suhrawardy died in December 1963. Awami League deserted NDF at the beginning of
1964. Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was elected the General Secretary of the
party. Awami League started its new journey under his leadership. It made NDF
inactive. However, in the Presidential election on 2 January 1965, Awami league, NAP,
Council Muslim League, Nezam-e-Islami etc. joined again to form a Combined
Opposition Party (COP) so that they could nominate a single candidate against Ayub
Khan. COP nominated Fatima Jinnah, the younger sister of Muhammad Ali Jinnah to
contest for the Presidency of Pakistan. Ayub Khan managed to have supports of the
Basic Democrats to his side before the election. Though people expressed their
enthusiasm about Fatima Jinnah, Ayub Khan won the election race and became the
President. National and Provincial Legislative Council elections was held after the
Presidential election. Ayub Khan's Convention Muslim League won the majority in this
election too.
India-Pakistan War in 1965
When India and Pakistan emerged as two separate countries in 1947, an enmity ensued
between them centering round Kashmir. Both India and Pakistan considered Kashmir
as their inseparable part. The first war between these two countries was about the
control of Kashmir. But the war ended as the United Nations intervened and mediated.
The second war between these two countries was again about Kashmir in 1965. Ayub
Khan had a long cherished desire to invade India and capture Kashmir. Tension aroused
in the Indian part of Kashmir when the Kashmiri leader Shiekh Abdullah was arrested.
Ayub Khan availed himself of this opportunity. He attempted to create rowdiness in
co Kashmir by infiltrating a few saboteurs at first. At last, when Pakistan forces
& attacked Indian

188 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
territory, the war began. From the very onset the Indian Army met with considerable
success. They forced back Pakistani soldiers marched forward to Lahore. In such a
deplorable situation of Pakistan, Bangalee soldiers fought with great courage and saved
Lahore from a fall. On the seventeenth day after the war had ensued Pakistan was on
the verge of a total wretchedness. Some western countries and the Soviet Union
intervened and used diplomatic tools to mediate a ceasefire. The Soviet Union Premier
Alexei Kosygin hosted ceasefire negotiations in January 1966 and an agreement was
signed between India and Pakistan in Tashkand city . With the signing of this treaty, the
second Kashmir war ended.

The second Kashmir war aroused a strong anti-Ayub stance among the common people
of East Pakistan. The reason behind this was the obvious absence of any defense
mechanism in East Pakistan. This unguarded land could be invaded by Indian forces
anytime. During this time even the administrative communications between the East
and the West parts of Pakistan were totally cut off. Ayub Khan failed to ensure the
security of East Pakistan despite the life risking valiant contributions of the Bangalee
soldiers to protect Lahore.

Discrimination Towards East Pakistan

The state of Pakistan emerged in accordance with the proposals made in the Lahore
Resolution. But East Bengal did not get the status of a separate sovereign state in
accordance with the fundamental of the Lahore Resolution. East Bengal had to strive
for autonomy through movements and agitations for long 24 years. During this long
span of time West Pakistani rulers adopted the policy of discrimination and oppression
against the people of East Pakistan in political, administrative, military, economic,
educational and cultural areas. In protest of this, movement for autonomy and
independence originated in East Pakistan i.e. East Bengal.

Political Discrimination

Since its inception in 1947, East Pakistan was made crippled politically and was
dependent on West Pakistan. Though it was mentioned in the Lahore Resolution that
the states were to be autonomous, Pakistani rulers were reluctant about this matter from
the very beginning. They defied democracy and continued ruling the country through
autocracy and military rule. They imposed colonial rule on East Pakistan and worked
for the prosperity of West Pakistan by depriving the East in every field of social,
political and economic activities. They created stalemate in the political atmosphere of 80
East Pakistan by oppressing and suppressing the political leaders. They repeatedly sent &

Military Rule and the Movement for Right of Self Determination (1958-1969) 189
the national leaders including Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman to illegitimate
imprisonments. In spite of being majority, Bangalees had a very few representative in
the Cabinet of Pakistan. To create hindrance for the democratic process, Pakistani
tulers showed their disinclination to hold elections for the National and Provincial
Legislative Assemblies. They removed the elected government of Juktafront from the
power unlawfully in 1954. Later they dissolved the East Pakistan cabinets repeatedly
to collapse the governance. Finally, the Government of Pakistan imposed Martial Law
and withheld people's democratic rights.
Administrative Indiscrimination
The officials of the civil service were the key force in the Pakistani administration. In
1962 there were only 119 Bangalees among 954 high ranking officials in the
Ministries. In the central government offices there were 42000 employees, among them
only 2900 were Bangalees. As the capital was set up in Karachi in 1947, the West
Pakistanis got employment in a large scale in all government offices. It may be
mentioned that the West Pakistanis enjoyed the absolute right to hold almost all high
positions in the central government offices. All the head-offices were in West Pakistan.
It was not possible for the Banglaees to go there to compete for a job because of the
geographical distance. As Bangla did not get the status of the state language in Pakistan
till 1956, success in the competitive examinations for government jobs was not easy for
the Bangalee students.
Discrimination in the Army
Disparity of the West Pakistanis over East Pakistan was clearly marked in the military
affairs. Representation of Bangalees in the army was very negligible. From the very
beginning Punjabis had been occupying the top posts of the army. They resorted to the
policy of keeping a distance from the Bangalees. In the recruitment policy of the army
they adopted a quota system allocating 60% Punjabis, 35% Pathans and only 5% from
other parts of the whole Pakistan including East Pakistan. There was a very
negligible increase in the number as a consequence of the pressing demands of the
Bangalee. A census in 1955 revealed that among 2211 army officers Bangalees were
only 82. In 1966 there was only one Bangalee among the 17 top ranking officials.
During Ayub Khan's regime 60% of the total outlay of the government was allocated
for the army. East Pakistan was liable for supplying the major part of the budget, but

o the defense of East Pakistan suffered from negligence.

S

N

190 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Economic Disparity

East Pakistan suffered from the highest disparity caused by West Pakistan in economic
affairs. The degree of exploitation by West Pakistan was terrible. As a result East
Pakistan could never be economically self-sufficient. Provincial government did not
have any authority to exercise in currency management and economic control. Under
the supervision of the central government all types of income of East Pakistan was
drained to West Pakistan. Head-offices of banks, insurance and commercial
organizations including The Central Bank were in West Pakistan. For this money was
laundered to West Pakistan very easily. East Pakistan had to rely on West Pakistan for
the required monetary allocations. The surplus financial savings remained deposited in
West Pakistan. For this East Pakistan never had any growth in the capital formation.
All types of planning were designed and prepared in the Headquarter of the Central
Government in West Pakistan. As there was no representation of the Bangalees, West
Pakistani rulers deprived East Pakistanis of their lawful rights. Since inception, three
five-year plans were adopted in Pakistan. In the first one the government outlay from
budget allocations in East and West Pakistan was 113 crore and 500 crore respectively.
In the second one the budget allocations were 950 crore for East Pakistan and 1350
crore for West Pakistan. In the third five-year plan the budget allotments were 36% and
63% respectively for East and West Pakistan. The maximum portion of the allocated
outlay for the renovation and development of the capital was for West Pakistan. 570
crore taka was spent in 1956 for the development works in Karachi, which was 56.4%
of the total government expenditure. At that time the rate of total government
expenditure in East Pakistan was 5.10%. 300 crore taka was spent for constructing
Islamabad till 1967; whereas, the money spent for Dhaka was 25 crore taka. Though
the low-cost raw materials were available in East Pakistan, most of the mills and
factories were set up in West Pakistan. The few industries grew in East Pakistan were
owned by West Pakistanis. So for industrial matters East Pakistan had to rely on West.
There was no barrier for anyone who went from East Pakistan toWest Pakistan taking
gold and money with him, but there were government restrictions on bringing gold and
money from West Pakistan to East Pakistan.

Disparity in Education

Bangalees experienced discrimination in the field of education too. West Pakistan
wanted at heart the backwardness of this Bengalees in the feild of education, whereas
they chalked out massive plans for the spread of education in West Pakistan. So, they wo
did not undertake any plan for the improvement of education in East Pakistan. s

Military Rule and the Movement for Right of Self Determination (1958-1969) 191
they did not undertake any plan for the improvement of education in East Pakistan.
Besides, they attempted to strike the education system of East Pakistan by replacing
Bangla with Urdu as the medium of education. They also conspired to introduce a
system of writing Bangla in Arabic language. In the matter of allocating budget for
education, extreme disparity was maintained between the two wings of Pakistan. From
the total allocation for education during the period of 1955 to 1967, a sum of 2084
million rupees was allotted for West Pakistan in contrast to 797 million rupees for East
Pakistan. West Pakistan got 30 scholarships out of the total 35 in Pakistan and East
Pakistan received only the remaining 5.
Social Discrimination
West Pakistanis enjoyed more privileges than Bangalees in the field of roads and
highways, school-colleges, courts and offices, hospitals, postal services, telephone,
telegraph, electricity etc. Most of the West Pakistanis got the benefit of social welfare
and service oriented activities. As a result, West Pakistanis enjoyed a better living
standard.
Cultural Disparity
Language, literature and culture of the two wings of Pakistan were quite different. East
Pakistan had 56% of the total population. Moreover, Bengali language and culture had
the heritage of thousands of years. On the other hand, 45% of the total population lived
in West Pakistan, but there existed different languages, nationalities, and cultures. Urdu
speaking people were only 3.27%. Still West Pakistani rulers engaged themselves in
conspiring to wipe out Bangla language which the majority people used to speak as
well as the highly enriched Bengalee culture. At the very beginning, they tried to
eradicate Bangla language and had the attempt to use Arabic alphabets in writing
Bangla. Though Tagore's songs, plays and literatures heightened Bangla culture, they
attempted to forbid them with a view to give a blow to Bengalee culture. They even
tried to create hindrance in the celebration of Pahela Baishakh mentioning that the
festivity had Hindu influence.
(Group work: Graphically show the disparity of the Central Government of Pakista
toward East Pakistan in the field of military, economic and education
Six Points and Bengalee Nationalism
To get rid of the colonial rule and exploitation of the Pakistanis, Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman announced the Six Points program in 1966. The purpose of
Bangabandhu was to free East Pakistan from the discrimination through realising Six
so Points demand. Basically after the end of the war between India and Pakistan,
& Bangabandhu raised voice against the extreme negligence of the West Pakistan

192 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Government to the security of East Pakistan and limitless disparity toward East
Pakistan Opposition leaders convened a conference on 5-6 February in 1966 in Lahore.
Bangabandhu reached Lahore along with the top Awami League leaders. In the
conference Bangabandhu presented the 'Six Points' demand which was rejected by the
leaders in the conference. Bangabandhu walked out of the conference and returned to
Dhaka disclosing Six Points to the press. On 218 February a pamphlet titled ‘Amader
Bachar Dabi: Chhoy Dafa Karmashuchi’ (Our Demands for Survival: Six Points
Programe) was published in the name of Bangabandhu. The Six Points were as
follows:

1. The constitution should provide for a Federation of Pakistan in its true sense
on the basis of the Lahore Resolution and the parliamentary form of
government with supremacy of a Legislature directly elected on the basis of
universal adult franchise.

2. The federal government should deal with only two subjects: Defense and
Foreign Affairs. All other residuary subjects shall be vested inthe federal states.

3. Two separate, but freely convertible currencies for two wings should be
introduced; or if this is not feasible, there should be one currency for the whole
country. But effective constitutional provisions should be introduced to stop the
flight of capital from East to West Pakistan.

. he |
my * fo ow So ee Se) -
F ‘ | . ae oo if ZI ‘ %
: ee ; a i be
cz Sg I! | 3 cS
Demonstration in favour of Six Points in the street of Dhaka. 8

Military Rule and the Movement for Right of Self Determination (1958-1969) 193
Furthermore, a separate banking reserve should be established and separate
fiscal and monetary policy be adopted for East Pakistan.

4. The power of taxation and revenue collection shall be vested in the federating
units. The federation will be entitled to deposit a certain portion in the federal
fund. The federal government shall use this fund to meet its expenditures.

5. The federal units shall have the full authority to regulate foreign exchange
earnings and trade links. The foreign exchange requirements of the federal
government should be met by the two wings equally or in a ratio to be fixed.

6. To safeguard regional solidarity and national security the provinces should
have the authority to form and control their own militia or paramilitary force.

The Six Points of Bangabandhu was accepted in the Working Committee meeting of
the Awami League held on 13 March 1966. Then Bangabandhu campaigned for
creating public opinion in favor of the Six Points. He went to different places and
delivered speech on this. He termed these Six Points as ‘our demand for survival.' As a
result of Bangabandhu's campaign, Six Points gained public support very rapidly.
Being panicked the Government of Ayub Khan started arresting the leaders and
activists of the Awami League. During this time Ayub Khan visited East Pakistan and
delivered speech in various public meetings where he termed Six Points as seditious
and a threat to unity. The Government of Ayub Khan arrested Bangabandhu on 9 May
in 1966 as Six Points gained popularity day by day. On 7 June a general strike was
observed to protest the arrest of Bangabandhu. During hartal a number of individuals
were killed in police firing. In protest of this killing opposition staged walk out from
the Provincial Assembly on 8 June. In 1968 the Government put Bangabandhu on trial
accusing him in the historic Agartala Case. The case led to mass upsurge in 1969 and
the Government was forced to release Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. The key
factor in Awami League's election manifesto in 1970 was this Six Points program. The
Awami League sought public mandate in favor of the Six Points program in the general
elections of 1970. A landslide victory was gained with the absolute mandate from the
people of East Pakistan in favor of Six-Point program. Yet, this Six Points program
could not be implemented. The Six Points program ended with the commencement of
the War of Liberation that followed the genocide caused by the Pakistani occupational
forces. Afterwards Bangladesh gained independence after a nine months Liberation
wat.

Forma- 25, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

194 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Historic Agartala Case (State vs. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and others), 1968
Since emergence, disparity between the two wings of Pakistan was gradually
escalating. Large scale attachment of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman with the
mass people made him a people's leader in East Pakistan. To keep him away from his
political activities, West Pakistani government arrested him and sent behind the bars
frequently. But nothing could stop Bangabandhu from his efforts to free this land. On
various occasions different professionals, especially the young Bangalee members of
the armed forces came in contact with him. At one stage he was attracted to armed
revolution. Lt. Commander Moazzem Hossain along with a group of soldiers of
Pakistan Navy met Bangabandhu. In the meeting they exchanged views on armed
movement. In 1963 Bangabandhu visited Tripura secretly. In Agartala, the capital of
Tripura, he met Sachindralal Singha, the then Congress leader who became the Chief
Minister of Tripura later. In that meeting, Bangabandhu sent a message through
Sachindralal Singha to the Indian Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, seeking his
support for the armed movement. It may be mentioned that the Six Points programe of
Bangabandhu in 1966 gained widespread popularity in East Pakistan. Autonomy of
East Pakistan became the demand of the people. Meanwhile, few Bangalee officers and
soldiers were getting organized for armed revolution to protest the existing disparity in
the army. But, the matter was uncovered by Inter-Services Intelligence of Pakistani
government. 1500 Bengalees were arrested in Pakistan. Bangabandhu was implicated
as the main accused of this conspiracy. Bangabandhu was in jail then. A case was filed
in January 1968. The Government framed the charged saying Bangabandhu led a secret
meeting with the Indian government officials in Agartala. In the meeting a plan was
designed to liberate East Pakistan through armed movement with the assistance from
the Government of India. This is why it became known as ‘Agartala Case’. But
officially the case was termed 'The State vs. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and others'.

On 9 May 1966 Bangabandhu was released from the jail, but he was again arrested
under Martial Law at the jail gate and was taken to Dhaka Cantonment. 35 persons
were accused in this case. Along with Bangabandhu the other 34 accused were Lt.
Commander Moazzem Hossain, Steward Mujibur Rahman, LS Sultanuddin Ahmad,
Nur Mohammad, Ahmed Fazlur Rahman CSP, Flight Sergeant Mahfizullah, A. B. M.
Abdus Samad, Habildar Dalil Uddin Hawlader, Ruhul Quddus CSP, Flight Sergeant
Md. Fazlul Haq, Bhupati Bhushan Chowdhury alias Manik Chowdhury, Bidhan
Krishna Sen, Subedar Abdur Razzaque, Habildar Mujibur Rahman, Flight Sergeant
Md. Abdur Razzaque, Sergeant Zahurul Haq, A.B.M. Khurshid, Khan Mohammad
Shamsur Rahman CSP, AKM Shamsul Haque, Habildar Azizul Haq, Mahfuzul Bari,
Sergeant Shamsul Haq, Risaldar A. K. M. Shamsul Hoque, Habildar Azizul Haque,
Mahfuzul Bari, Sergeant Shamsul Haque, Major Dr. Shamsul Alam, Captain Md. %
Abdul Motaleb, Captain Shawkat Ali, Captain Khondkar Nazmul Huda, Captain A. S. &

Military Rule and the Movement for Right of Self Determination (1958-1969) = 195
M. Nuruzzaman, Flight Sergeant Abdul Jalil, Mahbub Uddin Chowdhury, Lt. M. M. M.
Rahman, Subedar A. K. M. Tajul Islam, Md. Ali Reza, Captain Dr. Khurshid Uddin
Ahmed and Lt. Abdur Rauf.
A special tribunal was formed for the disposal of the Agartala Case. The hearing of the
case started at 11 a.m. on 19 June 1968 in a chamber inside Dhaka Cantonment. There
were 227 witnesses including 11 approvers. A defense team of the lawyers of the
accused persons was formed under the leadership of prominent lawyer Abdus Salam
Khan. On the other hand, Bangalee expatriates in England sent a renowned lawyer Sir
Thomas William MP to defend Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. The
government lawyers leading the case were the former foreign minister Manzur Quader
and Advocate General T.H. Khan The Chairman of the tribunal was Justice S.A
Rahman. The other members were M.R. Khan and Muksumul Hakim. On 29 July 1968
the hearing of the case resumed. Sir Thomas William filed a writ petition in Dhaka
High Court on behalf of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman challenging the
legality of the formation of the tribunal.
Anti-Ayub agitation was getting momentum in both the wings of Pakistan during the
trial. In East Pakistan people's voice became stronger to realize the demand for the
release of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and the withdrawal of the case.
Gradually the mass movement in East Pakistan turned to mass upsurge in 1969. Some
political parties including Awami League, National Awami Party formed a Democratic
Action Committee (DAC). At a point of turmoil, Sergeant Zahurul Haq, one of the vital
accused in the case, was shot to death in Dhaka Cantonment on 15 February 1969. The
news of his death led a furious mob in Dhaka on 16 February 1969. Angry mob paraded
the city streets with the coffin of Sergeant Zahurul Haque. In a bid to tame the situation
Ayub Khan convened a round-table meeting on 19 February 1969 in Rawalpindi.
Maulana Bhashani and Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman were among others
invited to attend the meeting. To pave the way for Bangabandhu to attend the meeting,
the Government proposed to release him on parole. But the people of East Pakistan
including Maulana Bhashani refused the Govt. proposal and demanded withdrawal of
the Agartala Case. At last in the face of the mass movement, the Ayub government was
ultimately compelled to withdraw the Agartala Case. All the accused including
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman were released on 22 February 1969. On the
occasion of the release of Bangabandhu a grand public reception rally was organized at
the Race Course ground on 23 February 1969. In that mammoth rally Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was vested with the appellation of 'Bangabandhu'.
Impact of The Agartala Case
This case played a vital role to ignite nationalist awareness among the Bangalees. The
purpose that inspired Ayub Government to lodge the case did not gain any success;
x rather it acted as a boomerang against Ayub Government. At this stage the leader of the
“oppressed Maulana Bhashani came forward toh the political leadership.

196 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was recognized as the undisputed leader and
forerunner the Bangalees for his role as the spokesman of the interest and autonomy of
the Bengalees.

11 Points Movement

During the period of 1968 to 1969 the anti-Ayub mass movement in East Pakistan
reached its peak. The momentum of the movement was slowed down as the Awami
League leaders got arrested for their roles in the mass movement. In this situation
students took the leadership of the movement. Students’ involvement turned the mass
movement to mass upsurge. At the joint initiative of Chhatra League, Chhatra Union
(Matia and Menon group) and Dhaka University Central Students Union (DUCSU),
student leaders sat together at DUCSU office on 5 January 1969 and formed a united
front known as Sarbadaliya Chhatra Sangram Parishad (All Party Student's Action
Committee) under the leadership of Tofael Ahmed, the then Vice-President of DUCSU
( Dhaka University Central Students Union).

Chhatra Sangram Parishad called for mass upsurge based on their 11 Points demand.
This 11 Points program inspired not only the students but also mass people for the
movement. The 11 Points demand of the students also included the Six Points of
Bangabandhu. Other important demands included the increase of educational facilities
with the withdrawal of notorious Dhaka University Ordinance, freedom of speech,
individual freedom, freedom of the press, nationalization of large industries, fair wage
for labourers, right to form trade union, flood control and proper use of water resources,
withdrawal of acts for promulgation of curfew, emergency and other repressive
measures, unbiased foreign policy, immediate release of leaders and activists.

Mass Upsurge in 1969

The movement that developed centering students' unrest in November 1968 was no
longer confined to students only. It turned into a mass movement with the participation
of workers, peasants and general people. A very strong movement against the autocracy
of Ayub Khan started and the movement soon engulfed the whole of the then East
Pakistan turning it to a mass upsurge. Focusing on the downfall of Ayub Khan, people
of both the wings of Pakistan participated together in anti-Ayub movement for the first
time. These movements were against the racial repressions, deprivation and disparity
done to East Pakistan since the inception of Pakistan. Those factors had their impacts
on the mass upsurge in 1969.

The student agitation turned into a vigorous mass movement under the leadership of
Maulana Bhashani. As a part of joint program, the National Awami Party, East Pakistan
Workers' Federation and East Pakistan Peasants' Association arranged a public meeting
at Paltan Maidan to observe the Repression Resistance Day on 6 December 1968. After
the meeting was over, a huge procession gheraoed the Governor's House. Maulana
Bhashani declared a hartal the next day, following the violent clash between the police x
and the demonstrators. =

Military Rule and the Movement for Right of Self Determination (1958-1969) 197

On the call of the main opposition parties a hartal +

was observed throughout East Pakistan on 8

December. Awami League observed Repression ,

Resistance Day (nirjatan protirodh dibosh) on 10 .

December. A 'gherao' program was staged on 29 \

December. The leaders of Chhatra League,

Chhatra Union (Matia and Menon group) and iS,

Dhaka University Central Students Union x get

(DUCSU) sat together on 4 January 1969 and oe ‘ : )

formed a united front known as Sarbadaliya :

Chhatra Sangram Parishad (All Parties Student { \A4

Resistance Council). Chhatra Sangram Parishad Maceyredanndear leer Asad manera votive fing

presented 11 Points program which was, by and

large, a combination of the six points of Bangabandhu and few other demands. 11

Points got support of the Bangalees from all strata of life very soon. During the time of

turmoil in 1969, students' 11 Points program was a very timely manifestation of the

demands of the opposition parties in East Pakistan. This brought the opposition parties

together to be united quite rapidly. On 8 January eight parties formed an alliance known

as 'Gonotantrik Sangram Parishad' (Democratic Action Committee/DAC) and placed

forward 8 points demand.

Thereafter, at the joint initiative of 'DAC' and Chhatra Sangram Parishad a widespread

mass movement developed. A hartal was observed on 14 January in Pakistan at the call

of DAC. To voice against police repression Chhatra Sangram Parishad observed strike

on 18 January. Police had a widespread clash with the students during the strike. On 20

January students observed hartal in East Pakistan to protest that brutality. During hartal

police fired in front of Dhaka Medical College and a student leader Asaduzzaman was

killed. In protest of killing Asad, students undertook extensive program on 22, 23 and

24 January. During hartal on 24 January a huge number of people from all walks of life

joined the procession. Thus, the movement took the shape of a mass upsurge. Again, a

student of class IX, Matiur, died of police firing and a large number of people received

injuries. Angry mob set fire on the office of Government dailies The Daily Pakistan and

the Morning News. Dhaka went out of control of the Government. Indiscriminate firing

of the army and the police killed a lot of people and injured many others in the

successive movement and hartal after 24 January.

Sergeant Zahurul Haque, an under-trial prisoner in the Agartala Cased was killed

brutally by gun shot in Dhaka Cantonment on 15 February. The movement triggered off

in protest of the killing of Zahurul Haque on 16 February. Mob set fire on the residence

of the Chief Judge of the Agartala Tribunal. In the afternoon Maulana Bhashani
o declared in a public meeting, 'Implement 11 Points in two months and release all
S political detainees. If required, we will bring out Mujib of the jail by demolishing the

198 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
prison like the French Revolution.’ Finding no other alternative, the Government
imposed curfew in Dhaka. On 18 February, the army bayoneted Dr. Mohammad
Shamsuzzoha, the then Proctor of Rajshahi University and killed him.
After 18 February the movement spread like a wild fire and the overall situation of the
country deteriorated. The opposition leaders rejected Ayub Khan's call for a round table
meeting. Ayub Khan could realize that the situation would go beyond control unless the
Agartala Case was withdrawn and the accused people were released. Yielding to the
pressure of mass upsurge, on 215t February Ayub khan declared that he would not be a
candidate in the next presidential election. After Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman was freed from the historic Agartala Case, the mass movement of 1969 took a
new course. Bangabandhu extended support to the 11 Points demand and pledged
emphatically that Six Points and 11 Points would be implemented. He was firm in favor
of Six Points and 11 Points in the round table meeting with Ayub Khan held on 26
February. Meanwhile, anti-Ayub movement spread in West Pakistan too. Round table
meetings failed repeatedly. Law and order situation worsened in the whole country. In
March, 90 people died as the army fired on the demonstratrators. Finally, in a meeting
held on 10 March, Ayub Khan declared that he would introduce Parliamentary Form of
Government and the elections would be held ensuring voting rights of the adults. On 22
March Ayub Khan removed Monaem Khan from the post of Governor of East Pakistan.
Still the mass movement could not be tamed; rather it became irresistible. On 25 March
Ayub Khan handed over power to the Army Chief General Yahiya Khan. Thus
anti-Ayub mass upsurge in East Pakistan gained success. The mass upsurge of 1969
developed a sense of class consciousness among the peasants and workers of the rural
and the urban areas too. Craving for a free sovereign state intensified among the people
of East Pakistan.
Exercise

Multiple choice questions:
1. Who was nominated the first President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan?

a. Muhammad Ali Jinnah b. Iskander Mirza

c. Ayub Khan d. Malik Feroz Khan
2. The principal cause of anti-Ayub student movement is —

i. the arrest of Suhrawardy on sedition charge;

ii. the oppressive act of the police on students;

iii. proclamation of new constitution by Ayub Khan. s°

S
N

Military Rule and the Movement for Right of Self Determination (1958-1969) 199
Which one of the following answer is correct?
ai b. iandii
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
Read the following text and answer the questions no 3 and 4:
The general members of Agrani Club expressed their dissatisfaction at the obstinate
and non-co-operative activities of the President of the club. Under the leadership of Mr.
Maruf Raihan the members submitted a memorandum on their rights and claims to the
club President. But the President and his cohorts turned down the plea considering the
matter illogical. For establishing justice, Mr. Maruf Raihan and his followers voiced
against it.
3. Which historic event has been reflected in the measures taken by Mr. Maruf?
a. Raising of Six-Points demand; b. Formation of National Democratic Front;
c. Movement against Ayub Khan; d. Formation of Democratic Action Committee.
4. In the backdrop of that historic event—
i. Ayub Government got panicked;
ii. Bangabandhu got arrested;
iii. Bangladesh coursed toward the struggle for Independence.
Which one of the following answer is correct?
a. iandii b. ii and iii
c. iand iii d. i, ii and iii
Creative questions
1.
a. Who contested in the Presidential Election on behalf of COP?
b. What was the structure of the Basic Democracy?
99 c. What kind of disparity was done to East Pakistan during Pakistan regime has
ES been presented in the above table? Explain.

200 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
d. Do you think that the disparity mentioned above is the only cause of the
movement for autonomy? Give reasons for your answer.
2. Rafique was watching a movie. The movie portrayed the struggle of a certain
locality. Though the people there had courage, intelligence and wealth, there was
no representation of them in the parliament due to government's one sided policy.
As a result, they were deprived of their rights to job, education and economy. An
uncompromising leader came forward to relive them from such dejections and
repressions. He demanded rights of people of that area so that they themselves can
control the trades and business, banking, defense and relations with other
countries as well as elect members of the central and the provincial parliaments
through direct votes and collect taxes.
a. Who mediated the ceasefire agreement between India and Pakistan at Taskhand?
b. What was the context of the killing of Matiur?
c. What activities of Bangabandhu does the leader of text above reflect? Explain.
d. Do you thimk that the said disparity was the only cause of the
self-determination movement of the Bangladesh? Show reasons in
favour of your answer.
ES
8

Chapter Thirteen
The Election of 1970 and The War of Liberation

The election of 1970 has great significance in the history of the liberation movement of
Bangladesh. When the military rulers of Pakistan enforced oppressive measures on the
leaders of East Pakistan including Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the people
of this country organized movements against them. This was resulted in the mass
uprising of 1969. As Ayub Khan stepped down following this uprising of 25 March, his
successor General Yahiya Khan promised re-establishment of democracy in Pakistan.
He declared that the military government would delegate power to the elected public
representatives. Following this route, a general election was held in 1970. Despite the
triumphant victory of Awami League in that election, the rulers of Pakistan were
reluctant to hand over power to the elected representatives. At one stage, they
fabricated various pretexts to grip the power and at a later stage launched attacks on the
innocent people of this country. At this juncture, the people of East Pakistan, under the
directives of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, vigorously got engaged in the war
of liberation. As a result, Bangladesh was liberated from the aggression of its enemies
on 16 December, 1971.
At the end of this chapter we will be able to -

e analyse the impact of the general election of 1970;

e describe the role of provisional government in leading the liberation war;

e evaluate the contributions of the freedom fighters;

e analyse the topic- Independence and Bangladesh on the world map;

e@ make the national flag and describe the methods of using it;

e narrate the history of the national anthem of Bangladesh;

e explain the significance of various memorials on the liberation war;

© be inspired with patriotism realizing the implication of the liberation war;

© be mindful about upholding the dignity of the national flag;

© be interested in preserving the memorials on the liberation war;

e make posters on the events of emergence of Bangladesh in chronological order;

e draw and display pictures on the Independence Day.
The General Election of 1970 and the Later Events
Comning to power Yahiya khan in a radio address promised to hand over power
through the next election to the elected representatives. As a development, political
Fauna: 36; History of Bangladesh & World Giniilization: Glass 0-19

202 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization

activities were permitted as all sorts of restrictions were lifted from 1 January of 1970.

At the same time polling for election to the National Assembly and the Provincial

Assemblies were declared to be commenced on 5 October and 22 October respectively.

Though the polling dates for the elections were declared, they were rather delayed and

finally held on 7 and 17 December respectively. However, elections in several regions

knocked by the devastating cyclone and tidal bore on 12 November were held on 17

January in 1971.

The Legal Framework Order

Yahiya Khan, in an address to the nation on 28 March, 1970, announced the basic

principles of the Legal Framework Order relating to election. In that address, he

focused on the number of seats to be allocated for the Parliament and Provincial

Legislative Assemblies, the procedures of polling, the time specified for the elected

assembly to frame a constitution and some special measures to bring into line the two

parts of Pakistan. The highlights of his speech were as follows:

1. The one unit scheme in West Pakistan shall be abolished to re-establish the
provinces those existed earlier. These provinces shall come into being on 1 July,
1970.

2. There shall be a National Assembly of Pakistan consisting of 313 members of
whom 13 shall be women and the five Provincial Legislative Assemblies will be
composed of 621 members.

Distribution of seats for the National and the Provincial Assembly
; National Assembly Provincial Assembly
Regions

[BastPakistn ——+(is2_—-[7_——‘|169 [300 [10 ‘| 310 _|

 WestPakisan ——‘[ise[6 [14a [300 [11 [ail

3. The principle of one person one vote was adopted for the election.

4, The economic and legal responsibilities and power of the two parts of Pakistan
shall lie with the elected representatives.

5. The list of voters shall be prepared by June, 1970.

The Election of 1970 and The War of Liberation 203
6. A fixed period of 120 days from the commencement of the first session of the
assembly was specified for framing the constitution. It was mentioned that if the
assembly failed to accomplish the task within that time, it will stand dissolved and
new election schedule will be announced. It was also mentioned that the Martial
Law shall persist until the creation and authentication of the constitution. There
were directives on the election as well as the foundation of the constitution. The
six basic fundamental principles of the constitution were spelt out in article 20 of
the Legislative Framework Order, which were;
a. Pakistan shall be a federal republic;
b. Islamic ideology shall form the base of the state;
c. Legislative members shall be elected through direct elections on the basis
of population and adult franchise;
d. The fundamental rights of the citizens shall be guaranteed;
e. Within a specified period, economic and all other disparities between
different provinces and areas shall be removed;
f. The independence of the judiciary shall be secured.
In the Legislative Framework Order of Yahiya Khan, an outline of a weak parliament
instead of a supreme parliament was recommended. Hence, it had been much criticized
by the political parties of East Pakistan. They demanded abolition of the undemocratic
articles of that order.
Election Management
On 2 July, 1969, as per the announcement of Yahiya Khan, an Election Commission
was formed which was headed by justice Abdus Sattar, a justice of Pakistan Supreme
Court. The initial task of that Election Commission was to prepare a wide-ranging voter
list. Out of the total registered voters in this list, 3,12,14,935 were from East Pakistan
and 2,52,06,263 from West Pakistan. The members of ethnic minority groups were
included in that voter list.
Political Parties taking part in the Election
Though the pro-Awami League parties were interested in forming an alliance with the
Awami League to participate in the election of 1970, the party leader Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman declared to compete in the election independently. As a result,
the political parties nominated their candidates separately for the election of 1970. A
total of 781 candidates filed nomination papers for that election. Awami League had
162 candidates running for the National Assembly with the symbol of a country boat.
Among other parties contesting the election were, All Pakistan Central Jamiatul Ulema

204 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
and Nejame Islam (45), Islamic Democratic Party (5), Jamaat-e-Islami Pakistan (69),
Pakistan Democratic Party (81), Pakistan Muslim League (Convention 93), Pakistan
Muslim League (Council 50), Pakistan Muslim League (Qayyum 65) etc.

Election Results ;
Awami League won 160 out of 162 seats in the A Of : :
National Assembly in the election of 1970. Awami | eo 4
League emerged as the single largest party in the | Lis %) J
National Assembly by winning a majority 167 seats - Ch: ‘ie

that included the reserved seats for women. On the aoa Pg ‘ Rye |
other hand, in East Pakistan Provincial Assembly, @ 9 * 4 ]
Awami League held absolute majority by bagging i : M wag “Fe

298 out of a total of 310 seats. During that time the | |

members of the National Assembly and the members a

of the Provincial Assembly were known as MNA and _Bangabandhu surrounded by his colleagues
MPA respectively. An analysis of the election results alter the Siecessiof HE.70's Election
shows that, in National Assembly, Awami League won 75.10% of the total votes
whereas in Provincial Assembly, they got 70.48% of the total vote. Such an elections
outcome manifested East Pakistan as a unique region and the Banglaees as people with
distinctive features.

Awami League earned the right to initiate the formation of government by dint of its
absolute majority in the National and Provincial Assemblies. But the military ruler of
Pakistan Yahiya Khan started to show his reluctance in handing over the power to
Awami League. He was provoked by Zulfiker Ali Bhutto to declare the meeting of
National Assembly scheduled on 3 March adjourned. As soon as the declaration came,
the common people of East Pakistan including students, workers, government and
non-government officers and employees burst into violent protest. People attacked
Pakistani soldiers at different places. Many people were killed and injured due to the
clashes. On that day the leaders of the Student League formed the 'Swadhin Bangla
Chattro Sangram Parishad’. This organization called for a countrywide general strike
on 2 March. The flag of Bangladesh was hoisted on this very day at a student rally at
Dhaka University. Student League organised a demonstration meeting at Paltan ground
on 3 March. Bangabandhu addressed the gathering as the chief guest. Student League
adopted the five points resolution in that meeting which was marked as the manifesto
of independence. The proclamation of an independent and sovereign Bangladesh was
made in this meeting. Moreover, the meeting called for observing half day hartal on 4
and 6 March.

The workers, officers and employees extended their support to that call of the students
and observed hartal actively. The artists of Dhaka Betar (Radio) and Television stayed

The Election of 1970 and The War of Liberation 205
away from taking part in TV programmes. Students, teachers and lawyers left their
workplaces to show their adherence to the movement. The movement all over the
country including Dhaka got momentum by those three days of hartal. Many people
were gunned down and injured as the police fired at many places during those
public-police clashes. Yahiya khan got frightened at the circumstances and on 6 march
in a betar (Radio) address he was bound to announce the convention of the National
Assembly on 25 March. But his announcement could not reassure the fuming wrath of
the people of East Pakistan. The great leader of Bangladesh, Bangabandhu, could not
put his trust on that declaration too. Consequently, a grand rally was arranged on 7
March at the Racecourse Ground (at present Suhrawardi Uddyan) on behalf of Awami
League to organize stronger movements protesting the military rule.
Significance of the Election
The election of 1970 had enormous significance for the emergence of an independent
and sovereign Bangladesh and Bangalee nationalism. That was the most free and fair
election after the election of 1954. The election of 1970 marked the victory of the
uniqueness that Bangalee as a nation had been voicing since 1947, at different aspects
of life including language, art and culture. Moreover, the autonomy that had been
claimed by the people of the eastern province was declared illegal by the western
government got validity. The demand for the Six Points based on autonomy was proved
valid due to this election result. However, following his announcement, Yahiya Khan
refused to transfer power when the time was due. Instead he directed military attacks
on the innocent Bangalees. That was the beginning of the armed struggle for the
liberation of the people of Bengal, which eventually resulted in the emergence of an
independent state in the world named Bangladesh on 16th December, 1971.

an independent and sovereign Bangladesh.
The Historic Speech of 7 March by Bangabandhu
There was an agitation in the political arena of Pakistan as the military rulers had not
transferred power to the elected representatives of 1970 election. The historic speech of
Bangabandhu came as an obvious guideline for the nation, amid lots of anxieties and
thrills prevailing all over the country. As the meeting was announced earlier, the
Racecourse Maidan (at present, Suhrawardy Uddyan) was overflowed with millions of
people on 7¢4 March, 1971. The speech that Bangabandhu delivered in this gathering is
one of the best in world history. His speech included four key demands:

206 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization

1. lifting of the prevailing martial law;

2. withdrawal of the soldiers to

their barracks. mi : |
3. inquiry of the mass killing; as ah sat = i Peaches Sembee ie
4, transfer of power to the elected <i ae ant ca eae aa,
representatives. cei eo i Sach tee

In addition, several more demands were ee ae tk SW eC Wino ena,
voiced in the speech of Bangabandhu. 1 z Fy a me eles cen a4
He declared the closure of all the courts, | s a \E mI eB
offices and educational institutions for |% ; rg sare re
an indefinite period. The gathering was a* ( r i a x ys} A
strictly monitored by the military [Pyle | | ee
administration. It was assumed that “= 0 \ Pil hy = i
the declaration of independence by — Thehistoric speech of 7 March, 1971 byBangabandhu
Bangabandhu might result in massive destructions. Therefore, a direct declaration of
independence was tacitly left out and it was declared indirectly. In that declaration of
independence Bangabandhu said, "I ask my people to set up struggle committees under
the leadership of Awami League in every village and every ward to carry out our
struggle. You must prepare yourselves with what little you have. Keep in mind, since
we have given blood, we will give more of it, we will free the people of this land,
inshallah. The struggle this time is for our emancipation. The struggle this time is for
our independence." He also gave directives to all to get prepared for the struggle of
independence and urged them to commit the greatest sacrifice to liberate the country
from its enemies. This speech of him was aired from Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra as,
‘Bajrokantho’ (Thunder Voice) which inspired the Bangalees to be engaged in the
struggle for freedom.
In 2017, the UNESCO recognised ‘The Historic March 7, 1971 Speech’ of
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman as a world documentary heritage. The speech
has been included in the Memory of the World International Register, a list of world's
important documentary heritage maintained by the UNESCO. This is for the first time
the UNESCO has recognised any such document as a world heritage which was a
speech without any script and thus unwritten.
Final Stage of the Non-cooperation Movement
Massive movements started countrywide from the next day of the speech of
Bangabandhu on 7 March. The schools and colleges, offices, courts, mills and factories
closed down following his directives. The agitated mass started to resist the members
of Pakistan army in various places. The realization of taxes and excises was brought to
a halt. Under this circumstance, Yahiya Khan appointed Tikka Khan as the Governor of
East Pakistan. The government issued a military order and asked all officers and
employees to join their workplaces. Despite that the people of East Pakistan continued
the non-cooperation movement. The government imposed Martial Law once again on

The Election of 1970 and The War of Liberation 207
March 13. On March 14 Zulfiker Ali Bhutto, a leader of West Pakistan, suggested an
unrealistic formula to hand over power to the majority parties in East and West
Pakistan. However, without paying heed to these, Bangabandhu introduced the 35
points based demand on that very day. That included various directives for the mass
people to continue the movements.

After the release of the decree of Bangabandhu, Awami League took control of every
sector except the army. Comprehending the seriousness of the situation Yahiya Khan
came to visit Dhaka on March 15. There he suggested holding a discussion with
Bangabandhu on the political crisis. Bangabandhu agreed to take part in the discussion
but did not withdraw the non-co-operation movement. The Yahiya-Mujib talk
commenced from March 16. Then Zulfiker Ali Bhutto came to Dhaka abruptly and
joined the discussion. Meanwhile, Pakistani Army fired at some innocent people at
Joydevpur and that incident had its effects on Mujib-Yahiya talks. In fact, the
discussion ended up with no results. On March 23, the Republican Day of Pakistan, the
flag of independent Bangladesh was hoisted in the houses of this country instead of the
flag of Pakistan. On March 24 the leaders of Pakistan tried for the last time to negotiate
the conflict. But Yahiya Khan departed Dhaka on the sly leaving the discussion
unfinished giving directives to the military force to launch attacks on the unarmed
Bangalees.

The Genocide of 25 March

A disgraceful chapter opened up in the history of the Bangalees as well as the world at
the midnight of March 25. At that time, the Pakistan army attacked the unarmed,
innocent, freedom loving, common people of East Pakistan and committed random acts
of assassination. Pakistan named that mission ‘Operation Searchlight’. Though that
operation was launched on March 25, they had planned the attack in the beginning of
March. On 18 March Tikka Khan and Rao a lieiect ae A co 1
Forman Ali designed the blue print of the acy gan wn ga
ruthless killing of the Bangalees known as rg ¢ Sa aS
‘Operation Searchlight.’ The disarmament dea PS e bs 0/7 ie stot ig
of the Bangalee soldiers of East Bengal 9% NEN FT BIR a =
Regiment started from March 19 in East (/} p. a. | ~ i an a
Pakistan. On March 20 the government ie, pita Powe) ws
issued an order to surrender weapons. On | ™ ot oh m_ a ;
that very day, the military preparation in “eet ) es \ ae
Dhaka cantonment was given a complete Fe “ain gh tee F esl
shape by General Yahiya Khan, his military JP.) 2 , Saga (Go ~
advisor Hamid Khan, Tikka Khan, § <9 ees a Gin
General Peerjada, General Omor Faruk and AN Veo a ‘N Wek i
others. During that time 6 to 17 PIA flights a : ae March, 1971

208 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Boeing 707 flew to Dhaka every day carrying soldiers, arms and amunitions; while
ships were anchored Chittagong port loaded with soldiers and weapons. The unloading
of weapons and foodstuff from MV Sowat started on March 24 at Chittagong port.
When all preparations were made, March 25 was chosen for launching the genocide.
Major General Rao Farman Ali was assigned with the main charge of Dhaka city.
Attacks on Dhaka University dormitories started at dead of night. Acts of killing and
brutal assaults continued in Jahurul Hoque Hall, Jagannath Hall and Rokeya Hall. Mass
killing was taking place in the same fashion in old Dhaka, Kachukhet, Tejgaon, Indira
Road, Mirpur, Mohammadpur, inside Dhaka airport, Rayer Bazaar, Ganaktuli,
Dhanmondi, Kalabagan, Kathalbagan and other places. Genocide also started in other
places of the country.
War of Liberation and Declaration of Independence
Following the commencement of genocide in Dhaka, Bangabandhu declared
independence and broadcasted it via wireless. Immediately after hearing the
proclamation announced by Bangabandhu, resistance was posed in different districts of
Bangladesh including Chittagong. That was the beginning of an uneven war between
Pakistani army and Bengalee police, Ansar and common people which is known as the
great War of Independence in history.
The declaration of independence was made in English so that the people across the
world could understand that. The Bengali version of the declaration is given below:
"This may be my last message. From today, Bangladesh is independent.
I call upon the people of Bangladesh wherever you might be and with
whatever you have, to resist the army of occupation to the last. Your
fight must go on until the last soldier of the Pakistan occupation army
is expelled from the soil of Bangladesh and final victory is achieved."
(Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, Ministry of Law, Judiciary
and Parliamentary Affairs, October, 2011, Page- 153)
This declaration of independence was transmitted to everywhere in Bangladesh via the
transmitter of the then EPR, telegram and teleprinter. The declaration of independence
by Bangabandhu was broadcast at the noon of March 26 once from Chittagong Radio
Centre and then again from Kalurghat Radio Centre by M. A. Hannan, a leader of
Awami League in Chittagong. The freedom loving people of Bangladesh got motivated
by the news of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman's declaration of independence
and it earned immediate support and participation from the Bangalee military,
para-military and civil forces. On 27th March Major Ziaur Rahman read out the
declaration of independance on behalf of Bangabandhu from the same radio centre.

The Election of 1970 and The War of Liberation 209
Group work: 1. Write down the summary of the declaration of Independence,
2. Specify why did the Bangalees start Independence War?
Formation of the Bangladesh Government (Mujibnagar Government)
As the Pakistan military force started genocide on TEER DT
March 25, 1971, the people of East Pakistan posed Sa yO gee ts nee
resistance against them initially without any #eimauees : as Ze
preparation and organizational movement. In order jf a5 ‘ae | eee 4
to administer the liberation war efficiently the first BRgpaaw) < \ Care aBe
provisional government of Bangladesh was formed '###%¥ oe oe , ‘i
on April 10. The formal swearing in ceremony was a | | 4 .
held on April 17 at Vaidynathtala in Meherpur gage) - fe , alii,
district. A large number of local and foreign beh be A :
journalists and other dignitaries attended this The oat of Bangladesh Goverment (Mojinagar
ceremony. This government was headed by Government)
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. The village Vaidynathtala was named
Mujibnagar after his name and the provisional government also came to be popularly
termed as Mujibnagar Government. However, the aircraft of Pakistan Air Force
bombed Mujibnagar and took control of Meherpur just after two hours of formation of
this government. Hence, the headquarters of Mujibnagar government was shifted to 8
Theatre Road in Kolkata.
Government of Bangladesh (The Mujibnagar Government)
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
Vice President Syed Nazrul Islam (the Acting President,
in absence of Bangabandhu, who was in
charge of the Commander- in-Chief of
the Armed Forces and Muktibahini)
Home, Agriculture, Relief and Rehabilitation Minister] A. H. M. Kamaruzzaman
Foreign, Law and Parliamentary Affairs Minister | Khondokar Moshtaq Ahmed
Commander-in-Chief Colonel (Rtd.) M. A. G. Osmani
Chief of Staff Lt. Colonel (Rtd.) Abdur Rob
Deputy Chief of Staff a Group Captain A. K. Khondokar
Forma- 27, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

210 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Administration under the Mujibnagar Government and the War
The Mujibnagar Government included the winners of the 1970-71 elections to the
National Assembly and the Provincial Assembly. The main objectives of that
government was to lead the war of liberation and earn worldwide support in favour of
Bangladesh.
The government ran its administration by the Bangalee officers. It had 12 ministries or
divisions. These were Ministry of Defense, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of
Finance-Industry and Commerce, Cabinet Secretariat, General Administration, Health
and Welfare Division, Relief and Rehabilitation Division, Engineering Division,
Planning Commission, Control Board for the Youth and Reception camp etc.
Mujibnagar Government established missions of Bangladesh government in the
important cities (Kolkata, Delhi, London, Washington, New York, Stockholm) of
different countries of the world. These missions tried to run campaigns in favour of
Bangladesh and earn support for the government of Bangladesh. The government
appointed Justice Abu Sayeed Chowdhury the special envoy. He devoted his service to
mobilise public opinion as well as world support in favour of the liberation war. After
founding of the Mujibnagar government on 10 April, initiative was taken to form a
freedom fighter force including military, civil and mass people to carry out the struggle
for independence. On 10 April, the government divided Bangladesh into four military
zones and appointed four Sector-Commanders.
This was restructured on April 11 by creating 11 Sectors. Moreover, a number of
Sub-Sectors and three Brigade Forces were set up. The Bangalee military officers and
soldiers working in Pakistan Army, police, EPR, members of Navy and Air Force
joined these forces. Every force consisted of military, guerrilla and ordinary fighters.
They were known as Freedom fighters or Muktifouz. People from various professions
including students, youths, women, farmers, activists and supporters of political
parties, workers joined these forces.
Those fighters, after having training in different training camps, entered the country
and attacked various military camps or shelters. Besides, the various forces under the
government, a number of forces emerged spontaneously within the country. Those
forces had valuable contributions in the war against the Pakistani and Razakar forces.
The Kaderia Bahini of Tangail is one of the such forces that had significant
contributions. The freedom fighters, under the leadership of Mujibnagar government,
fought battles in order to free the country from the grasp of the Pakistanis. Many of
them were injured and many others laid down their lives.
S
8

The Election of 1970 and The War of Liberation 211
Besieged Bangladesh
The Pakistan military force engaged in a fiesta of assault, murder and destructions all
over Bangladesh from March 26 to December 16. The main target of the mass killing
venture that started in Dhaka with the code name, ‘Operation Searchlight’ was the
students of this country including the students of Dhaka University. The educated
middle class, who used to believe in secular politics and the minority Hindus were also
the targets. The Pakistani rulers would believe that the Hindus had certain roles in
instigating movements and struggle in East Pakistan and these had all been patronized
by India. Hence they targeted them.
Though Pakistan army was scheduled to start their operation at the 'zero hour' of March
25, the army left cantonment at about half past eleven at night for pre-determined
destinations. The Pakistani force started widespread operation all over the country
including Dhaka. They targeted their attacks in the Jahurul Hoque Hall, Salimullah
Muslim Hall, Jagannath Hall, Rokeya Hall and in the residential buildings of many
teachers and killed many of them. They attacked with tanks, cannons and machineguns
in different areas of Dhaka including Rajarbag Police Line and the EPR (East Pakistan
Rifles), at present BGB (Border Guard of Bangladesh) headquarters at Pilkhana. Thus,
the most atrocious genocide in the history began. Being inspired by the March 7 speech
of Bangabandhu, people made attempts to put barricades on the streets of Dhaka. The
EPR and Police forces showed resistance with boundless bravery. But the Pakistani
army equipped with modem weapons made their way into that resistance with ease.
It can be assumed from the malicious mass killing, assaults and the demolition inflicted
on the Hindu community living at Nawabpur, Tatibazar and Sakharibazar areas in Old
Dhaka that Pakistani rulers had a more hostile attitude towards them. In the eye of West
Pakistani rulers, Hindus were synonymous to Awami League supporters and they were
considered as threats to the unity of the 'divine' Pakistan. It was also thought that they
were backed and patronized by India. The acts of mass destruction and violence
towards women out of such blind convictions revealed the extreme anti-Hindu feelings,
animosity and dreadful detestation of the Pakistan army. Due to the abrupt nature of the
attack, the innocent and helpless city dwellers had no measures to defend themselves.
Dhaka University became the target of the wrath of the Pakistan Army due to its
anti-govememnt movements. Hundreds of students were slaughtered along with
professor Gobinda Chandra Dev, Dr. Muniruzzaman. Dr. Jyotirmoy Guha Thakurta
suffered bullet injury and died after two days in Dhaka Medical College. The situation
in old Dhaka, especially, in Hindu dwelling areas of Sakharibazar, Tatibazar was
disastrous. The residents of Dhaka could not think, even in their dreams, of the
barbarous, brutal and mischievous bluster that was awaiting them. The city of Dhaka
5S turned into a dome of the dead. One could hear only the lament and cry of the distressed
SN human race.

212 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Pakistan army did not confine themselves within Dhaka city, but spread out to the far
off villages. The intrusive Pakistan force and their collaborators killed 30 lakh
Bangalees and more than two and half lakh of mothers and sisters fell to their cruel lust.
In order to make this country intellectually barren the Pak army cruelly annihilated the
eminent writers, artists, poets, journalists, physicians and engineers in a planned way.
The Rajakars, Al-Badr, Al-Shams and Peace Committee lent their hands to Pakistan
army in their act of molestation, execution, setting fire, looting, etc. Those people of
this land who used to work as the collaborators of the Pakistani military regime are
known as anti-liberation force. Mainly the supporters of Jamaet-i-Islami, Muslim
League, Nezam-e- Islami, East Pakistan Council Muslim League, etc. were active
against the war of liberation. These parties also took part and assisted in anti-human
crimes.

The Evil Activities of the Anti-War Forces

The Rajakar (Rejakar) was the voluntary force organised by the Pakistani government.
In June, 1971 Lieutenant General Tikka Khan promulgated the 'East Pakistan Rajakar
Ordinance’. At the beginning this force was composed of the Ansars and the Mujahids.
Later many pro-Pakistani people joined that force. General Neazi played important role
in establishing this force. The Rajakars were trained for one week. They were trained
by Pakistan army. They fought against the freedom fighters as the associates of
Pakistani force. Besides Rajakar force, there was another ferocious force called
Al-Badr. The Al-Badr force was composed of the members of Islami Chatro Sangho,
the students wing of Jamaet-e-Islami. The Al-Shams force was formed with the leaders
and activists of other pro-Islamic students’ organizations. The Al-Badr force was
assigned with the main task of executing the Bangalee intelligensia. Therefore, this
force was very fearful and atrocious in nature. The former Amir of Jamat-e-Islami,
Motiur Rahman Nizami (convicted as commiting crime against humanity during
liberation) was the chief of Al-Badr force. Another organization that came into being
with a view to counter the liberation war was the 'Peace Committee’. Peace Committee
was formed all over the country including Dhaka, the capital city. Having the Governor
General of Pakistan Tikka Khan as its patron, the peace committee got expanded with
the support and participation of different parties such as Jamat-e-Islami,Council
Muslim League, Jamat-i- Olama-Islam, Muslim League etc. This organization acted as
the most loyal subordinate for the tortures, atrocities, and genocides committed by the
occupant force. The "Dhaka Nagarik Peace Committee’ was formed with Khaza
Khoeruddin, the President of Council Muslim League as the Convener. Leaders of
Jamat-e-Islami Golam Azam, Moulavi Farid Ahammad, A.S.M. Solaiman and so on
were in this Committee.

The Pakistan army wanted to destroy all the resources and institutions of Bangladesh ©
as per the, 'scorched earth policy’. For this reason educational institutes, shops and 8

The Election of 1970 and The War of Liberation 213

stores, houses and buildings, hospitals, mosques, temples nothing was let off their

attack. Their goal was to take control of this land by murdering the people of this

territory. Some local collaborators assisted the Pakistanis to carry on such anti-human

offenses.

Individual Work: Who were the collaborators of the Pakistani force? What role
did they play in the genocide and torture in association with the Pakistani force?

Liberation War and Different Organizations

The great war of liberation is the outcome of long political movements and struggles.

It is likely that difference of opinions among the political parties regarding the

liberation war is evident. Though the majority of the leftist political parties were in

favour of the liberation war, a certain faction was against it. On the other hand, the

Islamic political parties having faiths in Pakistani ideology not only opposed the war of

liberation but also helped the Pakistani forces in violence, torture and genocide and

directly participated in such acts. Awami League is the party that led the war of

liberation. The first Bangladesh government that was formed with Bangabandhu as the

P ” o > os ee
Sm ee. gee ee
Meeting of the Advisory Committee of Bangladesh Government at Mujibnagar
during Liberation War

President and Tajuddin Ahmed as the Prime Minister led the war of liberation with

much efficiency, skill and foresightedness. In the first week of September, 1971,

Awami League formed an advisory council with the like-minded leftist parties.

Members included in that committee were: Maulana Abdul Hamid Khan Bhasani

(NAP-Bhasani), Moni Singh (Bangladesh Communist Party), Monoronjon Dhor

(Bangladesh National Congress), Professor Muzaffar Anmed (NAP-Muzaffar) and

from Awamil League Tajuddin Ahmed, the Prime Minister, and Khondokar Moshtaq

Ahmed, the Foreign Minister. However, Purba Pakistan Communist Party under the
e leadership of Mohammad Toaha known as a pro-Pieking politician and the Purba
S Baglar Communist Party (Motin-Alauddin) were against the liberation war.

214 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
The torture, aggression and massacre done by the Pakistan army and their local
collaborators made the people of this country more united. People from every section
of the society such as students, farmers, workers, women, teachers, poets, journalists,
physicians and artists joined the struggle for freedom.
Students
Among the freedom fighters, students were highest in [a= . 2a
number. The students were the forerunners in aes dh Pasa
demonstrating initial resistance against the Pakistani (@ li ae al i.
force at different areas of the country. Even the school | \ a a
going adolescents took part in the war of liberation a. Sy ali doe y
along with the college and university students. They pe ¥ 4
crossed the border to get war training. Government of 2 PRG =
Bangladesh which was in charge of leading the war of | 4 j? ow jt ee 4
liberation provided with the arms and training for the . ited wel api
students and youths. In most cases, equipped with only | iP ag
three weeks of training and light weapons, the freedom gy dents in Liberation Movement
fighters chased the enemies stirred by unlimited
courage, motivation and patriotic zeals.
Farmers
The farmers had glorious contributions to the war of liberation. They were ready to
make any sacrifice in order to achieve freedom. They acted as dedicated individuals in
each attack towards the enemies. They were not concerned with personal gain or loss.
They had just one goal; that was to achieve freedom at any cost.
Women
The women played a glorious role in the liberation war. Women, especially the female
students participated spontaneously in the Sangram Parishad that was formed in the
very beginning of March, 1971 in each region. Women had valuable contributions
beside the males in liberating the country. During the nine months of war thousands of

“y. 1 ea’

Women in Liberation Movement NS

The Election of 1970 and The War of Liberation 215
mothers and sisters fell victim to the torture of Pakistan army. Bangabandhu, with the
affection of a father, addressed them as 'Birangana’. In addition to that a huge number
of women helped the freedom fighters in many ways by providing shelter, food,
nursing and hiding weapons even at the risks of their own lives. Even the instances of
women taking part in direct battles are not less in number. As a result, two women have
been awarded the title 'Bir Protik' in recognition of their gallantry in the liberation war.
One of them is Taramon Bibi and the other one is Dr. Sitara Begum. Many more
women freedom fighters faced the Pakistani forces in the battle fields all over the
country.
Mass Media
The role of mass media in the liberation war of Bangladesh is boundless. Newspapers
and Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendro played the leading role in this respect. The artists
and cultural activists of Chittagong Betar introduced the Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendro
on 26 March. Later it was run under the supervision of Mujibnagar Government.
Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendro inspired common people to take part in the war by
broadcasting news bulletins, patriotic songs, heroic tales of the freedom fighters,
various incidents of battlefield etc. Thus, it paved the way of victory by encouraging
the freedom fighters. Besides, the newspaper published under the supervision of the
transmission cell of the Mujibnagar government played a special role in this respect.
Expatriate Bangalees
The expatriate Bangalees extended their helping hands to the liberation war in various
ways. In different countries they collected funds for the liberation war. They rushed to
the members of parliaments to earn support for Bangladesh, sent delegates to various
international organizations, appealed to the government not to supply Pakistan with
arms and ammunition. In these respect, the role of the expatriate Bangalees in Britain
deserves special mentioning. They worked in order to create public opinion in favour
of the liberation war.
Artists-Writers-Intellectuals
The main driving force behind the liberation war was the mass people. However, the
contributions of artists, writers, intellectuals and different cultural activists in
motivating people during war were much commendable. They helped the freedom
fighters in various ways even at the risks of their own lives. Writing in newspapers,
the news bulletins of Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendro, patriotic songs, liberation war
based songs, recitation of poems, plays and talks on the theme of liberation war, the
very popular 'Charampatra' programme of M. R. Akter Mukul and 'Jallader Darbar' etc.
co helped the liberation war much to go ahead. These helped the freedom fighters
§ sustain emotional and moral strengths in the battlefields, provided courage and ignited

216 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
indomitable spirits among people against their rivals. The Pakistani force exterminated
countless gifted personalities including composer Altaf Mahmood, Journalists
Sirajuddin Hossain, Selina Parvin, Physician Dr. Fazle Rabbi, teacher of Dhaka
University Ghiyasuddin Ahmed and so on. This country became free from the enemies
paying the price of these lives.

Mass People

It was possible to achieve independence by the Bangalees in just nine months due to the
help and co-operation of the common people and their sincere craving for
independence. Everyone, except some few collaborators of Pakistani invading force
took part in the liberation war in some way or other. The common people gave the
freedom fighters shelters, helped them with information on the positions and
movements of their opponents, supplied food and medicine, did nursing and gave
information. People from small tribal groups also took part in the liberation war of
Bangladesh alongside common people. Many of them became martyr in the liberation
war. The number of common people dominates among the thirty lakh martyrs of our
liberation war. Our independent map, the red and green flag have been achieved in
exchange of their blood.

Contributions of Political Figures in Achieving Independence

The contribution of the political figures in achieving the independence of Bangladesh
is never-ending. The political leaders of different parties sacrificed a lot for
accomplishing of the independence of Bangladesh. They put up with much humiliation
and torture. The politicians continued their political movements from the beginning of
the struggle for independence with their life at risk.

Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman

Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was the . he

main leader of the struggle for independence of -%: .

Bangladesh. Throughout his life, his activities, % Z

movements and struggles were all deliberated to the ( <

cause of the freedom of the Bangalees. In 1948 \ =

Students League in 1948 and East Pakistan Awami , >
Muslim League was founded on 23 June, 1949 in a 7 a j
conference at Rose Garden, Dhaka. Maulana

Abdul Hamid Khan Bhasani became the party Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
President, Shamsul Haque from Tangail became the Secretary General and
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and Khondaker Mostaq Ahmad became the
Joint Secretary In 1955 keeping secularism as the prime ideal, The name of the party
was modified as East Pakistan Awami Leaque. Later this political party became
the major political party of the Bangalee under the Leadership of Bangabandhu. S

The Election of 1970 and The War of Liberation 217
He played a crucial role in the language movementsof '48 and '52 . He was
among the first group of people who were imprisoned following the Language
Movement. His voice was always loud, be it in the parliament or in the streets The
Father of the Nation Bangabandhu played invincible role in the election of the United
Front in 1954, the recognition of Bangla as the state language by the constitution
in 1956, the movement against the military rules of Ayub Khan in 1958, placing of the
‘Six Points demands for our sustenance’, the Six Points movement in 1966, the mass
uprising of 1969, the unprecedented win of Awami League in the General Election of
1970 and the proclamation of independence from the non-co-operation movement and
the achievement of independence in 1971.
He spent 12 years in prison out of the 24 years of the Pakistan regime. When, on March
25 the Pakistani occupying force launched crackdown on the innocent Bengalees, he
proclaimed independence candidly on the early hour of March 26 (after 12 a.m. of 25
March). Following the course of struggle, he called for the liberation war in his
momentous speech on March 7. It was in his name that our war of liberation was
carried out. He was the Commander-in-Chief of the war of liberation and the President
of the Mujibnagar Government. We have got our independence owing to his sturdy and
uncompromising leadership. Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman is the great leader
of our freedom and the architect of independent Bangladesh.
Tajuddin Ahmad ———
Tajuddin Ahmad was the General Secretary of Awami League a '
during the war of liberation. He was a loyal and close companion | AL
of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. This great leader i\ z. 9
shouldered the responsibility of Prime Minister of the Mujibnagar \=
Government (April 10, 1971) which was formed to lead the Bias.
liberation war. He announced the formation of Mujibnagar PP OS
Government through a radio speech on April 11, 1971. In absence
of Bangabandhu, he led the liberation war successfully. He was the  Tajuddin Ahmad
Convenor of the Committee formed to carry out the liberation war. His name is closely
related with the history of the liberation war in Bangladesh.
Sayed Nazrul Islam
Syed Nazrul Islam was one of the prime leaders of Awami League. He ;
was the Vice-President of the Mujibnagar Government during the \
liberation war. Syed Nazrul Islam took on the charge of Acting eae
President in absence of Bangabandhu. In 1971, he urged all concerned
to make the liberation war vigorous and successful. Syed Nazrul Islam
was one of the organizers and directors of liberation war.

Syed Nazrul Islam
Forma- 28, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

218 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Captain M. Mansur Ali a
Captain M. Mansur Ali was a prime leader of Awami League and a , ee nit
close aide of Bangabandhu. He was the Finance Minister of the [> )]
Mujibnagar Government during liberation war. He was in charge of i. /
ensuring funds needed for food, clothes, arms and training during Nee
liberation war. He carried out that responsibility successfully. é

A. H. M. Kamaruzzaman Copii M Mannie
A. H. M.Kamaruzzaman is another top ranked leader of Awami

League. He was the Minister for Home, Relief and Rehabilitation of

the government during the liberation war. At that time he carried out ae
important tasks of collecting reliefs for thousands of people taking —
refugee in India, distribution of reliefs in relief camps and later

onarranging rehabilitation for the refugees. He had endless
contributions to the liberation war and achievement of the ‘V |
independence of Bangladesh. AHLM. Kamaruzzaman
Other Leaders

Among other leaders the role of Maulana Abdul Hamid Khan

Bhasani in achieving the independence is worth mentioning. He

played significant role in the movement demanding for acquittal of 4
Bangabandhu of the historic Agartola Case (1968-69) and in the | | hen ,

mass uprising of 1969. Staying in India during the liberation war, he | |" Ry
urged different nations to extend their support for and stand beside j has ay 1
Bangladesh. Besides him, Professor Mozaffar Ahmed meay
(NAP-Mozaffar) and Comrade Moni Singh of Communist Party ne (
played important roles in the liberation war. These three leaders ygautana Abdul
were members of the committee that was formed to lead the war of Hamid Khan Bhasani
liberation efficiently.

The Role of World Opinion and of Different Countries in the Liberation War
The heinous horror caused by the occupying Pakistani armed forces in 1971 stirred the
world conscience. The world mandate came around to protest the acts of ransacking,
burning, rapes and extermination committed by the Pakistan forces and their
anti-liberation native collaborators. Different countries condemned and protested and
conveyed supports to the liberation war. The world voice became louder to protest the
acts of the dark night of March 25 and the brutal atrocities afterwards. People from all
over the world conferred their support to the liberation war of Bangladesh. Ss

The Election of 1970 and The War of Liberation 219
Role of India
India, the closest neighboring country, gave support to the liberation war of Bangladesh
directly. India effectively exposed to the people around the world the brutal massacre
on the dark night of March 25, 1971 and the heinous genocide, ransacking and
destructions committed by the Pakistani occupying forces throughout the next nine
months. The name of the then Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi is closely
associated with the history of the independence of Bangladesh. Through her enduring
efforts and initiatives, she was the first to draw the attention of the international
community to the liberation war of Bangladesh.
The people and government of India helped nearly one crore of refugees by providing
them with shelter, food, clothes and medical treatments as well as giving arms and
training to the freedom fighters. Towards the end of the liberation war of Bangladesh,
on December 3, 1971, Pakistan launched air attacks on India. In the backdrop of
Pakistan's attack, the governments of Bangladesh and India formed the Joint Command
consisting of Mukti Bahini and Indian Army. Bhutan and India gave at first recognition
to Bangladesh as an Independent state on December 6, 1971. Many Indian soldiers laid
down their lives during the liberation war of Bangladesh.
Role of the Soviet Union and the Communist States: After India, the highest
contributions to the liberation war of Bangladesh was made by the then Soviet Union
(Now, Russia). The Soviet Head of the Sate, Nikita Khrushchev urged the Pakistan
President Yahiya Khan to put an end to the genocide, blazing of public property and
atrocities towards women in Bangladesh by Pakistan forces. He also asked Yahiya
Khan to transfer power to the elected representatives of Bangladesh. The Soviet
newspapers and media helped create the global mandate by publishing stories on the
barbarousness of Pakistan forces in Bangladesh and the advancements of the liberation
war. Soviet Union exercised 'veto' to discard the proposal of putting an end to the war
which was put forwarded by the United States in favour of Pakistan. The socialist
countries of that time such as, Cuba, Yugoslavia, Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria,
Czechoslovakia, East Germany etc. also supported the liberation war of Bangladesh.
Role of Great Britain Western World And Other Countries : Starting from the
post-election period of 1970 to the days of liberation war in 1971, the media of Britain,
especially, BBC and the newspapers published from London made the people of the
world aware of the brutality of Pakistani occupying force, the resistance and struggles
of the Bangalees, the miserable conditions of the refugees sheltered in India, the
genocide of Pakistani forces and the developments of liberation war. The British
Government was also very compassionate towards our liberation war. It may be
mentioned that London was the main centre abroad for the campaigning in favour of
% liberation war. West Germany, France, Italy, Japan and Canada helped formation of
& world mandate against the Pakistani forces. Iraq supported the cause of the liberation

220 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
war of Bangladesh. The people of the United States, media and many Congressmen
were loud in favour of the liberation war of this country. However, the US goverment,
China,Iran,Saudi Arabia and other muslim countries in the middle East were against
the liberation war of Bangladesh. However, the London-born noted singer George
Harrison performed songs on the acts against humanity during the liberation war of
Bangladesh in front of a crowd of 40,000 in New York in the United States to create
awareness in favour of the liberation war.

Role of the United Nations: The main aim and objective of the United Nations is to
protect world peace and security. When Yahiya Khan was busy annihilating the
Banglaees instead of handing over power to the elected public representatives, the
United Nations played the role of almost a silent observer. The United Nations could
not take any step against the heinous atrocities and violation of fundamental human
rights.

The Emergence of Independent Bangladesh ON: ry Le
The liberation war of Bangladesh is a very significant oD e Ms
chapter in world history. Bangladesh was the first country ) » 4 Lead

in the third world which achieved independence through My \ 4r¥

an armed struggle. aN AS )

India contributed and helped us a lot from the beginning WY. te fF
of the liberation war. Particularly on November 21, 1971, 9) JA. rh ND»

the formation of the 'Allied Forces' combining the Mukti — Surrender of the Pakistan Army
Bahini and the Indian Forces was a very significant event. The war intensified after
Pakistan attacked India on December 03. Indian Army, Air Force and navy also
participated in the war along with the liberation force of Bangladesh from December
6 to 16.

As a result of a strong planned attack the occupying Pakistani force was defeated
morally before the formal surrender. At last the commander of the Eastern Command
of Pakistani Army Lieutenant General Ameer Abdullah Khan Niazi surrendered along
with 93 thousand Pakistani soldiers to Lieutenant General Jagjit Singh Arora, the
Commander of the Eastern Command of the Indian Army at twenty one minutes past
four in the afternoon of December 16, 1971. Group Captain A. K. Khondakar
represented the Bangladesh Government. The achievement of this momentous
independence came as a result of three million martyrs, limitless sufferings of lakhs of
women, torture and sacrifice of the Bengalees. Thus independent, sovereign eo
State—People's Republic of Bangladesh appears proudly in the world map. $

The Election of 1970 and The War of Liberation 221
The History of the Name of Bangladesh
We know that the name of our country is Bangladesh. However, the
constitutional name of Bangladesh is People's Republic of Bangladesh. There is
a history behind this name that we need to know.In fact, the land boundary of a
nation is closely related to the naming of any country. The land boundary of
Bangladesh changed time to time.
It has been discussed in the previous chapters how Bangladesh was divided in
various localities in the ancient and middle ages. Mahabharata and in the
writings of historian Ptolemy refer to the name of Bengal. Much later in 1342
Shamsuddin Illiyas Shah established independent Bengal for the first time
uniting three centers of Bengal like Lakhnauti or Laxmanaboti (Gour), Satgaon
(Rarh) and Sonargaon (Bengal). This independence existed for 200 years. The
titles of Illiyas Shah were ‘Shah-E Bangla’, 'Shah-E Bangalian', and
‘Sultan-E- Bangala'. From that time the whole Bengal region came to be known
as "Bangala’. Its capital was Sonargaon. Bengal got the identity of 'Subah Bangla’
during the era of the Mughal Empire when Akbar was the Emperor. But the
Europeans, particularly the Portoguese named this region 'Bangala'. But the
English called it 'Bengal’.
During the rule of the East India company a separate province was made with the
name Bengal. Bihar, Odisha, and Choto Nagpur were the parts of Bengal. Later
in 1905 another new province was formed with the name 'East Bengal and
Assam' with East Bengal and Assam of India. In the context of movements the
proposal for the partition of Bengal was nullified by the English government
after six years. After the end of the British rule in 1947 West Bengal was
included in India and East Bengal in Pakistan. Even in the Pakistan days today's
Bangladesh was known as East Bengal When the Pakistani government
renamed East Bengal to East Pakistan, Bangabandhu protested it. Bangabandhu
said, "The name Bengal has a long history and tradition. So, the attitude of the
people of this region should be taken by a referendum before changing its
name". Bangladesh found its position in the world map after a sanguinary great

gS liberation war in 1971.

N

222 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization

History Of the National Flag

The national flag of Bangladesh is the symbol of our pride

and dignity. The people of this country achieved this

red-green flag through an ocean of blood and a lot of

sacrifice. The green rectangle is the symbol of the green

nature of Bangladesh and red circle stands for the blood The National Flag

sacrificed by the martyrs in the liberation war. The flag that

was used during the Liberation War in 1971 had a map of

Bangladesh on its red circle. With this map in the flag,

the emergance of a new country named Bangladesh was

made clear to the whole world. The flag with a map

of Bangladesh made us organized, focused and united. The present national flag
of Bangladesh

The design of the national flag was made under the direction of Chatra League Leader

Serajul Alam. Other responsible persons for making the flag were A.S.M. Abdur Rab,

Shajahan Siraj, Kaji Aref Ahamd, Monirul Islam, Hasanul Haque Inu, Shiva Narayan

Das and kamrul Alam khan khasru. The flag was made very confidentially in room

number 118 of Jahurul Haque Hall in Dhaka University in the midnight of June 06,

1970. The National flag was sewed at Pak Fashion Tailors situated at Balaka Building.

When the whole country was turbulent in the burning March 2 in 1971, students leader

A.S.M. Abdur Rab hoisted the flag of Bangladesh for the first time at the west gate of

Arts Building of Dhaka University. It was like refusing Pakistan state before the formal

declaration of independence of Bangladesh. In the meantime, non-cooperation

movement had already started at the call of Bangabandhu . An unpredictable thing

happened on March 23 which was also the Republican day of Pakistan.

National flag of Pakistan was burned in different towns including Dhaka. Bangladeshi

national flag was hoisted on many buildings. The refused flag of Pakistan could return

no more. Three million martyrs sacrificed their lives to save the dignity of the national

flag. After the independence Bangabandhu gave artist Kamrul Hasan to finalise the

design of the national flag. Our national flag got the present design in the hands of

artist Kamrul Hasan.

National flag is the symbol of a nation’s hopes and desires. The dignity and honour of

the country is integrated with the dignity and honour of its national flag. It is our sacred co

duty to defend the dignity of this flag as the citizen of Bangladesh. S

The Election of 1970 and The War of Liberation 223
Individual Work: Mark the reasons behind the comment— ' National flag is the
History Of the National Anthem LS
Amar shonar Bangla / Ami tomae bhalobashi (My Bengal <a )\
of Gold / I love you.) is our national anthem. In 1905 the %, i
British government tried to divide Bengal for creating a v , oe)
new province 'The East Bengal and Assam’. In its v |
consequence Rabindranath Tagore composed this song in B -
1906. In the first two decades of the twentieth century this al 4
song was very much popular during the timeof Swadeshi w
movement. The song was sung in a public meeting in |
Dhaka on January 3, 1971 and again in another public
meeting organized by Chatra League and Sramik League on :
March 3, 1971. The song was sung in the Race Course Rabindranath Tagore
Ground (presently Suhrawardi Uddan) before the historical March 7 speech made by
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. Exiled Mujibnagar Government recognized
the song as the national anthem and it was regularly broadcasted from Swadhin Bangla
Betar Kendra. After the liberation the song 'Amar Sonar Bangla’ was declared as
national anthem of the People's Republic of Bangladesh by the constitution (article
4,1). It was suggested that the first ten lines of the song should be sung vocally and the
first four lines should be played on instruments.
The National Anthem of Bangladesh
Bangla Lyrics English Translation
Amar shonar Bangla, My Bengal of Gold,
Ami tomae bhalobashi. T love you.
_— Forever your skies,
lomeaend batash Your air ae my heart in tune
As if it were a flute.
In spring, O mother mine,
O ma, Phagune tor amer bone The fragrance from your mango groves
Ghrane pagol kare, Makes me wild with joy,
3 Mori hae, hae re— Ah, what a thrill!

224 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
O ma,Oghrane tor bhéra khete In autumn, O mother mine,
Ami ki dekhechhi modhur hashi. In the full blossomed paddy fields
I have seen spread all over sweet smiles.
Ki shobha, ki chhaea go, Ah, what a beauty, what shades,
Ki sneho, ki maya go_ What an affection, and what a tenderness!
Ki achol bichhaeechho What a quilt have you spread
Boter mule, At the feet of banyan trees
Nodir kule kule! And along the banks of rivers!
Ma, tor mukher bani O mother mine, words from your lips
Amar kane lage, Are like nectar to my ears.
Shudhar moto, Ah, what a thrill!
Mori hae, hae re— If sadness, O mother mine,
Ma, tor bodonkhani molin hole, Casts a gloom on your face,
Ami noeon jole bhashi. My eyes are filled with tears!

Formalities of Playing National Anthem

a. Full national anthem will be sung on special occasions like the
Independence Day, the Victory Day and the Martyrs Day.

b. Full national anthem will be sung in the functions where the President/the
Prime Minister will be the chief guest at the moments of their arrival and
departure.

c. Full national anthem will be sung during the Guard of Honour ceremony
for a visiting Head of the State at the time of saluting the Head of State. In
such ceremonies the national anthem of the visitor's state will be sung first
and the national anthem of Bangladesh will be sung afterwards. But only
the first four lines will be sung if the guest is the Head of the Government,
not the Head of the State.

d. Only first four lines of the national anthem will be sung in foreign
embassies in Bangladesh. In such a function the national anthem of
Bangladesh will be sung first and the national anthem of the concerned
state will be sung afterwards.

e. The national anthem of Bangladesh will be played in other ceremonies or
special ceremonies or in public meetings of the President, the Prime
Minister or the diplomatic missions as per the approved rules.

°9
S
AQ

The Election of 1970 and The War of Liberation 225
National Monumentals

Jatiya Smritisoudha was built in order to glorify the | wv” |

immortal memories of millions of martyrs in the ——

war of liberation. It is situated in Savar, 35

kilometers away from Dhaka in the north-west. ih

Architect Moinul Islam designed this mausoleum. gg@/// DW

The pick of the mausoleum is one hundred fifty feet See=atMEEEEs ses
high with seven pairs of triangular walls rising step al

by step in order of small to big. National Mausoleum
Various objects were used to increase the beauty and gravity of the mausoleum. In
order to reach the main pulpit of it one has to dwell a long undulating way, pavement
and a bridge upon an artificial lake, All these are indeed symbols of various movements
and struggles of our liberation movement. There is a mass graveyard beside the place
where lie many who sacrificed their valuable lives for our independence. Seven pairs
of walls in the main mausoleum practically symbolize the proud struggles of the
Bangalees. These political events were 1952, 1954, 1956, 1962, 1966, 1969, and 1971.
Besides the history of our struggle for independence exists in these seven important
years. The Bangalees were successful to achieve independence from the chain of
domination through the events happened between 1952 to 1971. The National
Mausoleum again and again reminds us those great martyrs. The construction of the
National Mausoleum started in 1972 and was completed in 1982 in three phases. The
Mausoleum is the symbol of the pride, boast and dignity of the Bangalces.

Oporajeo Bangla

Oporajeo Bangla is the symbol of the protesting |
attitude of the Bangalees and the spirit of the ff 3 i
freedom fighters. It was constructed in the Arts j ». 5
building premise in Dhaka University on a six feet high ¢ ‘ogee
pulpit. The main sculpture is twelve feet high, eight fect FBR” Vf 1: Re
wide and six feet in radius. The students community “ ae | # ,
contributed a lot in all movements and struggles for | ee Fe) !
democracy. Oporajeo Bangla was built in order to = : ae a
immortalize the proud sacrifice of the students in all ~~ ” @porsjes'Bars ga
struggles from the Language Movement of 52 to the

liberation war of ‘71. Freedom fighter and sculptor Khaled Abdullah made this
sculpture. Its construction continued from 1973 to 1979. The structure of three young
uncommonly brave freedom fighters has been reflected in this sculpture in a very
Forma- 29, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

226 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
skilled manner. Two young freedoms fighters stand for the determination to face the
enemy and the young girl with a first-aid bag stands for the services rendered to the
injured freedom fighters during the liberation war. Oporajeo Bangla will ever remain as
a source of inspiration for the students community of Bangladesh.

Mujibnagar Smritisoudha ( Mujibnagar Monument)

This monumental structure was built in Meherpur in

Kustia District in order to honour the memory of the Pt iad
Mujibnagar Government which led the liberation war. iAihe. " ae pe br
The stucture has 24 triangular walls gradually becoming \ \ iri i yyy
higher making the highest height at the last. These 24 "00H Li SO EREMEE ES
triangular walls make the symbol of twenty four years of === ae
exploitation of the colonial Pakistani rule. The people of ~

this country gradually organized themselves in order to ——

assert their rights since 1947. At a stage they freed their - :

country by dint of strong attitude and determination. The Mujibnagar Smritisoudha
first government of independent Bangladesh first took

oath here. It's architect was Tanveer Karim.

Budhdhijibi Smritisoudha (The Intellectuals Mausoleum)

As a part of the conspiracy to make Bangalees meritless Fee EE,
innumerable intellectuals were killed during the meni tay’ os
liberation war. The Rajakar and the Al-badr forces helped | 9] © = |i jd
the Pakistan Army to kill these intellectuals brutally. Two es % d
days prior to the final defeat the Pakistan Army killed ames - iota
innumerable intellectuals on December 14. In order to Ease
immortalize their memory Budhdhijibi Smriti Soudha | E y
(The Intellectuals Mausoleum) was built in Mirpur in : — =
Dhaka. Its architect was Mustafa Ali Quddas. Its ame
construction completed in 1972. Budhdhijibi Smniti Soudha
Shikha Chironton (Flame for Ever)

Shikha Chironton (Flame for Ever) was built in the [773 $6 ae
Suharawardy Uddayan on March 26, 1997 to Pea ih, He
immortalize the memorable martyrs who sacrificed their |ip* am ; ao
lives in the Liberation war. Bangabandhu called for the 5 Re! fe
‘struggles for independence and freedom' from this place eal — Eee,

on March 07 1971. The important thing is that the S Stee
occupying Pakistan Army surrendered on December 16 in [ ae: g
Suhrawardy Uddayan after a nine months bloodshed in ? ;

the war. Shikha Chironton was founded to celebrate the Shikha Chironton 0
silver jubilee of the independence of Bangladesh. BS

The Election of 1970 and The War of Liberation 227
Rayer Bazar Bodhyobhoomi (Rayer Bazar Scaffold)
At the time of Liberation war the Pakistan Army and their P |
allies in Bangladesh killed millions of people. Mass | ei
graveyards and scaffolds were scattered all over the) i
country. In 1971 the Rayer Bazar area in Dhaka was very Fifi 0s oscil
calm and quiet. There was not enough population there. asa s _
The area covers some three kilometers from Kalu Shah ol
Pukurpar to Goal Masjid. Rayer Bazar became a scaffold —
from the month of March. Not only people were killed ®#¥¢t Bazar Bodhyo Bhoomi
here but also innumerable dead bodies were brought to this place. People living here
did not dare to move around the brick field of this place. Rayer Bazar Bodhyobhoomi
was discovered on December 18, 1971. A huge number of rotten and deformed dead
bodies were recovered from the holes of this scaffold. The best sons of the country were
killed here brutally. Among them the dead bodies of the professors, journalists, writers,
physicians were majority in number. Razakars and Al-Badrs played a major role in the
killing of the intellectuals. Some of the dead bodies found became so much deformed
that they could not be identified. Yet only a few number of dead bodies of the
intellectuals like Professor Munir Chowdhury, Journalist Selina Parvin, Dr. Fazle
Rabbi, eminent eye specialist Dr. Alim Chowdhury and some other could be identified.
Exercise Questions

Multiple choice questions
1. How many seats did Awami League bag in the provincial election of East

Pakistan in 1970?

a. 167 b. 198

c. 267 d. 298
2. Swadhin Bangla Chatra Sangram Parishad was organized—

i. for delaying to transfer power to the elected peoples representatives.

ii. for withholding the National Assembly session;

iii. for increasing admission fees in the university.

Which of the followings is correct?

a. iand ii b. iand iii

x c. ii and iii d. i, ii, and iii
N

228 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Read the stimulator and answer to the question nos. 3 and 4
State 'B' extended its help with shelter, food, clothes and medical aid to the tortured and
homeless people of the state 'A' in their rational struggle for freedom from their rulers
and focused their miseries to the world community.
3. Which of the states played the role of the stimulator like state 'B' during the
liberation war of Bangladesh in 1971?
a. China b. India
c. Nepal d. Myanmar
4. Asa result of the measures taken by that country —
i. independence was hastened;
ii. human rights were defended;
iii. The picture of the torture in Bangladesh was exposed to the external world.
Which of the followings is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iii
c. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii
Creative Questions
1. Abraham Lincoln, the pioneer of the modem democratic world is a memorable
name in the history of democracy. His kindness, simplicity, wit, oration and soft
manners placed him on the seat of an ideal man in the world. He left an unparallel
mark in politics. Thus he became the President of America from a struggling
individual. He freed the humanity from the cruelty of the selfish people. His
historical speech for the people aspiring for democracy and freedom "Government
of the people, by the people, for the people" has immortalized him even today.
a. What was the name of the Prime Minister in the Mujibnagar Government?
b. What does " Operation Searchlight" mean?
c. Which political leader reflects the characteristics and activities of Abraham
Lincoln as narrated above? Explain.
d. We achieved our independence for the strong and uncompromising lesdership
of that leader in Question no. C. Explain.
2
g

Chapter Fourteen
The Reign of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman (1972-1975)
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman declared the Independence of Bangladesh in
1971. After the declaration of independence, Pakistan army arrested Bangabandhu on
the first hour of March 26 in 1971 and took him to West Pakistan. He was a prisoner for
nine months during the Liberation War. Pakistan government started his trial on the
charge of treason at a military court. In a travesty of judgement, he was sentenced to be
hanged. Bangabandhu was still a prisoner in a Pakistani jail even after the final victory
on December 16 1971. His countrymen even did not know whether he was alive.
People all over the country were deeply anxious about Bangabandhu. There was eager
waiting for the great leader's coming back to his people. At last, Bangabandhu returned
to his country on 10 January 1972. This chapter discusses the important events of
Bangabandhu's reign.
Atthe end of this chapter we will be able to -
e describe the reconstruction activities of the war-torn country;
e explain the background of the framing of the constitution;
e describe the important events in Bangabandhu's reign;
e we will be respectful to the constitution of the country.
Bangabandhu's Return to Country (Swadesh Protyabartan)
Bangabandhu was flown direct to London by a special plane of Pakistani force before
his return to homeland on January 10, 1972. After that, he came to Dhaka via Delhi by
a British Royal Comet aircraft. At Dhaka, he was offered an unprecedented
welcome ceremony. He was drenched in love. He cried himself and made people cry.
People's emotion-soaked congratulation to the undisputed leader was spontaneous.
Millions of people gathered on the way from the old airport to the Racecourse Maydan
<2 (at present Suhrawardy Uddan) at Ramna just to have a glimpse of the popular leader.
S
N

230 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
At the Race Course Maydan, which is known as iy
Suhrawardy Udyan Bangabandhu gave a guideline in yd
his speech on the emergency duties and the policy ’
issues regarding a newly liberated country. He spoke
in a clear voice on the reconstruction of the war-torn as :
country, the recognition of Bangladesh as a new 4 g ca
country by other countries of the world and on the 4 ‘S a
nature of the state Bangladesh. He said, Bangladesh __ ot rah z .
will be an ideal state and it would not be founded on ey 3 i. Ba 3 Sle
any particular religion. The foundation of the country SJR *am v4 i 4
will be democracy, socialism, Bangalee nationalism i 1) UP ill
and secularism. aa = ee
Bangabandhu's return to homeland
Parliamentary System of Government onTonmary 10,1972
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was the President of the government of
Bangladesh formed at the beginning of the War of Liberation. But that time, no final
decision was taken due the nature of the government. The next day of homecoming, on
January 11 1972 Bangabandhu had a long discussion at the cabinet meeting and made
the 'Temporary Constitution Ordancance' to introduce the parliamentary system of
government in the country. On January 12 Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was
sworn in as the President by Chief Justice Abu Sadat Mohammad Sayem and instantly
resigned to take over as the Prime Minister. Justice Abu Syed Choudhury was
appointed President on the same day.
These arrangements indicate his profound trust in parliamentary democracy. The
government of Bangladesh was led by Bangabandhu from January 12 1972 to August
15 1975. This government had the opportunity to perform only for three years seven
months and three days. He made a unique contribution to build up the country from the
heap of destruction done by Pakistani invading army. He did his best to build an
honourable image of the country in the world through attaining international
recognition in this very brief period of his tenure.
War torn Bangladesh
The post-war condition of Bangladesh was simply horrible. Bangabandhu's
government started literally with an empty treasury. Due to the 'parched soil' policy of
Pakistani army the region of Bangladesh turned into a waste land. Administration
along with physical structures were destroyed. In the international arena, no country ,,
except India and Bhutan gave diplomatic recognition to Bangladesh. The overall S

The Reign of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman (1972-1975) 231
situation was very disheartening. There were misgivings whether Bangladesh would be
able to continue its existence as an independent country. During the nine month long
war of independence, Pakistani army along with their local collaborator Rajakars,
Al-Badars, Al-Shams went crazy in destroying assets side by side of genocide and rape.
They burnt about 43 lakhs houses, 3 thousand office buildings, 18 thousand primary
schools, 6 thousand high schools and madrashas, 9 hundred college buildings and 19
thousand rural bazaars into ashes all over the country.
In a planned way, the Pakistani army destroyed the communication system. 274 small
and large bridges and 300 rail bridges were destroyed. The Pakistanis also made large
scale destruction to railway engines, carriages and rail lines too. The river ports were
not usable because of mines planted by the Pakistanis. Before the ultimate defeat, the
Pakistan army burnt the currency stored in different banks and looted the reserve of
gold. As a result, the banks were without any fund.
The government took the hard challenge of rehabilitation and reconstruction. The
administrative framework was totally broken and so relief programmes were operated
with the help of Red Cross and the Relief and Rehabilitation Committees beginning
from the district headquarters to the remote villages. At the beginning of 1972, an
official demand note was prepared on the basis of monthly demand to operate relief
activities. The estimated monthly demand of food was two lakhs to two lac fifty
thousand tons, cement one lac tons, corrugated iron sheets fifty thousand tons, wood
fifty thousand tons and medicine and other daily necessaries two lacs metric tons. On
January 14 1972, Bangabandhu, at his first press conference as the Head of the
government made an open call for wide assistance to all the states, freedom-loving
peoples and international organizations along with presenting government's emergency
work plan.
Goup Work: Prepare a report on the damages made by the Pakistani
occupying army during the Liberation War.

Development, Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Programme
Development in Agriculture
The livelihood of 85 per cent people of was dependent on agriculture. More than half
of the gross national product came from agricultural sector. So, Bangabandhu paid
special attention to the development of agricultural system, for example-

(a) He made the land property up to 25 bighas tax free and wrote off all previously

due taxes;
o«  (b) He made a ceiling of land up to 100 bighas per family;
& — (c) More than twenty two lakhs of farmer families were rehabilitated.

232 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Development in Education
Bangabandhu took some emergency steps in education. He rebuilt 900 college and 400
high school buildings. For the first time, he nationalized all the primary schools.
Consequently, the jobs of 1 lakh and 65 thousand teachers working in those schools
were nationalized. He paid due salaries of teachers of the nine months during the War
of Independence. Despite resources constraints, Bangabandhu emphasized education
for the development of human resources. He took an effective initiative within only six
months of takeover to build up an education system suitable for an independent
country. For this purpose, he formed an Education Commission headed by famous
scientist Dr. Muhammad Kudrat-e-Khuda on July 26 1972. He passed the University
Act 1973 in the parliament to give autonomy to public universities.
Development of Road, Rail and Air communication
The emergency reconstruction of all bridges destroyed during the War of Liberation
started. By 1974, the communication system of the country was raised to a satisfactory
level. On the Dhaka-Aricha road, 97 bridges including the larger ones were
constructed. The destroyed rail bridges including the Hardinge Bridge were restored. A
bridge over the Jamuna was also planned. The primary feasibility report of the Jamuna
Bridge was prepared on November 4 1974. The air communication was also given
priority. The operation of Biman in both domestic and international routes and the work
of making Tejgaon airport usable were finished quickly. The air link of Dhaka with
Chittagong, Sylhet, Jessore and Comilla was established by March 7 1972. The first
flight on Dhaka-London route started on June 18 1973.
First Five Year Plan
The government formed a Planning Commission in January of 1972 for preparing long
term development plans of the new state. Measures were taken for the reconstruction
of the war torn country, poverty reduction and the promotion of GDP rate between
3-5.5%, Initiatives were also taken to achieve self-sufficiency in food production and
to gradually reduce dependency on external aids. Besides, the First Five Year Plan
(1973-1978) was made effective from July 1 1973 with the aim of overall economic
development.

Activity: Make a list of activities to reconstruct the war-torn country.
Background of the Constitution of 1972
The constitution is the supreme document of a state. This document can be either
written or unwritten. The constitution of Bangladesh is a written document. People of
Bangladesh achieved this document through a long struggle, sacrifice and blood. It can %
be mentioned that India and Pakistan got independence in 1947. While India took &

The Reign of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman (1972-1975) 233
two years and Pakistan took nine years to write their constitutions. But Bangabandhu's
government gave the nation one of the best constitutions in the world of the briefest
time of nine months only. It was possible only due to the sincerity and honest
commitment to the people by the government led by Bangabandhu.

The government proclaimed 'Constituent Assembly Order’ on March 23 1972 with a
view to drafting the constitution of Bangladesh. The constituent assembly consisted of
the elected members of the National and Provincial Assemblies of the then East
Pakistan in 1970 election. The only function of the constituent assembly was to draft
the constitution of Bangladesh. So the constituent assembly had no provision to
function as the legislature. The Order was made retrospectively in effect from March
26 1971.

The drafting of the constitution formally started with this Order. Awami League
parliamentary party nominated Bangabandhu the party leader of the constituent
assembly. The first session of the constituent assembly sat on April 10 1972. Shah
Abdul Hamid was elected the undisputed first Speaker of the Assembly and
Mohammad Ullah was elected Deputy Speaker. A committee was formed to draft a
constitution in the shortest possible time. Dr. Kamal Hossain was the Convener of this
committee. The member of the committee was 34 in number. The committee completed
the final draft of the constitution by October 11 1972. The assembly started general
discussion on the Constitution Bill from October 19. After a long discussion, the
Constitution Bill was passed on November 4 1972 in the Constituent Assembly. The
Constitution was in effect from December 16 1972, the first anniversary of the Victory
Day. In his speech at the assembly on the constitution, Bangabandhu said, ‘This
constitution is written in the blood of the martyrs. This constitution will prevail as the
symbol of the hope and aspiration of the entire nation.

Characteristics of the Constitution

The constitution of 1972 was a written document. It was drafted both in Bangla and
English. But Bangla was accepted as the original language. This constitution had one
Preamble, 11 Parts, 153 Articles and 4 Schedules.

The first part of the constitution is on the characteristics of democracy, the second part
is on the principles of the governance, the third part is on fundamental rights, the fourth
part is on executive divisions, the fifth part is on Jatiya Sangsad, the sixth part is on
judiciary, the seventh part is on election, the eighth part is on comptroller and auditor
general, the ninth part is on service commissions, the tenth part is on the amendments
of the constitution and the eleventh part deals with miscellaneous.

Forma- 30, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

234 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization

1. Supreme Law: The supreme law of the People's Republic of Bangladesh is the
constitution of Bangladesh. So, no law inconsistent with the constitution should be
passed. It is proclaimed in the constitution that all power of the state rest with
people. That power can only be exercised being subject to the constitution and on
behalf of the people.

2. The Fundamental Principles of Governance: In the Preamble of the constitution
four principles are accepted as the fundamental principles of state governance. In
this regard, it is mentioned in the constitution ‘the high ideals of nationalism,
democracy, socialism and secularism which inspired our heroic people to dedicate
themselves to, and our brave martyrs to sacrifice their lives in the war for national
liberation shall be the fundamental principles of the Constitution’.

a. Democracy: People of this region never enjoyed any democratic rights as
citizens of Pakistan since 1947. The Constitution proclaimed that the state of
Bangladesh will be a Democratic Republic. Every citizen's fundamental human
rights and liberty will be ensured by the state. The administration will run by the
elected people's representatives.

b. Socialism: Bangabandhu, all through his political career, told about the
economic freedom of the common people. He struggled to remove the sufferings
of the distressed. A large portion of the freedom fighters were from lower middle
class families. People's dream after liberation was that state will take measures
to meet fundamental socio-economic demands of the people. As a result,
socialism was taken as a fundamental principle of state governance. In fact, to
activate a socialist economy for establishing an exploitation-free society was the
objective of the state.

c. Secularism: The objective of secularism in the Constitution was to avoid
communalism and to avoid political status for any particular religion. Religion
should not be used for political interest. The state will not patronize any religion.
The state will ensure every citizen's freedom to observe religious rights and
rituals.

d. Nationalism: The religion-based nationalism inherited from Pakistan proved
null and void through the war of liberation. In contrast to this, Bangalee
nationalism emerged on the basis of language and culture. Secularism is the
foundation of Bangalee nationalism.

3. Fundamental Rights: It is important that there be the assurance of certain rights
for the development of a citizen's personality. It is important so that none can
interfere one's individual freedom. That is why fundamental rights have been
declared to be inviolable and sacred in the constitution.

The Reign of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman (1972-1975) 235

4. Unitary Government: According to this constitution, a unitary system of
government was introduced in Bangladesh. There is no province or state in
Bangladesh. The administration is run all over the country under the central
government.

5. The Cabinet System of Government: The Constitution adopted a cabinet system
of government. In this system, the cabinet is accountable to the parliament. The
President is the administrative head. But, all the executive authority lies with the
Prime Minister and the cabinet.

6. Unicameral Legislature: The Constitution provides a unicameral legislature. The
legislature will consist of directly elected 300 members and 15 reserved-seat
women members. The legislature will be called Jatiya Sangsad.

7. Rigidity: A special procedure is followed for the amendment of this Constitution
which is not as easy as the procedure of making law. For any amendment, vote of
the two-thirds of the total members will be needed. The amendment bill will be sent
for the approval of the President. The President will approve the bill in 7 days.
After 7 days it will be assumed that the President has approved.

8. Independent Judiciary: An independent and neutral judiciary is mentioned in the
Constitution. The state will ensure the independence of the judiciary by separating
it from the executive wing. According to the provisions of the Constitution, the
chief justice and other judges will conduct judicial procedures independently.

9. ABan on Communal Politics: In line with the basic principles of the constitution,
Religion-based politics is banned. It is done so that none can differentiate in the
name of religion.

The most important success of Bangabandhu government was to draft a constitution in

the possible shortest time. This Constitution was very well written and was better than

that of many countries. It had the reflection of the hope and aspirations of a newly born
country. The fundamental principles played the role of a torch bearer for the
advancement of the new state.
Group Work : Discuss the main features of the constitution 1972. Present your
opinion in a poster.

Foreign Relations

The role of foreign policy was very important to ascertain the existence and

development of Bangladesh as a newly liberated third world country. Before

Bangabandhu's home coming on January 10, 1972, Bangladesh did not get recognition

of any foreign country except India and Bhutan. Most of the countries of the world

were in confusion due to the anti-Bangladesh campaign led by Pakistan and their allies.

On the other hand, it became very important to have assistance and co-operation of

236 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
international community in the reconstruction of the war torn country. Bangabandhu
realized by his long political experience and merit that two things should be given
importance in the foreign policy of Bangladesh.

Firstly; to enhance the acceptability of Bangladesh in the international arena through
acquiring recognition.

Secondly; to ascertain the help of foreign countries in the reconstruction of the
country.

Bangabandhu himself was in charge of the planning of the foreign policy of the new
state. He always used to say of an independent and non-aligned foreign policy. While
giving a direction of the foreign policy, Bangabandhu said, 'We want to make
Bangladesh the Switzerland of South Asia.' We find the reflection of Bangabandhu's
thoughts in the framework of foreign policy as stated in the Constitution of 1972. The
modus operandi of foreign policy is peaceful coexistence and friendship to all, malice
to none. Bangabandhu desired that Bangladesh would stand beside the exploited
people of the world in the struggle against imperialism, colonialism and racism.
The task of winning recognition for Banngladesh jug ; —
was not easy at all. Due to the enimical campaign of Fy yyy Fee
Pakistan, the Muslim world and China used to foster 4 ti i is
negative attitudes towards Bangladesh. Because of i, & 1 i;
the able leadership of Bangabandhu, Bangladesh ( IS hse iat
won recognition of most of the countries of the SN) pe te
world and almost all international organizations itn i iid nt Tind
including the United Nations by 1974. With the Ry pr 1 ; ; qi Roe
unanimous resolution of the General Assembly, [Ee ye he f 4) 4 j
Bangladesh joined the United Nations as the ac tha an rT
Organization's 136% member on September 17 Bangabandhu's address
1974. For the first time in history, Bangabandhu in Bangla at the UN.
delivered his speech in our mother tongue Bangla at the 29t session of the General
Assembly on September 25 1974. As a result, Bangla won a new status in the
international level. During the reign of Bangabandhu, two important states did not offer
their recognition to Bangladesh. The two states are China and Saudi Arabia.
Bangabandhu took sincere initiatives for normalizing the relationship with the two
countries. China gradually began to show positive attitude towards Bangladesh.
Although China did not give recognition, it signed a trade treaty, sent relief for the
flood affected in Bangladesh. On the other hand, Bangladesh became the member of
the Organization of Islamic Countries and won recognitions of the majority Muslim
states. Although Saudi Arabia was yet to give recognition, the image of Bangladesh
became brighter among the Muslim states of the Middle East including Saudi Arabia

The Reign of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman (1972-1975) 237
due to able diplomatic communications. So, the course of events indicates that the
recognition of China and Saudi Arabia was only a matter of time.

Bangabandhu placed the national interest at the highest position in determining the
relations with other countries of the world. Bangladesh grew a cordial friendship with
India and the Soviet Union including other socialist countries because of their various
supports in our liberation war. In the post liberation period, India government gave
foodstuff, petroleum and other necessaries beginning from aircraft and ships as
assistance and donation to help survive in the struggle for existence. India gave 67.01%
of the total foreign grants Bangladesh got till June 1972. Obviously, Bangladesh could
not avert a massive human disaster without India's help at that time. Although India
itself was a foreign grant receiver country of the third world, it gave a huge assistance
in the reconstruction of Bangladesh.

But the needs of Bangladesh was much higher. It was not within the capacity of India
to meet the needs. For further economic assistance, the government has to depend on
East European states including the Soviet Union. The socialist countries failed to
support Bangladesh due to their own resource constraints. So later, Bangladesh had to
depend more on capitalist countries and Muslim countries. Since the US was against
the liberation war, Bangabandhu's government declined to accept the US assistance
towards the beginning. For the interest of the country, Bangabandhu's government took
effective initiatives to establish friendly relations with capitalist and Muslim countries.
During the rule of Bangabandhu, Bangladesh won the recognition of 130 states of the
world. Besides, the country received the membership of 14 international organizations
including the UN, Commonwealth and the Organization of Islamic Countries.

The First General Election in Bangladesh 1973

The first general election was held in Bangladesh on March 7 1973. After the
Constitution took effect, the constituent assembly was dissolved. Bangabandhu's
government made an important contribution to the way of democracy by taking a
decision for general election within the shortest possible time after the liberation.
Awami League achieved landslide victory in the election. Among the 315 seats of the
parliament including reserved women seats, Awami League won 306, Jatiyo
Samajtantric Dal 2, Bangladesh Jatiyo League 1 and independent candidates won 6
seats. People took this election result easy due to the huge popularity of Bangabandhu
and that of The Awami League for their leading role in the War of Liberation. The new
cabinet was formed on March 16 1973 under Bangabandhu's leadership.

238 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
The Introduction of Presidential System of Government

The Presidential system of government was introduced to the country on January 25
1975. The President became the authority of all powers. The cabinet and the parliament
had no power in this system of government. The change in the system of government
was brought through the fourth amendment to the Constitution. According to this
amendment, the President would be elected by the people's direct vote for 5 year
tenure. He would be able to appoint and dismiss at his will the Vice-President, the
Prime Minister, Ministers and officers of other government departments. Besides, the
President was given the authority to form a national political party for Bangladesh.
After the formation of the national political party, other political parties would be
declared void and illegal. President Bangabandhu Seikh Mujibur Rahman banned all
political parties and launched ‘Bangladesh Krishak Shramik Awami League’
(BAKSAL) on February 24 1975. The Chairman of this party was Bangabandhu and
General Secretary was M. Mansur Ali.

The change in the system of government through the fourth amendment brought about
a host of debates. The arguments against this system were that it curtailed the authority
of the parliament, it gave unlimited power to the President and it introduced an
undemocratic system by forming a single political party. Bangabandhu was conscious
of the limitations of this system of government. He accepted this as a provisional
system. The fourth amendment became unavoidable to face socio-economic and law
and order situations of the country. The global political reality also influenced to the
adoption of the fourth amendment. It is to be mentioned that socialist countries of the
world have the instance of single-party political system. But before the new system of
government could come in effect in full swing in the country, the ruthless massacre was
held on August 15 1975. So it was not possible to have the experience of good or bad
effect of the system.

The Ruthless Massacre of August 15

August 15th 1975 is a disgraceful day in the history of Bangladesh. On this day the
killers brutally assassinated 'the Father of the Nation’ and the members of five families.
The murderer's bullet did not let even child Russel to live. The murderers who fell in a
barbarous orgy of killing spree were some renegade army personnel. The military and
civil plotters were behind the curtain. They were the beneficiaries of the 15 August
brutal massacre. Many foreign and local well-wishers cautioned Bangabandhu
beforehand. It was not at all safe for the President to live in such an unprotected
residence. But he was not at all worried about personal safety. He used to utter in firm
trust, 'There's no Bengalee who will kill me’.

On August 15 it was yet to dawn Dhaka was about to start its day. The father of the
nation was still sleeping with his family at house No. 677 on Road No. 32 of Dhanmondi.

The Reign of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman (1972-1975) 239
The killers came down on to the street with ultra-modern weapons including tanks,
cannons and machine guns. Their target was to kill Bangabandhu, his family and his
relatives. About 5.30 am, they started the onslaught on Babgabandhu's residence. The
killers encircled Bangabandhu's house under the command of Major Mohiuddin, Major
Huda, Major Pasha and Major Noor.
The killers entered Bangabandhu's house by force. Then the daylight became brighter.
The residents of Dhanmondi area were panicked by the booms of gunfire. As per the
blue print, the killers hurled attacks on to the family of the father of the nation. Bang-
abandhu's family waked amid shouts, chaos and the booms of gunshots. The killers
killed all family members one after another. Even child Russel was not exempted. One
of the killers dragged Russel downstairs. Eight-year old Russel was utterly terrorized
and started crying for his mother. The ruthless murderer took him upstairs again and
shot him to death. The murderers shot the chest of Bangabandhu with stein gun. 18
bullet wounds were found on his chest. They murdered Bangabandhu's wife Begum
Fazilatunnesa Mujib, his sons Sheikh Kamal, Sheikh Jamal, minor child Sheikh
Russel. 18 family members were killed including daughters-in-law Sultana Kamal and
Rosy Jamal, brother Sheikh Naser, farmer leader Abdur Rab Semiabat, youth leader
Sheikh Fazlul Hoque Moni and his pregnant wife Arju Moni, Baby Semiabat, Sukanta
Babu, Arif and Abdul Naim Khan Rintu. Bangabandhu's two daughters Sheikh Hasina
and Sheikh Rehana survived as they were abroad that time.
Only in three and a half years of rule, Bangabandhu succeeded to lay the bed rock of
advancement for the newly liberated country, Bangladesh. Despite being the architect
of Bangladesh, the best beloved leader of the country had to meet the end in this
inhuman way. There are few instances of such pathetic, brutal and heartrending murder
in the history of civilization. Local and foreign conspirators along with military and
civil politicians were involved in the plot of Bangabandhu's murder. Khandakar
Moshtaq Ahmad was the ring leader of the murderers. We have turned into an
ungrateful nation in the eyes of the world due to the murder of Bangabandhu. The
usurpers tried to obliterate Bangabandhu and his achievements from history. But their
attempt failed because the history of Bangladesh cannot be written ignoring
Bangabandhu's role in its making. Poet Annadashankar Roy said the same thing in the
following lines :
“As long as the Padma, Jamuna
Gouri, Meghna remain flowing,
Marks of your deeds will remain glowing
Oh Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.”

240 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
in the history of The Bangalee nation explain.
Khondokar Moshtaq's Ascendancy to Power
The politics in Bangladesh was led to hopeless quagmire through the murder of
Bangabandhu. Khondokar Moshtaq ascended to power with the help of the murderers.
To make his illegal power permanent, he declared martial law for the first time in
liberated Bangladesh.
Exercise
Multiple choice questions:
1. In 1971, Bangabandhu was arrested on
a. 25 March. b. 26 March.
c. 27 March. d. 28 March.
2. Why did Bangabandhu take over as the Prime Minister?
a. Because he was a believer in parliamentary democracy;
b. For the reconstruction of the country;
c. To punish the Rajakars;
d. To administer the liberated state.
Read the following passage and answer the question No. 3 and 4:
In the state 'A' Ramesh, Abdullah, Linda Gomes and Amal Barua all celebrate their
Puja, Eid, X-mas Day and Bouddha Purnima freely and with splendor. The state does
not patronize anyone specially in observing these festivals.
3. Which particular character of the 1972 Constitution is reflected in state 'A'?
a. Democracy b. Secularism
c. Nationalism d. Socialism
4. That particular character gives people —
a. teligious freedom. b. economic freedom.
c. social freedom. d. cultural freedom.

The Reign of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman (1972-1975) 241
Creative questions
Russel's friend, Robert, is charmed at the beauty of Bangladesh. He loves the green
nature of this country very much. But the sight of dirty slums besides tall buildings has
given much pain to Robert. In their country, the state undertakes the responsibility to
meet people's demand of food, clothing, education and shelter. The aim of their
constitution is to establish a society free from exploitation. Russel says, their
constitution guarantees human rights and individual freedom and the government is run
by elected representatives. The parliament is formed by the members directly voted by
people. All executive power rests with the Prime Minister. But the President enjoys the
highest respect in the country.
a. Which date did Bangabandhu come back to his own country?
b. Why did Bangabandhu introduce parliamentary system of government?
c. Explain which character of the 1972 constitution is noticeable in Robert's
country?
d. ‘A portion of the character of 1972 constitution is prominent in Russel's
speech’.--- Evaluate.
Forma- 31, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

Chapter Fifteen

Military Rule and Subsequent Developments (1975-1990)
Khondokar Moshtaq: a Disgraceful Chapter in History
As pre-planned, Khondoker Moshtaq Ahmed seized power after the brutal killings of
August 15. He has been in power for about three months. He had been in politics with
Bangabandhu for a long time. He was one of the confidants and trusted persons of
Bangabandhu. However, he was the one who committed vile treachery with
Bangabandhu. He gave birth to a disgraceful chapter in the history of this country.
At the end of this chapter we will be able to -

e describe, the beginning of military rule and the successive political development;

e describe the notable sides of the rule of President Ziaur Rahman;

e evaluate the 1982 military rule and the situation arising out of the developments

thereafter;

e explain the important administrative reforms of the Ershad government;

e@ explain the background of the 1990 mass upsurge and its result;

e show positive attitude towards the significance of democracy in Bangladesh

and its application.

The brief rule of Moshtaq ushered a state of serious disorder in Bangladeshi politics.
An attempt was made to obliterate all the achievements of Bangladesh earned through
the Liberation war; and the restoration of Pakistani trend of thinking started. Within
five days of usurping power, Moshtaq declared the first martial law in independent
Bangladesh. In his address to the nation on 15th August, he started with 'Bismillahir
Rahmanir Rahim’ and concluded by saying 'Bangladesh Zindabad'. Describing the
killing of Bangabandhu as a historical necessity, he said that “little by little, under a
suffocating situation, the countrymen were becoming ruined in silent pain. Despite the
desire at all levels for a change in the country's system of government, the armed forces
had to come forward for a change of government as it was not otherwise possible under
the existing law. The armed forces opened ahead the door of golden opportunity
through fulfilling their responsibility with utmost sincerity.’ This was Mostaq's first
initiative to deceive the nation.
Moshtaq tried to attribute the conspiracy of a few retired and dismissed low and
mid-ranking officers of the armed forces as a coup of the entire armed forces.
Moreover, he referred to this brutal, barbaric killing as a door of golden opportunity.
Moshtaq formed a cabinet with Awami League leaders through intimidation. It is not
that some were not eager to join the cabinet. However, despite intimidating them with

Military Rule and Subsequent Developments (1975-1990) 243
death, Moshtaq could not influence the “four leaders” and many others. Prime Minister
Mansur Ali was arrested on August 17. Tajuddin Ahmed and Syed Nazrul Islam were
arrested on August 22. About 20 leaders including Kamruzzaman, Abdus Samad Azad,
Korban Ali were arrested on August 23. Many other leaders and workers were arrested
as they refused to accept the leadership of Moshtaq. The four national leaders who
gaveled leadership during the liberation war had to pay a heavy price. On November
03, Syed Nazrul Islam, Tajuddin Ahmed, Mansur Ali, and Kamruzzaman were brutally
killed in the Central Jail while held prisoners there. Those who entered the jail and
killed the four national leaders were not arrested; no trial was held. Thus another
disgraceful chapter was added to the history of Bangladesh.

During this time, Moshtaq took various anti-progressive initiatives which were
contradictory to the spirit of the liberation war. For example, he abolished the war chant
of the liberation war Joy Bangla’. Emulating ‘Pakistan Zindabad' he introduced the
slogan 'Bangladesh Zindabad' and like 'Radio Pakistan’, he used "Radio Bangladesh’.
Moshtaque's most condemnable, detestable act was the promulgation of an order on
August 20, 1975. According to this order, the killers of Bangabandhu and his family
members could not be tried. In no civilized society can such a law be passed where
killers would not be tried. This black law against humanity known as ‘Indemnity
Ordinance 1975' was published in Bangladesh Gazzette on September 26, 1975. It was
stated in the Indemnity Ordinance that with regard to all plans or activities taken for
changing the government on August 15, 1975 and those who were involved in it, no
recourse to any court of law could be taken as punishment to them. Not only that,
Khondokar Moshtaq rewarded the killer gang with high posts both at home and abroad
and provided them various privileges.

After the August killings, Moshtaq and his associates tried to establish control over the
armed forces with the intention of lengthening and securing their power. As part of this
attempt, the service of Army Chief K.M. Shafiullah was placed under the disposal of
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Moshtaq appointed Major General Ziaur Rahman as
chief of army staff on August 25. Brigadier H.M. Ershad who was undergoing training
in India was promoted to Major General and appointed as deputy chief of army staff.
Pakistan was the first country to recognize the Mushtaq government. There was no end
to the joy of Zulfiquar Ali Bhutto at the news of the brutal killing of Bangabandhu.
Bhutto congratulated the killer gang because to him this was a victory for Pakistan as
if it were getting back the area it lost in 1971. China and Saudi Arabia recognized
Bangladesh on 16 and 31 August 1975 respectively. The downfall of the unpopular
military government of Moshtaq came on November 3, 1975.

244 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Khaled Musharraf's Coup and Counter-Coup

As a consequence of the August 15 killing, along with the acute political vacuum in the
country, the army was in chaos. It was not possible for Moshtaq to deal with army
officers and soldiers. The killer group established their domination on state power by
staying in Bangabhavan. Due to this, the chain of command in the army completely
broke down. Despite the demands of senior army officers, newly appointed army chief,
General Zia did not take any initiative to restore discipline in the army. This is because
Zia got the post of Army Chief with the co-operation of those involved in the August
15 killing,

Therefore, it was not possible for Zia to take a strong position against them. Under such
circumstances, due to Zia's inactivity, dissatisfaction in the army grew further. The
Chief of General Staff in the army, Brigadier Khaled Musharraf took initiative to
resolve the leadership crisis in the army. He discussed with senior armed forces
officers. He finally decided that it was not possible to restore the chain of command
without a military coup. Colonel Shafayet Jamil played an important role in this coup.
According to plan, Khaled Musharraf had a secret meeting with some trusted officers
on 1 November. According to the final decision on the counter coup, it began with the
return of the soldiers of the 1st. East Bengal regiment to the barracks in the cantonment
from Bangabhavan on the night of November 2. Ziaur Rahman was placed under house
arrest in the early morning of November 3. Khaled Musharraf continued to negotiate
with Khondokar Mushtaq on assuming state power. At one stage, on the advice of
General Osmani, the August 15 killers along with their family left Dhaka for Bangkok.
In the morning of November 4 Khaled Musharraf came to know about the barbaric,
brutal Jail Killing.

On the late night of November 3, 1975, prior to their leaving the country, a killer group,
with the permission of president Mushtaq, illegally entered the central Jail and brutally
killed the four Liberation War leaders Syed Nazrul Islam, Tajuddin Ahmad, Capt. M.
Mansur Ali and A.H.M. Qamruzzaman. Despite intimidating them in various ways,
Mushtaq failed to persuade them to accept ministerial positions in his cabinet. As a
result of that, the killer group committed such a barbaric killing inside the Jail. This
killing was the implementation of the conspiracy and blue print of the defeated forces
of the 1971 liberation war as well as the domestic and international opponents of the
independence. The main objectives of the two killings were to destroy the
achievements of the independence and armed liberation war of Bangladesh, make the
country leaderless and establish the ideals of Pakistan. The same group committed the
killings of 15 August and 3 November.

On 4 November, Khaled Musharraf informed through an announcement that Ziaur
Rahman had retired from the post of Chief of Army Staff. He exerted pressure on

Military Rule and Subsequent Developments (1975-1990) 245
Mushtaq to promote and appoint him as the army chief. He had to face great difficulty
in getting Mushtaq's consent in favour of the change in power. At last at mid-night of 5
November, Mushtaq was forced to relinquish power. Under the circumstances, Khaled
Musharraf and the officers involved in the coup requested the then Chief Justice Abu
Sadat Mohammad Sayem to take the responsibility of the president. On 64 November
Justice Sayem took oath as President in the Durbar Hall of Bangladesh. By removing
Mushtaq and Zia from power and freeing Bangabhavan from the control of the killer
group, Khaled Musharraf succeeded in establishing his control on state power. Khaled
Musharraf was popular and acceptable in the army because of his reputation as a brave,
valiant freedom fighter. As commander of 'K' Force in the liberation war, he fought
many times from the front. However, he failed in the leadership of the military coup.
From 3 - 4 November, he was able to establish his control over state power for only
four days. In a counter coup by Colonel Abu Taher (retired) on November 7, Khaled
Musharraf lost power. Later, Khaled Musharraf and his close associates were killed.
Government of Justice Sayem

On the subsequent date of taking oath of Justice Sayem as the president of the country
on 07 November a counter coup took place. While Ziaur Rahman was
house-imprisoned, he requested Colonel Taher to make him free from jail through
telephone. Taher was a heroic freedom fighter who lost a leg in the liberation war. Zia
knew that due to his leftist ideology Taher had a good number of supporters among the
soldiers. For political support Taher involved the ‘National Socialist Party'
(Jatio Samajtantrik Dal) in this coup. This was an unexpected chapter in the history of
Bangladesh as well as in the history of Bangladesh Army. As per planning at the
mid-night of 6 November under the leadership of Taher another coup took place against
Khaled Musharraf. The soldiers made Zia free from house imprisonment. Zia thanked
Taher over a hug for saving his life. Without any obstacle soldiers declared Zia as the
chief of staff.

Through returning to the state power of Zia, Mushtaq desired that he would be
reinstated as the President. But his desire could not be fulfilled due to the lake of
support from Zia. Though Justice Sayem remained on the post of the President in the
Bangabhavan, the real power lay in the cantonment in the hand of the Chief of Staff,
General Zia. For that reason, Justice Sayem could not take any decision freely during
his reign. President Sayem delivered a speech to the nation where he gave commitment
for forming the democratic government through election. But he could not continue
that. On 21 April, Ziaur Rahman took over the post of the President formally by
applying force. In fact, before creating this situation the government of Sayem became
inactive. President Sayem assigned Justice Satter to hold dialoges with political parties

246 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
with a view to arranging national election. But Sattar was not interested in arranging
election rather he motivated General Zia to capture the state power. Zia also did not do
any injustice to him. He appointed Sattar the Vice-President of the state.

Various Steps for Consolidating Ziaur Rahman's Power

Ziaur Rahman was an ambitious military officer. As a freedom fighter he had
popularity in the army. After independence, the Bangladesh government gave him
many promotions within a short span and promoted him to the rank of Major General.
He was appointed Deputy Chief of staff of the Army in June 1972. In recognition of his
contribution in the liberation war, Bangabandhu awarded him 'Bir Uttam'. Coming to
power at the age of only 40 years, Zia took some steps to strengthen his hold on power
as quickly as possible.

Trial of Abu Taher

Colonel (Retd.) Abu Taher was arrested on 24th November 1975 on charges of army
revolt and anti - state activities. At the same time a large number of Jatiya Samajtantrik
Dal (JSD) leaders and workers were arrested. This was because, only Taher and JSD
were capable of challenging Zia's power that time. On 215t June 1976, the trial of Taher
began in Dhaka Central Jail amidst extensive security. The camera trial under a special
army tribunal was completed on 17‘ July 1976. The Chairman of this tribunal was
Colonel Yusuf Haider, a repatriated army Officer from Pakistan. The tribunal awarded
death sentence to Taher.

According to the judgment of a farcical trial, Taher was hanged on 215t July 1976.
Taher who saved Zia's life, was hanged by Zia in return.

Establishment of Control in the Army

Widespread suspicion, distrust or lack of confidence was created because of the coup
and counter-coup in the army. Because of three military coup on August 15th, 1975,
November 3 and November 7 within almost three months, the chain of command in the
army broke down. In the last coup, there was lot of bloodshed in the army, especially
fear spread among the officers. In this coup, the slogan was 'All Sepoys are brothers,
we want the blood of officers' and 'All Sepoys are brothers, there is no officer above the
rank of Subedar’. Due to the conflict between officers and jawans, there was no

Military Rule and Subsequent Developments (1975-1990) 247
discipline in the army. Besides, there was dissatisfaction in the army for a long time
over professional privileges and facilities.
Zia had rightly understood that his main task was to restore discipline in the army. This
is because army was the source of his power. There was no legal validity of his taking
over power. In his own interest, for surviving in power, he tried to satisfy the army by
providing them with different types of privileges and facilities. Arrangement was made
to provide the sepoys with standard uniform, food, arms and ammunition. The status of
the officers was also increased. In comparison to the Bangabandhu Government, Zia
increased military expenditure manifold.

Proclamation of Martial Law

On April 23, 1977, within three days of forcibly taking power from Justice Sayem, Zia

imposed a Martial Law decree, bringing about fundamental changes in the 1972

constitution which was inspired by the liberation war. The changes were:

a) So far citizens of Bangladesh were known as ‘Bengalee'. Zia gave the new
identity 'Bangladeshi' to the people of this country.

b) At the beginning of the constitution, before the Preamble, 'Bismillahir Rahmanir
Rahim' was added.

c) Replacing 'Secularism' as the state principle ‘complete trust and faith on omnipotent
Allah

d) Another main state principle 'Socialism' was described as 'Economic and Social
justice’.

e) With regard to foreign relations it was stated that efforts would be made to
consolidate, preserve and strengthen brotherly relations with Muslim countries on
the basis of Islamic solidarity.

f) It was decided to use 'war of independence’ in place of ‘liberation war'.

The main purpose of the constitutional amendments by Zia was to earn the support of

anti-liberation war or anti-Awami League parties and persons. The overall objective

was to deepen the religious influence on the state and the people. Zia tried to stabilize
his power by bringing back Pakistani spirit against the spirit of the liberation war.

Start of Domestic Politics

In an effort to reduce political unrest the military government promulgated ‘Political

Party Regulation’ on July 28, 1976. Under some special conditions, permission was

248 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
granted for forming political party and carrying out political activities. According to
law, no party could indulge in politics without the permission of the martial law
government. Zia adopted a go slow policy in granting permission to some political
parties. 23 political parties out of 57 were permitted to carry out political activity.
Referendum

Military rulers of many third world countries arrange referendum after illegally
occupying power. The purpose is to give some kind of legitimacy to their take over. On
April 22, 1977, a day after taking over power from Justice Sayem, President General
Ziaur Rahman, in his address to the nation, announced holding referendum on 30 May,
which was known as Yes/No Vote.A government circular stated falsely that in the
election held on 30 May, 1977 and 88.5 percent voters cast their votes.

Presidential Election 1978

After independence, Presidential election through direct voting was held for the first
time under martial law. Election date was fixed on June 3, 1978. There were two main
contenders in the election: General Zia and General Osmani. In the meantime, two
alliances were formed centering the election. Zia was the candidate of the Nationalist
Front while Osmani was the candidate of the Ganatantrik Oikya Jote. Despite various
kinds of adversity, Awami League took part in this election. There was no doubt that
Osmani would not be successful against Zia in this unequal competition. The big
challenge for Zia and his supporters was how to make this election credible at home
and abroad. Zia was elected President by receiving 76.63 percent vote through rigging.
Only 21.70 percent vote was shown in favour of Osmani. People did not get back their
democratic right even after this election as martial law still continued.

Formation of a New Political Party

Like other military rulers, General Zia, too, after taking over power, thought of forming
a political party. Zia's journey started with the gaining of political support of
anti-Awami League camp. After independence, religion based politics was banned
because of the anti-Bangladesh role of pro-Pakistani Jamat-i-Islami, Nezam-i-Islami,
Muslim League and other religious parties. Zia provided the anti-independent forces
opportunity to do politics by abolishing Collaborators Act and the constitutional
obstacle. Zia formed a new political party, Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) on

Military Rule and Subsequent Developments (1975-1990) 249
September 1st, 1978. He himself took the responsibility of the Chairman of the party.
Various anti-liberation and leftist, rightist parties and individuals joined BNP.

Many politicians gathered around Zia mainly in the hope of getting different privileges
and facilities. Zia rewarded them in various ways by giving them various posts. A big
number of advisers/ministers during Zia's rule were close associates of Ayub and
Yahiya. Again, many of them had anti-independence role. Zia appointed a member of
the anti-liberation group, Shah Aziz, his Prime Minister.

Parliamentary Election, 1979

According to the announcement of President General Ziaur Rahman, parliamentary
election took place on February 18th, 1979. Zia led BNP got 207 seats. Bangladesh
Awami League (Malek) on 5‘ April, 1979 with 39 seats played the role of the
opposition party. Leaders and workers of the opposition party had to face various
obstacles and intimidations during the election campaign. In reality, the Election
Commission could not work independently under the military government.

The Fifth Amendment Law, 1979

The fifth amendment of the Constitution of Bangladesh was accepted in the parliament
(Jatio Sangsad) on 5th April, 1979. By this amendment all the laws, ordinances,
regulations declared and enacted by the unconstitutional governments since the killing
of Bangabandhu and his family members till 9th April 1979 were given legal
protection. Zia withdrew martial law on 9th April 1979.

The Law of Indemnity

The dictionary meaning of 'indemnity’' is to provide someone insurance or protection.
Indemnity was proclaimed so that none could seek judicial proceeding against the
killers of Bangabandhu, his family members and the four national leaders. Thus the
killers were given protection which was entirely contrary to human rights. Bangladesh
was slammed by many countries for this black law which was promulgated by General
Zia with a view to providing constitutional protection for some killers. Much later the
Government of Sheikh Hasina repealed the law on 12th November, 1996.
Development Work

It is the usual practice by all the military governments to blame the previous
government. They do it as a pretext to justify their illegal measures of capturing power.
Zia and his allies could successfully run the propaganda that there was no development
work during the regime of Bangabandhu. They publicized that all the development
work of the country and people's wellbeing were done by Zia. Zia declared his
principles and programs based on 19 points on 30 April, 1977.

Forma- 32, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

250 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
These programmes had highest priority on some popular issues. They included
agricultural development, self-sufficiency in food, women empowerment, health
facility for all, improvement of worker's conditions, a corruption free society, and equal
rights for all citizens irrespective of their religious affiliations, caste and creed. During
his time, some government programmes got huge popularity The canal
digging programme, village government, youth co-operative centre and mass
education were some of those programme.

Canal Digging

During Zia's regime the most talked about issue was his canal digging pragramme or
canal digging revolution, which was inaugurated on 18t December 1979 at Ulashi
Jadunathpur in Jessore. However, the canal digging programme did not have long term
impact on the agricultural progress in the country.

Gram Sarkar (Village Government)

The Zia government decided that every village in Bangladesh would have its own
government known as Gram Sarkar. Such a system would enable the people to deal
with their local problems, handle their own law and order situation, work for mass
education and other development programmes in the locality. The first Gram Sarkar
was established in Jirabo, Savar on 30 April 1980.

Mass Education

There cannot be any debate about the necessity of mass education. With the view to
enabling 57,00,000 students to read and write, the Zia government started a mass
education programme on 21 February 1980. However, owing to a lack of adequate
planning, the mass education programme could not go far.

Zia gave incentives to private sector with a view to strengthening industrial sector.
Sometimes state property was sold out with a minimum price. Yet, foreign investments
could not be attracted. Though there was a routine growth of national income, revenue,
and per capita income; the difference between the rich and the poor became too wide.
During his time, foreign aid and an import based economy was patronized. This had
negative impacts in the long run, such as the number of tax evasion, black money,
commission agents, smuggling of foreign currency increased. A new middle class was
created in rural and urban areas by providing different sorts of financial benefits. This
newly rich section was the direct beneficiary of Zia's martial law. Many people became
billionaires overnight with the money they borrowed from the banks in the name of
doing business and setting up industries. At one stage these rich people appeared as
loan defaulters. A huge part of national wealth was wasted due to corruption and abuse
of power. Limitless military expenditure halted the national growth. 8,00,000 tons of

Military Rule and Subsequent Developments (1975-1990) 251
food production decreased in 1976-77 in comparison to 1975-76. The number of land-
less people increased to 51 per cent in 1979. People had much hardship as there was
price hike for fuel, electricity, and rice in the ration. There was no significant change in
the socio-economic conditions of the common people during the military rule.
Foreign Relations

Zia framed his foreign policy in line with his domestic policies. He gave importance to
developing relations with Muslim countries and made it a part of the constitution. The
Islamic identity of Bangladesh was highlighted as the reason of changing the foreign
policy. As a result, from the very beginning Zia took an anti Indo-Soviet stand.
Bangladesh's relations with India became very cold and bitter. Due to suspicious
attitude, disbeliefs and lack of trust from both the sides, the relation between these two
countries deteriorated much. Issues like the Farakka Dam and border clashes made the
politics in Bangladesh volatile. Anti-Indian propaganda was in its peak nationally and
internationally, especially based on the Farakka Dam. Zia raised the issue of Farakka
Dam to UN and other international organisations. When Indira Gandhi lost the
election in India in March 1977 and Morarji Desai came to power in India,
Bangladesh's ties with India improved somewhat.

During Zia's time the relation between China and Bangladesh developed significantly
though the process started during the tenure of Bangabandhu. Bangladesh signed a
business treaty with China in May 1975. China gave recognition to Bangladesh on 31
August, 1975 when Mushtaq was in power. The relation between these two countries
got more friendly by Zia's visit to China.

On the other hand, Zia took special move to better the relation with Pakistan. In 1976
diplomatic relation was established between Bangladesh and Pakistan by exchanging
diplomats. The claim made to Pakistan during the regime of Bangabandhu regarding
asset sharing and taking the stranded Pakistanis back remained unsolved. Due to Zia's
excessive lenience to Pakistan within a very short time telecommunications, air and
marine communications between these two countries were established, trade pacts
were signed and courtesy visits of high officials also took place. The Pakistan
Government and anti-liberation political organizations in Bangladesh began
demanding that Bangladesh and Pakistan should form a confederation. They demanded
change of the national anthem and the national flag. They also started propaganda in
favour of introducing Islamic rule. However, due to the resistance from the freedom
loving majority Bengalees, Zia could not do so.

Zia took initiatives to develop Bangladesh's relation with the Middle East, Far East and
the Western countries. He also proposed a forum for increasing regional co-operation
among the South Asian countries. It is also to mention here that the necessity of such a

252 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
forum for regional co-operation was felt and uttered by Bangabandhu after the
independence of the country. Finally in 1985 the proposal was accepted by other South
Asian countries when SAARC was formed.

Assassination of Ziaur Rahman

Ziaur Rahman was in power for nearly five and a half years. He didn't have to face any
major movement though there was disappointment in national politics regarding
martial law. The opposition could not organize any agitation against him due to
repressive measures and different kinds of fears and panic. This is why Zia was not
worried about political movement. But there were as many as 17 military coups against
Zia. Every time he took sternest punitive actions against the revolutionary officers.
Hundreds of military persons who were involved in those coups either were dismissed
from their jobs or sentenced to death. Yet, attack came on his life from the military side.
On 30 May 1981, a group of soldiers of the Bangladesh Army killed him in a coup at
Chittagong Circuit House.

Justice Sattar's Government

General Zia was succeeded by his Vice-President Justice Abdus Sattar as an Acting
President of Bangladesh according to the country's constitution. On the oath taking day,
the then army chief, Ershad who was present on the occasion pledged his support to the
78 year old Sattar. According to the constitution, if the position of the President falls
empty, then there has to be by election within 180 days. The new date of Presidential
election was fixed on 21 September, 1981.

Sattar was nominated as the Presidential candidate by the Bangladesh Jatiotabadi Dal.
But according to constitution, the position of the Vice-President being profitable
anyone holding such position could not contest the election. With the power of their
majority in the parliament, BNP brought sixth amendment in the parliament that
declared the office of the Vice-President not profitable. Therefore, Sattar had no legal
barrier in contesting the election. Being over enthusiastic and to show his absolute
loyalty Ershad, the Army Chief, announced that army would fully support Justice
Satter in the election. Dr. Kamal Hossain was the candidate from the Awami League in
the election. BNP candidate tried to influence the election by taking all the services
from the government. The opposition raised the point of poll rigging. 55.47 % of the
total voters cast their votes. Securing 65.80 % of the total cast votes Justice Satter was
elected as the President. His nearest rival Dr. Kamal Hossain got 26.35% vote.

Being sworn in Sattar formed his cabinet with 42 members on 28 December, 1981. But
after Zia's death the BNP's intra party feud rose to an immense pinnacle. Sattar faced
difficulty in running his administration due to economic instability and deterioration of
law and order. Sattar had to abolish his ministerial cabinet in three and a half months

Military Rule and Subsequent Developments (1975-1990) 253

because of boundless corruption. Still Sattar was unable to save himself. On 24 March

1982, the elected government of President Sattar was overthrown in a coup by General

Ershad, who proclaimed martial law all over the country. He proclaimed that the armed

forces had to take the power to keep the independence and sovereignty of the country

up; and also to free the nation from the crisis of the armed forces, economy and
administration. To legitimize the illegal way of captivating power of the state and to
expand their high ambition the illegal power grabbers always bring excuses like this. It
is important to know instead of solving the problems Ershad himself created many new

problems during his tenure from 1982 to 1990.

Military Coup: Government of Gen. Ershad

Lt. General Hussein Mohammad Ershad who took power forcefully in 1982 ruled

Bangladesh till 1990. He was the Chief Martial Law Administrator till 1983 and from

11 December, 1983 to 6 December 1990 he remained as the President. For a short

period of time Ershad made Justice Ahsan Uddin (from 27 March, 1982 to 10

December, 1983) the country's President. He did not hesitate to remove him at his

convenient time. In the meantime he dissolved the Assembly.

Reformation of Administration

After coming to power Ershad attempted to take the control over civil administration.

On 28 April 1982, he formed a committee to re-organize the administration. On the

basis of the suggestions of this committee he altered some frame work of the

administration.

A. Upazila: General Ershad's regime turned the thanas of the country into upazillas.
The plan was that under the elected representatives' the bureaucrat would perform
and implement the administrative work of the local government. The upazillas
would have elected bodies which would be responsible for the welfare of the
population. In the first phase, 45 thanas were upgraded to upazilas on 7 November
1982. Eventually 460 thanas were turned into upozillas. The name of the
administrative unit 'thana' was changed to 'upazilla’ on 14 March, 1983.

B. Sub-division Declared as District: In order to decentralize the administration,
the Ershad government upgraded existing Sub-divisions (Mohokuma) into
districts. Thus, Bangladesh was divided into 64 districts.

c. Reform of the Judiciary System: Some important changes were made in the
Judiciary system too. Munsef court and Magistracy were established in upazillas.
Permanent benches of the High Court were established in Rangpur, Jessore,
Barisal, Comilla, Chittagong and Sylhet. Later the Supreme Court decreed those
benches illegal and the High Court was restored to its earlier position.

254 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Ershad took some steps to reform some other sectors including education, agriculture,
land, drug policy. But general people did not support the policies considering them
anti-people. It was because the mass people did not get any benefit out of them. With a
view to establishing supremacy over public bureaucracy Ershad also appointed army
officers frequently in different sectors of public administration.

Development Programmes

Ershad tried to establish himself as a public oriented leader. By using government
media and by holding meetings he wanted to show that his development programme
aimed at changing the condition of the masses in the rural areas. He announced an
18-point program on 17 March, 1983 for the welfare of the people. This programme
included his vision about national unity, food, clothing, housing, employment, foreign
policy and others.

The economic condition of the country was not at all satisfactory during his period
though he publicized heavily his development programmes through government
television, radio and newspapers. The desired development could not be achieved
because of corruption and limitless plundering. During Ershad's time dependence on
foreign aid increased greatly. The 65% foreign aid dependency of the 1980-81 budgets
rose up to 126.3% in 1988-89. Army and civil bureaucrats as well as defected
politicians were benefitted most from the culture of loan defaulters in his time. All
parameters of economic development such as food production, GDP, GNP all showed
a downward trend. But he increased the defense budget to strengthen the base of his
power. He provided more amenities and facilities for the army personnel for the same
purpose.

International Relations

Ershad did not bring about any new changes in Bangladesh's relations with the outside
world. He followed the paths of General Zia. He took further initiatives to improve
relations with China rather than with India. Especially in military training, arms and
ammunition, he relied more on China. He maintained cordial relations with the Muslim
world, including Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, and Iraq. But he was too heavily pro-US. He
even expelled a Russian diplomat from Dhaka to satisfy the US. He tried to ease
tensions with India. However, he did not take any initiative to find solutions to the
existing problems with India.

One of his major successes in international relations was forming The SAARC. Seven
neighburing countries in South Asia came together and formed the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC). The first summit of this organization
was held in Dhaka in December 1985.

Military Rule and Subsequent Developments (1975-1990) 255
Referendum

To legitimize his power, Ershad, like many other army rulers, made arrangements for a
referendum. He could not hold presidential or parliamentary elections due to
opposition from the political parties. At last in 1985, on March 21, he held a
referendum. People had no interest in this referendum. Yet, Ershad got 94.14% of the
votes cast. Due to the conspiracy of the civil-military bureaucracy Ershad managed to
get this huge number of votes.

Forming Political Party

Ershad realised the need of a political party to strengthen his power. He formed
Janadal, a new political organization, in July 1984. Under the banner of this political
party some other fronts such as New Bangla Student Society, New Bangla Youth Com-
mittee, New Bangla Labor Federation, etc. were formed. In fact, Janadal was formed
with a combination of political opportunists and defectors of other parties. Later he
formed Jatiyo Front on 16 August, 1985. A few political parties and leaders with no
public support joined his front. Finally, on January 1, 1986, General Ershad formed his
own political party - Jatiyo Party.

Election

The third parliamentary election was held on May 7, 1986. 28 political parties,
including Jatiyo Party, Awami league-led 8-party alliance, and Jamaat-e- Islami took
part in the election. The BNP-led 7-party alliance boycotted the election. Jatiyo Party
won the election by getting 153 seats out of 300. Awami League became the 2nd largest
party by securing 76 seats. Awami League and other political parties raised charges of
a media coup and rigging against Ershad. Election observers also supported these
allegations. A presidential election was held on 15 October 1986. All the main political
parties boycotted the election. Ershad was declared elected as the President in this
farcical election.

Islam as State Religion

General Ershad, through the eighth amendment of the constitution, made Islam the
state religion. By this amendment he wanted to have the support of the pro-Islamic
parties. He amended the constitution only for some political gains. It is to be said that
making Islam the state religion went against the spirit of the great War of Liberation.
Demonstration Against Autocratic Rule

After the liberation General Ershad was the ruler who had to face opposition form the
students and public as well as demonstration hartal, etc. Students had a vital role in the
anti- Ershad movement between 1982 and 1990. Dhaka University tudents played

256 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
important roles in any activities against the military rule in this regard. This is why
Ershad closed down Dhaka University as well as other universities sine die at different
times.

Political parties formed different alliances in the anti-Ershad movement. Under the
leadership of Sheikh Hasina, Awami League formed an alliance with 8 political parties.
Under Rashed Khan Menon, the leftists groups formed a 5 party alliance. (Later these
two alliances merged to 15 parties' alliance). On the other hand, BNP Chairperson
Begum Khaleda Zia led a 7-parties alliance.

To curb the movement Ershad took the paths of suppression, repressions, tortures, and
killings. Things like opening fire directly on processions or driving trucks over the
protestors happened many times. On 15 February, 1983 Zafar, Jainal and Mozzamel
were killed in police firing, and many political leaders were arrested.

The new student wing of Ershad, Notun Bangla Chatra Samaj also launched terrorist
activities to suppress the student movement. Roufan Bosunia, a student of Dhaka
University, was killed by the Ershad's student front. At this juncture 22 student fronts
jointly formed Shorbodoliyo Chatro Sangram Parisad to accelerate the anti-Ershad
movement.

In the middle of 1987 all the parties realized that the movement will not be successful
until common programmes are taken. In fact, right after the parliamentary and the
presidential elections in 1986 all the political parties, general mass and the civil society
burst into anger.

Opposition parties started vigorous mass movement for the resignation of Ershad and
for a free and fair election. The parliament had to be dissolved in December when all
the opposition parliament members resigned together from the parliament in 1987. The
Ath parliamentary election was arranged on March 3, 1988.

All the major political parties, including Awami League and BNP, boycotted the elec-
tion. In this farcical election without any voter and participation of any political party
Ershad's Jatiyo Party won by getting 251 seats.

Under the leadership of the Government back leader A.S.M. Abdur Rab, the Sommilito
Birodhi Dal (combined opposition parties) COP got 19 seats. Among the rest of the
seats, JSD (Siraj) won 3 seats, Freedom Party won 2 and the independent candidates
bagged 25 seats.

Military Rule and Subsequent Developments (1975-1990) 257
Mass Movement of 1990 and Downfall of General Ershad

During the reign of almost nine years Ershad had to struggle against the demonstrations
from the opposition. 15 party alliances under Awami League, 7 party alliance under
BNP, Sramik Karmachari Okya Parisad (SKOP), Ainjibi Samanwai Parisad, Sammilito
Sangskritik Jote, Farmers society ignited anti-Ershad movement and spread the
movement to remote areas of the country.

Instability prevailed in the country because of hartals and blockades. At one point of the
demonstration, on 10 November 1987, Nur Hossain was killed at the zero point near
GPO. On the front and back of his body was written respectively 'Gonotontro Mukti
Pak, Soiracher Nipat Jak' (Let democracy be free', 'Let the autocracy fall down’. The
mass became more agitated from his death.

Sheikh Hasina and Khaleda Zia were arrested on 12 November 1987 and Ershad
government declared emergency on 27 November in the whole country. During a
public meeting of Sheikh Hasina in Chittagong on 24 January 1988 police fired openly
and indiscriminately on the public. She escaped death narrowly.

The whole country became agitated out of this issue. The siege of the secretariat on 10
October 1988 by the alliances and political parties made the political situation even
worse. On that day, 5 persons were killed and more than three hundred were wounded.
In the sequel of demonstration, in the year 1990 on 27 November Dr. Shamsul Alam
Milon was killed at the corner of TSC in Dhaka University and the anti Ershad move-
ment turned into mass up rising.

On this day, the government announced emergency and imposed curfew. The publica-
tions of newspapers were shut down by the journalists. The students and teachers of
Dhaka University brought out processions by disobeying the emergency and curfew
imposed by Ershad on 27 November.

Public took control over the roads and streets. Dhaka became a city of processions.
Under these circumstances, Shahabuddin Ahmed, the Chief Justice of the High Court
was made the Chief of interim government according to the outline given by the three
political alliances.

Ershad was forced to hand over the power to an interim Government headed by Justice
Shahabuddin, on 6th December, 1990. Ershad's long autocratic rule came to an end
because of the mass movement of the students and the common people.

Forma- 33, History of Bangladesh & World Civilization, Class-9-10

258 History of Bangladesh & World Civilization
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Who proclaimed "Indemnity Bill’ in 1975?
a. Khondoker Mushtaq Ahmed b) General Ziaur Rahman
c) Brigadier Khaled Musharraf d) Justice Sayem
2. What special strategy did Ziaur Rahman take to consolidate his power?
a. Increasing the military budget;
b. Introducing an internal political system;
c. Taking initiative to form SAARC.
Which one in below is correct?
ai b_ iiand iii
ce iandii d) i,jii, and iii
Read the passage below and answer question 3 and question 4
After seizing power to rule the country the undemocratic government legitimizes work
such as mass killing, taking power in an undemocratic way, etc, and provides protection
and legality to the work done by its likeminded people. In that way, an amended law is
made in the parliament to block the trial of the crimes.
3. Which amendment of Bangladesh relates to the activities said in the stem
or the above text?
a) First b) Second
c) Fourth d) Fifth
4. Through this amendment -
i. the rule of law was blocked;
ii. the image of the international community was damaged;
iii. the social life of people was affected.
Which one in below is correct?
a) i b) iandii
c) iand iii d) i, ii and iii

Military Rule and Subsequent Developments (1975-1990) 259
Creative question
1. Alene was bewildered by watching an anti-military and mass movement movie.
Due to the military oppression people were suppressed and confined. As a result,
political parties, general people, farmers, labourers, lawyers, doctors and cultural
units started agitation. They had the slogans of freedom of democracy. Nothing
could stop them-not even the bullets of the police. Moreover, these oppressive
measures made public more agitated and processions were seen throughout the
country.
a. Who established Upazilla system?
b. What do you understand by 'Indemnity Law'?
c. The stem reflects characteristic features of a certain movement in post-
independent Bangladesh. Explain what movement is it?
d. Evaluate the statement ' Democracy was freed through this movement’.
The End

Academic Year
9-10 History
Sop Wea-g (Grr BF, 28 Ft AS) CHT eT
Ls 3
ner

