DN .......aaS222.2...°¢;S
Home Science
Classes Nine-Ten
a. ~~ WES, 4 lf
ake Tiley Cadi ~ ptt he Le
J vs EF. NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH
reer

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a Textbook for classes nine and ten from the Academic Year 2013
e
Home Science
Classes Nine-Ten
Written by
Prof. Ismat Rumina

Soniya Begum
Gazi Hosne Ara

Shamsun Naher Bithi

Syeda Saliha Saliheen Sultana
Rehana Yasmin
Edited by
Prof. Laila Arjumand Banu
Prof. Syeda Nasrin Banu

Translated by

Prof. Rehana Begum

Prof. Rasheda Begum
Jahanara Begum

Syeda Tabassum Aziz

NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka
[All rights reserved by the publisher]
First Edition : December, 2012
Revised Edition : November, 2014
Reprint : August, 2017
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh
For free distribution by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Printed by :

PREFACE
The aim of secondary education is to make the learners fit for entry into higher
education by flourishing their latent talents and prospects with a view to building the
nation with the spirit of the Language Movement and the Liberation War. To make the
learners skilled and competent citizens of the country based on the economic, social,
cultural and environmental settings is also an important issue of secondary education.
The textbooks of secondary level have been written and compiled according to the
revised curriculum 2012 in accordance with the aims and objectives of National
Education Policy-2010.Contents and presentations of the textbooks have been
selected according to the moral and humanistic values of Bengali tradition and culture
and the spirit of Liberation War 1971 ensuring equal dignity for all irrespective of
caste and creed of different religions and sex.
The present government is committed to ensure the successful implementation of
Vision 2021. Honorable Prime Minister, Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina expressed her firm determination to make the country free
from illiteracy and instructed the concerned authority to give free textbooks to every
student of the country. National Curriculum and Textbook Board started to distribute
textbooks free of cost since 2010 according to her instruction.
Home science is a life oriented and vocational education. This education helps
learners acquiring appropriate ideas and competence related to four fields of home
science namely— Home and home management, child development and family
relationship, food and food management and clothing. It makes students expert and
tactful to reach ultimate goal by using limited asset, helps them fight against
unexpected incidents in home and outside by solving various problems in home
environment. The book appropriate development considering the facts to meets the
challenging of time.
I thank sincerely all for their intellectual labor who were involved in the process of
revision, writing, editing, art and design of the textbook.
Prof. Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

Table of Contents
[Ou | Hone Mangere SSC
“Four | Home Resource Management | 29:39
“Sx | GrowhandDewiopnentafChid | SPT
be
Remedies and Prevention 85-94
[Fiten | AtElnents and An indies ofTenie | _174185 |
‘Siseen | PiningandColowinginChhing | ~—a6189 |

Part-A
Home and Family Resource Management
After studying this unit we will be able to —

@ Describe the framework and objective of home management:

@ Explain different steps and procedures of home management:

@ Make proper decision:

@ Explain the qualities, duties and responsibilities of the head of the
family ;

@ Clarify the distinctiveness, classification and necessity of the home
resource as well as encourage others to use this resource properly;

@ Describe the concept, importance and procedure of preparing a budget
and set up monthly budget for the family:

@ Explain the necessity of management of time and energy;

@ Describe the technics of work simplification:

@ Explain the interior design and decoration of home:

@ Describe the asthetic aspects of decoration of home:

@ Describe the ways of maintaining healthy environment at home;

@ Make decorative items by recycling the unusable thing.

Chapter-1
Home Management
Lesson-1 Concept of Home Management
Natasha, Saira, Ariba and many of their friends decided that they would go
to "Shaheed Minar" (national monument for the martyrs of language
movement) at 6:30 a.m in the morning on 21 February. But it was already
6:30. Natasha could not wake up. She became upset as she was late. It was
not possible for her any more to go to "Shaheed Minar" then with her
friends. In this case Natasha should have given alarm on her watch or she
might have asked her parents to call her up. But she did not make the proper
use of her intelligence. And there was also lack of proper planning and
proper use of time. So it is clear that Natasha was missing something. You
may call it management. Existence of management is noticed in different
steps of personal, family and social life of human being. Management is
inseparably related with our daily life activities. To achieve the goal
everyone takes different actions while living in a family. He/she makes
planning, takes decision, organizes the works after consultation, controls the
situation of the work and finally evaluates the work. These courses of
actions are reflected in the home management system.
Management is inevitable and essential not only in running an organization
but also in running a family. To fulfill the needs of a family, it has to take
right decision with its limited resources. Members of a family do several
courses of actions to achieve its goal, or objective. Whereever some people
are working together to achieve a goal management is must there. So there is
the need of management in a family as well as an organisation.
Nickel and Dorsey have called the home management as the administrative
side of a family life. They have told that home management is planning,
organizing, controlling and evaluating of a family's human and material
resources to achieve its goal.
5S

Home Management 3
Home management is a continuous process that requires a right decision to
achieve the goal. If the definition of home management is illustrated, three
aspects are noticeable, such as-
@ Fixing up the goal or objective
@ Proper use of the resources
@ Gradual course of actions in using the resources - planning, organizing,
controlling and evaluating.
After fixing up the goal, the family is to proceed step by step getting the idea
of all sorts of resources. First of all, to do a work a proper planning is to be
taken. Next, the planned works are to be done in an organized manner. At the
last step it is necessary to evaluate the work, to see how much the work has
been successful. If the activities of management is completed in this way,
some new objectives are to be set up and to achieve those objectives, the
activities of management are to be started in a new way.
Home Management
Mental Physical
— | Total work procedure qe
Fo aed coon | Evaluating
i Human R r
Material Resources uman Resources
Achieving the Goal
Fig. : Framework of the concept of home management
Work : Prepare and display the Framework of the concept of home
% management in class room.
S
Q

4 Home Science
Lesson 2-Goal and its classifications:
What is Goal?
The key factor of home management is goal. Because all our activities centers
round the goal. To achieve any goal management is required. Necessity of
management arises where there are possibilities of achieving goals. In general,
the goal is nothing but what a person or a family wants to do or wants to
achieve. Aims or objectives are always in the conscious mind of a person
which can easily be understood and explained. Everybody always sets a goal in
his/her mind. Once a goal is achieved we set another goal. Specific goals help
us to proceed in right direction.
Every family possesses its own major and minor goals. Depending on the
values, we set our goals. For example one family gives emphasis on earning
money, another one wants to increase property and another family wants to
give its members' higher education.
Goal is a desired objective which has specific scope and it refers the activities
of a person. Without specific goal and clear expectation it can't be achieved.
When the goal is set, then the course of actions could be properly
accomplished. That means the goal makes the management easier and helps to
execute it successfully. Each of the members of the family has his/her own
goals. When something is desired to be done collectively, conflicts will be less
and achieving goals will be easier.
Types of goal
Nickel and Dorsey have divided the goal in three types. Such as:

@ Long term goal

@ Midterm goal

@ Immediate goal
Long term goal
Long term goal is considered as permanent goal. This goal is time consuming
and it always stays in mind. It influences on the midterm goal, so it's very
important. &%

Ss

Home Management 5

Midterm goal

To achieve the long term goal the family often sets midterm or short term goal.

These goals are more comprehensible than long term goal. Taking more

decision is needed to reach this goal.

Immediate Goal

These goals are minor in nature which does not need much work to be

done. Even a little work can help to achieve such goals. In other word

goals could be achieved immediately as they are identified.

Following examples will explain three different types of goals. Shoma is a

student of class IX. She wants to be an engineer. This is her long term goal.

She is in science group. She is preparing herself for getting successfully

through S.S.C. and H.S.C. examinations. She needs to be qualified for getting

herself admitted in Engineering University. So she is looking for the right tutor-

these are some midterm goals to achieve the long term goal.

To achieve her target she has to go to school regularly, study with attention,

complete the class work properly and achieve good result in class-are her

immediate goals.

Task - Set your specific goal. Prepare a list of your work to achieve that goal.

Lesson 3- Objective of the Home management

Scope of home management is not limited only at home. Outside of the home,

it is extended in the society and environment. Society is always changing.

Impact of the change of the society reflects on home and family. To adapt this

situation bringing change in personal and family life is very much essential,

which can be learned from home management.

Resources are limited according to our needs. To fulfill these needs taking right

decision and being efficient in using resources is inevitable. To increase the

efficiency level it is very important to know the nature and alternative uses of

the resources. In such situation home management plays an important role. In

present family is considered as the unit of economy. Source of the most of the
S economic activities are related with family such as income of the family,
N

6 Home Science
expenditure, savings, investment etc. On national economy family's economic
decisions are very much important. In this situation a person or family should
be concerned that as a consumer and buyer what are the rights they have and
how to protect these. Knowledge of home management helps to acquire
requisite skills in this area.
Aim of home management is to benefit the family as well as the society
through work oriented behavior. People can be successful by using his/her
knowledge and skills on management. This can bring accomplishment in
family and social life.
Specific objectives of Home management-
@ To accomplish expertise in using resources through planning,
organization, controlling and evaluation.
@ To set up and analyzing the goal on the basis of the values of person and family.
@ To build up a habitable environment in and outside of the home.
@ To enhance the skill to take decision and its implementation.
@ To become concerned on the rights and responsibilities of the consumer.
@ To identify the problems of daily life and the ways to solve that.
@ To decide ways to obtain personal and family economic solvency.
@ To increase efficiency in professional areas.
@ To get the opportunity to participate in development activities.
@ To adapt with modern lifestyle and to achieve effeciency in caring and
maintaining modern household equipment, tools, furniture etc.
@ To establish pollutionfree habitable environment.
@ To take active part with awareness regarding fuel crisis in present and
future.
By learning home management the learners can learn the qualities, which will
help them to ensure the welfare and progress of the family in present and
future. Knowledge of home management helps someone to adapt with the
difficulties and practical circumstances of home and workplace. «
3
aq

Home Management 7
Lesson 4- Process or Phases of Home Management

It is clear from the definition of home management that it is the total sum of a
continuous process to reach the family goal. These procedures are followed
consecutively. So they are called the steps or stages of home management
activities to achieve the goal of the family. Such as planning, organizing,
controlling and evaluating. This is a continuous process which we need to
follow consciously in our daily life activities. These activities rotate like a
cycle where home management plays the role of the executor of the activities.
The home manager needs to perform his/her duties as planner, organizer,
controller and evaluator.

Planning:

First step of home management is planning. What are the works to be done and
how to be done etc. have to be determined in ahead of time to achieve the goal
and thinking about this process is known as planning. In one word planning is
the forecasting of future work.

There are some matters which need to be considered while planning. Such as-

@ Planning has to be done by considering the opinion of all the members
of family and their convenience.

@ To achieve success in any activity while planning; the efficiency, ability,
experience, willingness to do the work etc. of the members has to be
considered. So to make proper plan good relation among the members is
a must. Good relation makes taking and execution of plan easier.

@ Planning has to be flexible. So that if needed change can be made. It is
essential to keep in mind that if any sudden crisis arises then the
situation should be favorable to solve the problem. Rather than this the
planning has to be simple.

@ Planning has to be accepted by all the members of family.

Organizing
Organization joins the activities of the family according to planning. It decides
which work has to be done where and how. By considering different resources
of family and which is to be used where and how, it is determined at the
o« _- organization level.
8 Organization includes which work to be done by whom, who has experience in

8 Home Science
that field, how to accomplish that work and what are the resources to be used.
Therefore in one word organization is establishing coordination among the
people and resources. There are three phases in organization-

@ On the first phase the person sets different activities to be done through
the steps to accomplish the work.

@ On the second phase the person arranges the sequence of the activities.

@ On third phase the person sets a work structure through that one or more
works to be done by different people.

As such it can be told that accomplishing any work applying the thoughtful
steps is organization.

Controlling

Controlling is an important step of home management. During the work
process it is required to monitor the development of work whether it is going
on according to the plan, or not. If required then the ways of work may be
changed. Followings are the chronological phases of controlling-

@ Being active in work: First of all to take initiative or being active in
work is necessary. Taking initiative to start any work is very important.
If the assigned responsibilities and the process of accomplishment are
known then it is easy to start the work.

@ Monitoring: At the second phase of work it is needed to observe its
development through monitoring. It is needed to ensure proper use of
resources, the success rate of the work in the given time etc. During the
procedure of work these should be observed.

e@ Adaptation/Adjustment: At the third phase of controlling it is needed to
adjust with the changed situation and handle the aroused problem.
According to the planning to meet the requirement of the changed
environment is adaptation or adjustment.

Evaluating

The last step of home management is evaluation. To asses or judge the result of

the work is evaluation. The result of the work depends on planning and
controlling. The contribution of the previous phases should be evaluated
precisely to achieve the goal. Without evaluation it is not possible to determine

the success or failure of the work. According to the goal the result has to be 8
assessed. If the desired outcome does not appear then it is needed to be %

Home Management 9
conscious about the planning and controlling. Through evaluation the success
or the level of success of the goal can be measured. If the goal is not achieved
then the causes of failure and the required alteration in future can be
determined. For accurate evaluation it is needed to consider the following
matters-

@ The planned works were done according to the goal

@ To determine the success and failure of the work

e If the failure occurs then finding out the reasons and later applying

modification can bring success in work.

Task- By following different steps of home management arrange a picnic.
Lesson 5- Decision Making
In home management decision making is an important matter. Because in its
different phases small/minor and big/major decisions are to be taken.
According to Gross and Scrandel, the main fact of decision making is to choose
the specific function from the different activities or ways to solve the problem.
Family may face the changed situation or problems at any time. To tackle this
situation it is needed to select the best option among the different alternative
options. It is called decision making.
A family may need to take personal or group decisions. The nature of the work
determines the type of decision of the family. Individual can make the small or
minor decisions of the family. Group decision plays vital role for doing any
creative work or solving any critical problem. In this case to find out the
alternatives, role of the group is more than an individual. Taking group decision
is more preferable to make an important decision of the family. Therefore the
work is done nicely and the chances of doing mistake become less.
Procedure or steps of decision making
There are several continuous steps of decision making. These are-

@ Understanding the nature of the problem

@ Finding the alternatives

@ Thinking about the alternatives

e@ Adapting one solution

@ Taking responsibility for the decided matter

10 Home Science
Understanding the nature of the problem: In the first step of taking the
decision, it is needed to understand the nature of the problem. If the nature of
the problem is unknown then it is not possible to solve it properly. Problems
may be simple or complicated. Minor problems can be solved by individual
decision. But taking decision in major problems requires intensive thinking.
Finding the alternatives: In second step of decision making it is required to
collect information and finding the alternative solutions of the problem. There
can be different alternatives to solve any problem. To analyze the alternatives
experience, knowledge and time are essential. Because of the limitations in
these areas it is difficult to select the right method and right decision can't be
taken. For example to go to a far place which mode of transport will be
appropriate is needed to be decided. In that case by considering the financial
condition, time, energy etc. the alternatives should be analyzed and then the
decision would be taken.

@ Thinking about the alternatives: During this step the alternatives to solve
the problem are evaluated elaborately. The outcome of all the alternatives
and the advantages and disadvantages of these are to be thought. The
decision maker is needed to be foresighted. Though many changes may
occur in future, due to that the expected result may not come. Due to the
limitations of timing different alternatives may not be thought. To do so it is
needed to give enough time to evaluate all the alternatives to take right
decision. At this level of decision making excellent intelligence is required.

e@ Adapting one solution: In this step of decision making it is needed to
select one alternative among all the alternatives. This step is very much
dominating. It influences the life style of people. Most of the time people
choose the rational alternative of the solutions though they try very less to
find out the best alternative. People become influenced by the time and the
condition of the family. As example, someone may buy the thing which is
well displayed in the shop. Adapting one solution depends on the condition
of the surrounding environment, age of the decision maker, need, income
etc. At the time of adapting a solution it is to be considered whether it is
enough effective and it can satisfy the mind completely or not.

@ Taking responsibility for the decided matter: The decision which has been
taken, by considering its result taking responsibilities is the last phase of
decision making. It should be implemented after taking the responsibility. %&

Home Management 11
Otherwise all the works done before will go in vain. So responsibility to
execute to the decided solution chosen from the alternatives must be taken.
The decision maker may alter the decision by consulting with the other
members of the family. Family decisions would be taken by the person who
has good relation with all the members and who is very much sincere
towards his/her duties and responsibilities.

Task- Identify the advantages and disadvantages of the individual decision
and group decisions taken by the family.
Exercise

Multiple Choice Questions

1. Who has told that home management is the administrative side of the

family?

a. Nickel and Gross b. Gross and Scrandel
c. Scrandle and Nickel d. Nickel and Dorsey

2. The home management system proceeds mainly focusing on-
a. Goal b. Planning
c. Controlling d. Evaluation

Read the following paragraph and answer questions 3 and 4:

Monowara Zaman is a housewife. She wants to open a poultry farm by
considering the financial benefit of the family. She arranges the essential
fund and recruits employee. After few months she comes to visit the farm
and notices several mismanagements there.

3. In Monowara Zaman's work process which is missing-

a. initiative b. decision making
ce)
8 c. organization d. controlling

12 Home Science
4. Monowara Zaman was supposed to-

i. to make plan

ii. to take initiative

iii. monitor the development of work
Which one is correct among followings?

a. iand ii b. iand iii

c. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii

Creative Question

1. Saiham is a student of class IX. He wants to be a doctor in future. Parents
are noticing that Saiham doesn't want to go to school very often. He doesn't
have adequate interest in studies. After discussing the matter in family
Saiham's mother gets some specific responsibility.

a. What is the key factor of home management?

b. Write clearly that how it would be easy to achieve the goal?

c. Explain what are the deficiencies Saiham has in his activities to achieve the
goal?

d. Evaluate the measures Saiham's family has taken.

2. Today is Khadiza Khatun's youngest daughter's birthtday. Suddenly she has
decided to invite guests for the occasion. As her husband is sick she sends
her son to the market. She gives her elder daughter to entertain the guests
who is very much shy in accompanying. During the program she supervises
constantly. After the program she feels that she was supposed to be more
careful.

a. What is the first step of home management?

b. What does the home management mean?

c. Explain the faults of Khadiza Khatun?

d. Analyze Khadiza Khatun's phases of works as an arranger. S

Chapter 2
Home Manager
Lesson 1- The Qualities of Home Manger
Every human being feels the essentiality of home for some personal and social
reasons. The goal of human mainly achieved at home. The wholehearted effort,
mutual understanding and cooperation of all the members of family create
peaceful environment in family. Therefore appropriate and efficient home
management is needed. Proper home management can make a simple home as
unique. And who plays the major role in home management, he/she is the
home manger. Both the parents in the family can perform the responsibility of
home manager. Home manager is the main centre of all the activities of the
home. On his/her management depends family's happiness-peace, good
financial condition, and disciplined home environment. Home economist
Nickel and Dorsey, 1950 notified that home management is the administrative
part of family life. Home manager leads this administration successfully with
his/her energy, ability and diversified skills. To perform this hard job the home
manager must possess some qualities. These qualities are-
Intelligence Enthusiasm
Rationality Creativity
Perseverance Adaptability
Self-control Knowledge about human nature
Personality
Intelligence: A home manger must be intelligent. Person's observation ability,
considering the surrounding condition, eagerness to learn etc. represents
his/her intelligence. Analyzing the situation by understanding the problem,
using previous experience while needed depend on intelligence. For bringing
success in different activities of the family, home manger must be intelligent.
Enhancing the beauty of the home, bringing discipline, require taking any
decision intelligence. Manager can meet all the needs with his/her intelligence
by using limited resources of the family.
Enthusiasm: One of the special qualities of home manger is enthusiasm. No
work gets success without encouragement and enthusiasm. Trying to
% accomplish the work with sincerity according to the necessity and importance
S
N

14 Home Science

of the work is encouragement and enthusiasm. This quality of home manger
spreads in other members. With enthusiasm all the works can be done with
interest and happiness. It is also seen that many plan can't be implemented due
to the lacking of enthusiasm. As such the goal can't be achieved.

Rationality Judgment: The person who is capable of analyzing the justice or
injustice, betterment etc. of family and can give neutral judgment is considered as
judgmental person. In every aspect of life one home manger should be judgmental.
Arising unusual complication is very natural in different times and activities. If the
home manger is very much judgmental then he/she can handle it easily. To meet
the need of the family the judgmental home manager needs to decide what is more
important and what is optional. For example, judgment includes taking the
decision by considering the fact of selecting school for the young child of the
family, standard of that school, distance of the school from home etc.

Creativity: To create attractive and diversified home environment, something
new is required. That is the symbol of creativity in everyone's eye. The home
manager has to posses that creativity which creates innovative things with
his/her imaginary power. With the creativity it is easy to make planning of any
work and the result can be assumed without difficulty. If any preplanned work
needs alteration then it is easy to handle with the creativity. For example it can
be said that a home manager can guide with his/her creativity while changing
home to select, buy and decorate the new furniture.

Perseverance: Without perseverance no work gets success. Complete a work
properly till its ending is perseverance. For this quality of the home manager
any hard work becomes easy. Patience, tolerance, concentration etc. help to be
perseverant. If a special work doesn't come under control while doing once, it
can be done by doing several times. To achieve success in different activities
the home manager must have this quality. To guide the children and make them
study this quality plays an important role.

Adaptability: As we are living in the changing environment, often we face
different alterations. Home manager must have adaptability or adjustability in
any altered situation. As example it can be said that it is necessary to give
treatment on time if any person becomes sick in family. If he/she stays at home
then proper care to be given. Or he/she can be admitted in hospital if doctor
suggests. In this case by adapting with the situation all functions should be
done. Home manager should have the ability to adjust in any type of situation. S
He/She who will be able to adapt easily, he/she can control the situation easily. “%

Home Manager 15
Self-control: While going through normal life there can be different problems
aroused. During the crisis period of family keeping the emotion under control
is self-control. A good manger must be self-controlled. By possessing this
quality many critical problems can be solved. If the ability of self-control
exists then it is easy to maintain good relation among the family members. In
family sometimes misunderstanding happens among the family members
which hamper the good relationship. In this situation the home manager can
control the situation by being self- controlled. Without any excitement as such
peace will be maintained in family by resolving the misunderstanding.
Knowledge about human nature: To understand the nature of human is a
special quality of a home manager. Everybody is different from each other.
Different persons of the family do not posses same nature, behavior,
liking-disliking, temper-mood etc. To maintain peaceful environment in family
it is essential to know about the overall behavioral pattern of all the members
of family. A home manager can come to know about the human nature through
observation and practice. Therefore he/she can resolve any problem easily
which is created by the members of the family. Children expect love-affection,
elder persons expect respect-obedience from the other members of the family.
To do a work children need command, elder persons need advice. It helps to
maintain discipline and peace in family.
personality:The expression of one's conducts, conversation and taste is called
personality. A home manager must have an attractive personality. The manners
of a home manager should be liked by all the members of the family. He or she
should have decency in conducts, dress-up and conversation. He/she must have
the qualities like-justice, responsibility, refinement etc.
With the integration of the above qualities a home manger can have excellent
personality. The person who possesses this kind of personality gets obedience
and cooperation from others. As such he becomes successful in any kind of
management.

2

&

16 Home Science
Lesson 2- Duties and Responsibilities of Home Manager
Already we have known the qualities of the home manger. There are different types
of work in a family. A home manger can expose and develop his/her qualities by
being conscious to his/her assigned works. He/she has to be always active to
perform the duties and responsibilities. Due to the lacking of the home manager to
perform his/her duties and responsibilities disaster may happen in family. For
efficient management the home manager performs different small and big
responsibilities. He/she is responsible for the overall activities of the family. To
perform all the works properly is home manager's duty and responsibility. Other
members become active after getting his/her instruction.
The home manager has to take the right decision to meet the needs by using the limited
resource of the family. Beside it is also his/her responsibility to take right measures by
being aware of by whom the work is to be done, how, when and why it is to be done.
Assigning the specific responsibility to individual and supervise these are also his/her
responsibility.
Duties and responsibilities of home manager in family are-

@ Create proper work condition at home

e@ Ensure proper arrangement of income and expenditure of the family

@ Maintain good relation with the family members

e@ Ensure family's proper safety

@ Develop good utilization behavior among the family members

@ Maintain suitable work environment
Create proper work condition at home- Distributing the work of the family
among all the members is one of the important responsibilities of the home
manager. There are many works those are done inside the home such as
cooking-serving, keeping home neat and clean, washing the clothes, helping
children in their studies, nursing the elderly or sick person, arranging entertainment
etc. There are some activities which need to do outside of the home such as
shopping, going to the laundry, gardening, taking information of the relatives etc.
According to the family members’ energy, ability, age, work spirit etc. home
manager distributes these works among them. Until the work is done it is home
manager's responsibility to monitor that and being cooperative to the members.
Ensure proper arrangement of income and expenditure of the family- It is essential
to ensure income to meet the needs of everyone of the family. With the earned money
they buy all the required goods and services. If the income is ensured than there willbe = &

Home Manager 17
no scarcity or complain in family. As a result there will be peace and pleasure. Home
manger has to look after this matter.

Proper use of the income is to be ensured by the home management- According to
the income a planning is required for expenditure, which is known as budget. It
needs to be ensured to meet all the requirements of the family by using the limited
resources of family through appropriate buying principles. As well as it is also the
home managers responsibility to save money for future security. Due to his/her
proper financial management all the members of family grow good habit of
spending, become economical and have saving tendency.

Maintain good relation with the family members- In a family the members
are different aged and relation is different too. Several activities are related
with home management. Through united effort of all the members of the family
these are performed. If the interrelation among the members is good then there
exists disciplined and peaceful condition. Home manager will maintain good
relation with others. Except this he has to be careful that other members should
have respect for each other. By considering the need and requirement of the
members of the family he/she has to take right measures to meet these in the
easiest way. Sometimes there is difference of ideology between the elderly and
young generation of the family. In this case home manger needs to understand
the nature of the elderly and young persons and handle the situation with
patience and tolerance. If the need of all the members is fulfilled then gradually
the relation improves with the home manager.

Ensure family's proper safety- Home manager should be very much careful
regarding the overall safety of the family. The safety of home, members of the
family and the commodity is to be arranged. The home should be safe and well
guarded. For house safety keeping fire extinguisher, good drainage system,
disbursement of the garbage in right place, keeping the home pollution free etc. are
the overall responsibility of the home manger. He/she has to be careful about the
members' physical and mental safety. First aid is needed to be kept to give primary
comfort if any family member has an accident. Dangerous things should be stored
in safe place. To ensure good health for the sick person good treatment has to be
arrange. For the safety of the commodities there should be proper storage facilities
in home which is the responsibility of the home manager.

Develop good utilization behavior among the family members- The duties
and responsibilities of home manager have increased with the present

18 Home Science
mechanical life and with the development of science. It is needed to notice that
the mental growth of the children is parallel according to changed world. For
that arranging the modern technology for the children is also a responsibility of
the home manger. And he/she has to put effort for selecting the right things as
food, clothing, housing etc. for the members of the family. As example, selection
of food to be right, selection of cloth should be according to the need and social
tules- regulations, house should be hygienic. To achieve these goals it is home
manager's responsibility to take conscious decision so that the need of members
can be fulfilled according to the capability. He/she also needs to take initiative to
increase the capability of limited home resources to meet the need.
Maintain suitable work environment- Home manager's responsibility is to
ensure proper work environment where all the members can accomplish their
work properly. If the work environment is good and comfortable then it is possible
to do the work with pleasure and enthusiasm. Such as, well ventilated and noise
free place is needed for studying. If all the educational elements like book,
exercise book, pen, pencil etc. are kept in specific place then it is easy to use. In
such environment study can be done without disturbance and with comfort. In this
way, the home manager has to ensure good environment for every work.
Rather than the above jobs home manager has to arrange several family
programs, different activities according to the occasion and seasons. To
perform these work home manager has to accomplish various important
responsibilities.
It has to be kept in mind that the home manager performs the hard job of the
overall management of home. It is the duty of all the members to cooperate
with him/her as much as possible. All the members have to work together and
perform the assigned responsibilities with ut-most sincerity with due respect to
him/her, obey the commands, instructions to perform the jobs. The family
affairs are done by the home manager's perfect management. All the family
members have to be sincere to their duties and responsibilities so that he can be
successful to perform his responsibilities. As such it can be expected that the
goal of the family will be achieved through proper home management.

Task: How can you help your family's home manager to perform his/her

duties and responsibilities? Write that. =

g

Home Manager 19
Lesson 3- Social duties and responsibilities of home
manger
Family is the basic foundation of the society. From the family, the members get
knowledge about the social rules-regulations, ideology-values and develop
socially. The home manger can involve him/her as well as the members of the
family in various social organizations and contribute in social welfare. Such as,
during different calamities he can serve for the mankind as being involved in
Leo club, Girls guide, Red Crescent etc. Home manager can teach the family
members about the rules-regulations of the society and can ensure maintaining
relation with others and attending in different programs. Members of the family
can be developed as good citizens by teaching them etiquette, ideal values.
Through educating them toleration of other's opinion, keeping patience in
crisis, helping others, socialization can build the moral character of the family
members. As such can be possible to stop the ruin of society as well as reduce
the crime.
Home manager whether it is father or mother must make the family members
respectful loving, caring foreach other. Side by side home manager makes the
family member interested in perticipating in various social occasions/functions
like-marriage ceremony, birthday, Milad, Eid, Puja, Christmasday, death-
anniversary. Moreover home manager must make the family members eager in
helping the distressed.
Home manager can develop the family members as responsible citizens by
educating them about nation, national program, rights and duties of the
citizens. The social duties and responsibilities of the home manager will be
obtained when he/she could make members social by teaching social values.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. What quality is needed to become successful in work?
a. Judgmental b. Creativity
c. Perseverance d. Enthusiasm

ve)

Sy

Q

20 Home Science
2. Ifa home manger posses the quality of self-control then-
i. Family relation continues well
ii. Easy to solve the family problems
iii. Behavioral characteristics of the members can be known
Which one is correct among followings?
a. iand ii b. iand iii
c. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii
Read the following paragraph and answer questions 3 and 4:
Saima's elder son watches T.V. and reads story books during free time. And the
youngest son goes to the adjacent field of the home for playing whenever gets
time. One day Saima asked her elder son to go to the shop for buying
something and he became irritated.
3. In which quality Saima has lacking?
a. Knowledge about human nature b. Adaptability
c. Ability to judge d. Intelligence
4. What Saima has to do to learn that quality?
a. observing the behavior of children __b. being affectionate to the children
c. keeping patience d. doing the work by herself
Creative Question
1.Sanjida Khatun is living happily with her husband and children. She
encourages her children in various ways to perform well in studies. But often
she becomes irritated to entertain the guests at home.
a. Whois the centre point of the activities of family?
b. Why is it needed to create good work condition at home? Explain.
c. Which quality Sanjida Khatun has exposed about the studies of children? Explain.
d. Is the issue of entertaining the guests of Sanjida Khatun matches with
the qualities of skilled home manager? Analyse. x
g

Chapter-3
Home Resource

Lesson 1-2 Family Resources, Characteristics of Family
Resources
Every family has some sort of resources. By using these resources through
nice, suitable and normal lifestyle family leads to specific goal. Prime
resources of a family are human and the elements collected by them. There are
some people who do not have money, land, house but the resources the person
possesses e.g. personality, education, time and energy etc. by using these they
may not be financially sound but by preventing wastage family can increase its
physical resources.
In every family it is seen that the master of the family earns money by using his
educational qualification, time, energy, patience, efficiency etc. And the
mistress of the family may not earn but with her educational qualification,
time, energy, patience, activeness she can handle that money properly to meet
the needs of the family and tries to increase the overall resources too.
Resource’ is the basic element of home management. Without resource the
goal can't be achieved. In Economics the material or things which help to
eliminate people's poverty and which has exchange value that is resource or
wealth. But in Home Economics through which the family meets all the needs
and achieve its ultimate goal that is resource. Such as: money, land, house, all
the commodities and energy of home, time, health etc. As such we can say that,
the one by using that we get benefit, can meet our need, can eliminate poverty
and help to achieve the goal is the resource.
Characteristics of Resources
Resources are the tool to meet our every need. We are benefitted by using
resources. The characteristics of the resources are:
1. Utility 2. Accessibility 3.Limitation 4. Inter-change ability
5. Manage ability
1. Utility: The ability of the commodities/elements/goods/things to eliminate
people's poverty is utility. People want to get those commodities which have utility.
Because people want to use that material: that have the characteristic of utility to

eo meet their need. So utility is the one of the characteristics of material or resource.

S

AQ

22 Home Science
Utility depends on education, intelligence, place, time, size, ownership and
creativity. Like in education the utility of the book is more. To make the
nutritious food with less cost the knowledge and intelligence of nutrition has
more utility. In summer water and fan have more utility The utility of food is
more when hunger appears. When thirsty, the utility of water increases. Yet
again the utility of the same material varies from person to person. Such as, the
utility of the betel leaf is more to the person who eats this, but who doesn't eat
this, there is no utility of this to him.

In four ways the utility can be increased-

a. Changing the dimension- Such as- when the grain is boiled to cook rice,
powdered rice to make pitha (native cake) then its utility increases.

b. Timely use- We save money in the bank, if the money can be used to buy
land or house then the utility of the money will be increased.

c. By transferring in another place- The utility of the material can be increased
by transferring the place. Such as, in Rajshahi area mangoes are more
available. The utility of this mango can be increased by transferring it in
other areas.

d. By meeting the need- The need of one thing is very high in a particular time,
e.g. while thirsty the need of water is high. During examination the need of
paper and pen is high.

2. Accessibility: The resource should be accessible. To use the resource it is to
be accessible or owned. Rarely other's money can be used for own use. Right
on resource can't be established if it is not accessible. Resource of others can be
used only if it is borrowed or gifted. The ownership of accessible resource
depends on its quality characteristic and use. E.g. as much as the land is fertile
the owner will be that much benefitted. If the money saved in bank can't be
used when needed then the money doesn't have much value.

To get some resources practice is essential. Such as: skill, good health etc.

3. Limitation: Limitation is one of the main characteristics of the resources.
Resource is limited qualitatively and quantitatively. Such as: energy is
qualitatively limited and time is quantitatively limited.

But the limitation of any resource is elastic. Such as: when a teacher teaches in
a class, then all the students can't acquire knowledge equally because of the 2
limitations in personal intelligence and interest. Limitation of time is universal  &

Home Resource 23
On the other side limitation in energy varies from person to person. But
through proper management limitation in time and energy can be controlled.

4. Inter-change ability: Resource is interchangeable. We can inter-change in

some ways;

@ Using the alternative resource: Alternative means using one instead of
the other one. Like, eating bread instead of rice. Using paper or cloth
made bag instead of plastic bag etc.

@ Multiple uses: One resource can be used in many ways. Such as, dining
table and chair can be used for studying, ironing, meeting etc.

@ Trade: Resource is trade able. Such as- trading money for buying thing.

@ Convertible: One resource can be converted to another one. Such as-
with the old sharee making katha, curtain, making cloth of children. As
such the use of resources increase.

@ Create: By using one resource another resource can be made. Such as
through cultivation producing corps. Producing vegetable on the roof of
home.

5. Manageability: Manage is using the resources properly. People either
consciously or unconsciously follow the system of management, e.g.,
while building house time, knowledge, skill, money etc. resources are
used. To use these resources different steps or phases like- planning,
organizing, controlling and evaluating are essential.

For the manageability of the resources we become benefitted. Such as-

@ Goal can be achieved

@ Resource can be increased

@ Financial condition develops

@ Scarcity and crisis can be handled

@ Satisfaction can come

Task- ‘Resources are inter-changeable' write with examples how this
characteristic can be applied during crisis time.

oy
ES

24 Home Science
Lesson 3-Classification of the Resources
Every human being owns some resources. So, to increase the consciousness on
resources and to manage properly, knowledge on the classification of resources
is very essential.
Resource can be classified mainly in two types-
1. Human resource 2. Material resource
Resource
=
Knowledge Ability and Skill
National and Social facilities
1. Human Resources- This increases through human's quality and practice.
Such as: time, knowledge, energy, skill, education etc. In every family there
is more than one member. The family goes forward nicely and can achieve
the goal if it uses properly the time, energy, knowledge, skill of every
member according to their ability. Family members’ skill, expertise, attitude
make management easy and reduces the wastage of non-human or material
resources and brings enrichment. Like- expending as budget. Budget ensures
proper utilization of money and reduces wastage of money.
On the other side if the time is scheduled then every work can be done on time
and success comes in life. The importance of human resource is immense for
proper management and in enhancing the material resources of the home. The x
human resources are discussed below- S

Home Resource 25
Time- Home economists have considered time as human resource. Time is
equally important to young-old, rich-poor, for all people. 24 hours are fixed for
everyone. The person who can use this properly can be successful and
established in life.
Energy- Energy is of two types - physical energy and mental energy. To do any
work both types of energy are required. Success can be achieved by enhancing
the skill to use energy through suitable habit, practice and thoughtful planning.
Knowledge- Knowledge is the essential resource to lead the home properly.
Knowledge of nutrition, clothing, taking care of child, managing home,
religion and other subject specific knowledge can establish one person in
family and in workplace.
Outlook- Outlook varies from person to person. Thinking, consciousness,
feelings, belief etc. are the integration of person's outlook. In adolescence
child's outlook develops from parents' thought process. Later with the
development of age child's self outlook expands. This outlook guides the life.
Ability and skill- The ability and skill of the members of the family help to
achieve the goal of the family. So ability and skill are family's resources. The
more the family members are capable and skilled, the more that family is
superior. But all the members of family do not posses same ability and skill. If
the works are divided among the members according to ability and skill then
the quality of work becomes high and good relation exists in family.

Task- Write the importance of human resources.
2. Material resources: The materials and services that can meet the need is
non-human or material resource. Such as: money, land, house etc. Rather than
these social and national facilities, like- road, market, school-college, transport
facility etc. meet our needs and make the home life easier.
Money- Money is a material resource. It has exchange value and transferable
to another hand, hard to get and calculable. The importance of money is
immense in human life. With money we buy commodity and service. Its proper
use ensures sound financial condition in life.
Land, House and Ornament- These are exchangeable, measureable and
ownership is transferable. But proper planning is required to use these. Making
unplanned property creates problem.

26 Home Science

National and Social Facilities- The facilities we get from the society is social

resource. Road, communication facility, electricity, gas, school-college, market

etc. are national and social facilities which people get from right. Park,
amusement centre etc. eliminates monotonousness from family life. The people
of any country enjoy these facilities as their inherent right.

Lesson 4- The necessity of proper uses of resources-

The prime aim or objective of using resources is to ensure satisfaction and

achieving goal through its uses. Our needs are unlimited, but there is

limitation in resources. To meet these unlimited needs with the limited
resources, it is essential to use the resources properly.

@ Proper uses of resources help the family to increase income, reduce
expenditure, and saving money. Through proper use of family members!
time, energy, ability, skill, intelligence etc. human resources, income of
family can be increased and expenditure can be reduced. Such as planting
vegetables on the front compound of house, poultry farming, cloth making
at home etc.

@ Supply of resources increase through proper use of resources. Such as- if the
mistress of the home distributes the responsibilities of the work among the
family members then she can save her time and energy. She can use that
time and energy in the development activities of the family or enjoy the free
time for recreation. As such the members of the family improve their sense
of duty and responsibility.

@ Balanced distribution of human and material resources is done through
proper use of the resources. As a result the relationship among the family
members stays well. Like- maintaining budget, following time table. As
such with few resources more satisfaction comes and can get mental
happiness.

@ To increase the longevity of the resource its proper use is essential. Different
appliances of home especially the refrigerator, iron, pressure cooker, oven
etc. need proper care and maintenance which give financial and mental
satisfaction.

be)

Home Resource 27
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. On which one utility does depend?
a. Knowledge b. Intelligence
c. Outlook d. Skill
2. Which one is more needed to manage the family?
a. Physical strength b. Mental strength
c. Knowledge d. Time
Read the following paragraph and answer questions 3 and 4:
Mr. Haider couldn't supervise the work while building the house. The person
who was supervising he completed the work very fast. After few days crack
was seen on the wall.
3. Which method Mr. Hyder could use to avoid this situation?
a. using the alternative resources
b. increasing the use of resources
c. following the management system
d. using the resources in multiple activities
4. What is the reason of the crack in Mr. Hyder's house?
i. not giving time
ii. not achieving goal
iii. not following the steps of management
Which one is correct among followings?
a. iandii b. iand iii
a c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
4

28 Home Science

Creative Question

1. Aysha Begum is a house wife. She completes her work with limited
resources. She makes curtain, rug etc. of the house with her old sharee if
needed. She meets the requirement of the family with her own effort.
Everyone of the family is pleased on her.

a. From which side the energy is limited?

b. What type of resources is transferable to another hand?

c. Through the activity of Aysha Begum which characteristic of resource
has been seen? Explain.

d. Everyone is satisfied on Ayesha Begum due to her proper use of
resources- Analyze.

2. Rahima Khatun is a house wife. Other members of the family are getting
cooperation and help from her to do the household works. She completes
her house hold work in little time and takes care of the poultry by herself
and tries to meet the need of family. Her college going son wastes her hard
worked money with many excuses. He doesn't listen anything.

a. What is utility?
b. What does the limitation of resource mean?
c. What kind of resource does Rahima's son spoil? Explain.
d. Is Rahima Khatun expert in using different resources to manage the home?
Evaluate.
3
8

Chapter-4
Home Resource Management

Lesson 1- Money Management- Budget, Necessity of
Budget and Heads of Budget
Money is considered as a material resource in home management. Money is
one of the material resources as well as most important. Importance of money
is immense in life. To meet any of human's need money is the most essential.
By exchanging money we get our essential commodities and service. Through
proper money management we can meet our unlimited needs with the limited
resources. Money management means how the money will be used to achieve
the goal or to meet the needs. The methods of home management are
applicable for money management too. Such as- by meeting the needs to
achieve the goal, implementing that plan and evaluating at the end. Family
earns money in several ways. Like all other resources money is also limited. As
money is the only media of exchange so we can get the needed goods with the
money. We can save money for future security. The strategy or technique that is
applied to use this valuable resource according planning is known as budget.
Budget
Budget is the pre-plan for money expenditure. More specifically it can be said
that, for a particular time, expenditure of fixed income and pre-plan for savings
is budget. The expected income in which areas, when and how much will be
expended is writtin in budget. If the expenditure is pre-planned then wastage
does not take place with that valuable money. In addition our all needs become
fulfill.
Necessity of Budget
Budget is an excellent principles to spend money. Budget helps us to meet our
all needs with limited resources. Following are some mentionable necessity of
budget -
@ Gives idea about the income and expenditure of the family
@ Prevents the misuse of money and helps to bring solvency
@ Helps to take measure to save for the future
@ Meets the important needs on priority basis
@ Helps to bring cautiousness among the family members in spending money
@ Saves time and energy
@ Can give satisfaction by fulfilling all the needs of the family members

vey

3

N

30 Home Science
Heads of the Budget
To make the realistic budget these are to be fixed that in which heads money
will be spent. The heads spending are needed in family life; these are known as
the heads of budget. According to the importance, the heads are arranged in
such a way where things are determined to be included according to their
heads. The heads are arranged according to the need of the life style-
Food Medical
a. Dry Grocery: rice, wheat, pulses, sugar, | a. Doctor's fee
tea, different spices etc. . r
b. Raw Grocery: Fish, meat, egg, milk, ealcine
vegetable, fruits etc.
Housing Family = member's personal
expenses
a. House rent
os a. Pocket money
b. Electricity, gas, water, etc.
. . b. Expense for recreation
c. Tax on house, repair and maintenance
Cloth Other expenses
a. Purchase of dress and cloth a. To attend guest
b. Tailoring of cloth b. Gift and donation
c. Cleaning and ironing c. Conveyance
d. Newspaper, magazine etc.
e. Maid's salary
Education Savings
a. Tuition fees for school and college a. Provident fund
b. Books and stationeries b. Bank, insurance, prize bond,
savings certificate etc.
c. Fees for house tutor
Task- ‘Realistic budget saves time and energy'-give your opinion with logical reasons.|
2
S
N

Home Resource Management 31

Lesson 2- The Rules of Preparing Budget

There are some rules to prepare the budget, by following these, realistic budget

can be made. As every work needs to follow some rules to complete properly

and nicely, budget doesn't become realistic and effective if the rules are not
followed. The rules to prepare budget are described below-

@ Usually budget is done on monthly basis. So it is needed to determine the
expected income of the month. To calculate the income all the income
sources of the family is to be considered. As the budget is prepared with
money, so the total financial income of the family is to be determined.

@ The budget is to be prepared for the specific time, according to the family
members' need of commodity and service. Essential commodities to be
categorized in main sectors and the other things of the specific category
needs to be mentioned.

@ Before determining the prices of the listed commodities, actual market price
of those things should be known. Later total price of all of these is to be
included in the budget. To do so it is good to take the opinion of the family
members. From the members' different information about the price of the
commodities can be known. Without having a clear idea about the price of
different commodities, implementation of the budget becomes difficult.

@ There should be balance between the expected income and expenditure.
After knowing the total income, expected expenditure to be calculated so
that there is a balance between income and expenditure. Expenditure should
never be more than income. But by increasing the family income and
reducing the expenditure this situation can be handled.

@ How much will be spent in which area is to be settled. Usually for food
maximum allocation is given. In middle class families' budget for food
requires 40 to 60 percent allocation. On the other side in lower class
families this allocation can be 80 percent of the income. As much as the
income increases the percentage of expenditure in food sector becomes less,
Usually less budget allocation is given in saving, treatment etc.

@ At the end the budget has to be analyzed for its implementation. There are
some points which to be considered to make practical budget. Such as- to

20 consider the needs of every person, to meet the crisis situation it is needed
R to keep extra money in hand, keeping focus in long term goal etc.

32 Home Science
Sample of Family Monthly Budget
Monthly income of the family - TK 30,000
Family members - 4 people
Estimated Total % of Total
Expenditure (Taka) | expenditure (Taka) | Expenditure
1, Food Item
a. Dry Grocery 5000/- 12000/- 40%
b. Raw Grocery 7000/-
2. Housing
a. House rent 7000/- 30%
b. Utility bills like- electricity, water, gas etc. 2000/- 9000/-
3. Clothing
a. Purchase of dress and cloths 1000/-
b. Tailoring of cloth 400/- 1600/- 5.33%
c. Washing and Iron 200/-
4. Education
a. Tuition fees for school and college 1000/-
b. Books, note books and stationeries 500/- 3500/- 11.67%
c. Fees for house tutor 2000/-
5. Medical
a. Doctor's fee 400/- 600/- 2%
b. Medicine 200/-
6. Family member's personal expenditure
a. Pocket money 300/-
b. Recreation expense 400/- 700/- 2.33%
7. Other expenditure
a. Guest 400/-
b. Gift and donation 400/- 2200/- 7.33%
c. Conveyance 200/-
d. Newspaper, Magazine etc. 200/-
e. Salary for maid 1000/-
savings | gue | toe | 1330
Pt 300007-
<
Note- Teacher will explain this budget according to the persent market price. §

Home Resource Management 33
Comment- In the mentioned budget the income and expenditure is equal. This
type of budget is called balanced budget. When the expenditure is more than
the income then that is called deficit budget. Apart from these where the
expenditure is less than the income then it is surplus budget. Surplus budget is
the best budget. Deficit budget is never expected, because in this type of
budget the amount of loan increases.

Task- With the help of your guardian make your family's budget.
Lesson 3- Management of Time and Energy - Necessity
of the Time-Schedule and Matters of Concern
Among the human resources of family time is one of the important resources.
Time is such a kind of resource which does not stay constant and does not wait
for any one. Time is the most limited resource which can't be expanded or
reduced in any condition. Time can never be saved. Rather it is used in
different sort of activities. The person who engages himself/herself with the
time appropriately through different significant activities, he/she becomes more
successful in life. With the proper utilization of time, people individually and
socially can make valuable contribution.
For proper utilization of time every person needs to make a plan for 24 hours.
From the beginning of the day to till beginning of the next day what are the
activities to be done during that time, when to be done and every day how much
time will be spent for that specific activity etc. need to be considered to prepare
time schedule. In every person's life as the time is his/her own resource as such
the time schedule is different from each other. According to every person's habit,
likings, need, requirement etc. the time schedule is being prepared.
Necessity of the Time-Schedule
To prepare the time schedule all the daily activities have to be written according
to time. The schedule has to be kept in such a place so that it is easily visible. If
the activities are done by following the schedule, formerly that will become
habit. As a result the habit of completing the works on time develops and the
tendency of misusing the time reduces. Success can come in life through
utilizing the time properly. Followings are the necessity of time schedule-
Creates idea about the work to be done - When someone works with a time
schedule he/she can have a clear idea about all the works. Which work is more

34 Home Science
important than the other, which work is better, which can be avoided—all these
factors are considered at the time of preparing time schedule.

@ It creates the habit of working on time - Since all the works to be done in
a fixed time, it creates the habit of doing work within the time frame and
ultimately in future it becomes as a habit

@ It increases the idea about relation between time and activity - Time
schedule for work gives the idea about the work/activity for which time
can/cannot be changed or rearranged. For example, time for visiting
physician,going to school or religious activities can't be changed, whereas
sleeping time, chatting time or study time can be rearranged.

@ It gives the idea about required time for each work - In the time
schedule, time for each work is given. This gives the idea about the
required time for individual work or activity.

@ Co-relation between work and recreation - Time schedule for work always
give emphasis on recreation. This helps to increase motivation on work.

@ Increases work efficiency and speed - Work can be done on time if time schedule
is set accordingly. This ultimately becomes a habit and helps to improve the
efficiency in work. It also helps to increase inspiration in creative work.

Points to be considered in preparing time schedule

While making the time table following points to be taken into account

@ Determine the works to be done in a day

@ Prioritize the work according to their importance

@ Time schedule should be done in consultation with the family members

@ Time for each work to be set according to its need

@ Family condition, facilities and family members habit to be considered

@ Those works which could be done together should be put together to reduce time

@ Family works and activities to be divided into daily, weekly and monthly
basis. Weekly or monthly works should be separated from daily works

@ In the time schedule, allocation of time to be given on work, rest and sleep

@ After hard work, easy work to be set. This will help to get enthusiasm in work

@ Time table should be flexible, so that it could be reviewed if require

Task - Show in a chart what benefit could be obtained if the work is done as a
per the schedule of time. s

Home Resource Management 35
Lesson 4 - Preparation of daily time schedule

If the daily time schedule is followed work can be finished in right time. This
encourages in doing more work with efficiency. In student life if the time
schedule is followed, it helps to achieve success. Everybody should work on
time and should not waste the valuable time.

Sample of daily time schedule of a student when school is open
[Wateupinthemoming SOC
[Fnshioret «|S OSASS mies —_—|

Brush teeth and wash face 5.45-5.55
[riomeiganasy | |
| Cleanandtidythebed ———SS«d|~SC«SWOSC*~SCTO mines ‘|
[As perschoolrouine tudyandiaethebook] 605705 | __ Ot hour

uniform and take rest
Planch 285251 mints J
[Fiishhomewok ——————~dt SCO = C« Fr |
[ PrepareandoferaRemoonpayer | _s00sa5_[__Tminutes |
[Bevayandbrahhar | asa «| aSminutes |
inemstniy es |
time with family
[ep ether orsevingevering sacks [700730 | S0minues
.

36 Home Science
Sample of daily time schedule of a student when school is closed
[Wake-upinthemoming SiO |
[Prepare and individual religions prayer | 54555 | TOminutes |
[Cleanandudythebed «| 855-605 | 1Ominutes |
[Take the dirty lothesforwash___——~| 805905 | OThour |
[Help matherfor cooking and clearinghouse | 905-1005 | _oThour |
[Keepingoneseifidy ———SSC*dtCCOSS | —<3Ominutes—_—|
[ivmetauepepmentirnan poy | |

clean the table prepare and offer noon prayer
| Spend time with family members andtakerest | 235-335 | Olhour_
| Preparehomeworkforschool | 335-435 | OThour
[ Prepare and offer afternoon prayer | 435-450 | 15 minutes
ee
| Total 24hours |
For school student two samples are given. However due to seasonal time it may
vary. In winter night is longer than day. Moreover prayer time also changes during
winter and summer. As such time to be adjusted with the season. For special reason
time schedule may be readjusted with other works and activities. From student life
one should practice to habituate in working according to the schedule of time.

Home Resource Management 37
Lesson 5- Management of Energy
Energy is a prime resource of the family as money and time. Family members’
health and satisfaction depend on proper utilization of this human resource.
Along with other resources everyone needs to be careful for proper utilization
of energy. To achieve the goal by meeting the needs we have to do many
activities. The work should be done in such a way so that the minimum energy
will be used in that work. Or by using same amount of energy many activities
can be accomplished. As such we will be able to do many works with our
limited energy. Energy loss occurs due to its improper use. As a result
reluctance, tiredness and irritation occur towards work. If the energy is utilized
through proper management then the misuse of it can be eliminated. To utilize
the energy properly there are some points to be considered. Such as-

@ Work to be done as per the set time table

@ Determine in advance which work needs how much energy and how to get
the work done

@ In distributing the works emphasis should be given on the age, individual
liking and interest of the family member

e@ Both the hands to be used for work. In addition if the work is done with the
correct posture less energy will be required. Like wiping the floor in
standing position needs less energy than in sitting position

e@ After heavy work one should take rest or do some light work

@ Using of different tools will help to waste less energy. e.g. use of pressure
cooker, washing machine, oven, electric iron etc.

In addition to above by using certain techniques different works can be done

easily. In home management these are known as techniques to work easily.

Required techniques to work easily and with less energy are:

@ Correct body posture and correct force to work - For effective use of
energy work area should be such that it allows working with correct body
posture and force. If the working equipments are within the reach then
energy can be saved.

cc =6@-»~=C Work in right place and use of correct equipments - If the work is done
g at the right place, then energy can be saved. For instance dine in the dining

38 Home Science
room, washing in the toilet etc. If the required equipments are kept in the
work place then energy is not lost in walking. Using of right types of
equipments also save energy. For example use of mop to wipe the room is
more comfortable than cloth.

@ Work with right technique - Every work has some techniques. If the
technique is followed less energy will be used. For example instead of
washing the cloth separately, if all the cloths are washed together and dried
together then less time and energy will be used.

@ Change of usable items - By changing the usual items sometimes energy is
saved. Like use of plastic table cloth instead of cotton one.

@ Change in the technique of preparing food - Sometime energy can be
saved by changing the technique used in preparing food. For example for
preparing salad tomato and cucumber can be sliced instead of grinding.

Task - In day to day work what techniques you can apply to waste less energy.

Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Which one is more essential to meet the needs of human?
a. Time b. Money
c. Labor/work d. Planning

2. What is called to keep the expenditure limited according to the income?
a. Goal b. Planning
c. Table/List d. Budget

Read the following paragraph and answer questions 3 and 4:

Amena Begum does all the works of family by herself. From the morning
till afternoon by doing the heavy works continuously she becomes,
exhausted. s

Home Resource Management 39
3. How can Amena Begum do her work to avoid exhaustion?
a. At first by doing the heavy b. At first by doing the light works
works
c By doing the light work after d. By doing the heavy work after
heavy work light work
4. Which is missing in the activities of Amena Begum?
i. Planning
ii. Schedule of time
iii. Doing the work with new spirit
Which one is correct among followings-?
a. iand ii b. iand iii
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
Creative Question
1. Mr. Tanzil is a service holder. His monthly income is 10,000/- taka. His
family members are his wife, school going two children and his sick
mother. At the beginning of the month he gives the money to his wife for
family expenditure. Before end of the month money is exhausted. For rest
of the days it becomes difficult to carry on.
a. What is budget?
b. What does the sector of budget means?
c. Prepare a monthly budget for Mr. Tanzil.
d. Is it necessary to prepare a budget in Mr. Tanzil's family? Give reasons in
favor of your answer.
2
&

Chapter 5
Interior Decoration of Home
Among our basic needs housing is one of them. The Furniture is essential to
make this home useable. To enhance the good looks of home by making it nice
and attractive, interior decoration is essential. In this case expensive furniture is
not required. Own taste and artistic mind can be projected through the
inexpensive goods according to ability. For making the home nice and
convenient to use, interior decoration is very much essential. Through
decorating the home family enhances the lifestyle and gets mental peace. And
depending on peace and prosperity of home social development takes place.
Lesson 1- Selection of Furniture
Furniture refers table, chair, sofa, bed, wardrobe, cupboard, book self etc. which
are heavy but movable home decorative things/goods. For accomplishing
different activities of home the role of furniture is enormous. Rather than these
to enhance comfort and beauty there is no other thing like this.
Either town or village, everywhere furniture is used to accomplish different
activities of the home. The types of furniture’s need varies according to the
lifestyle of family, living place that means town or village, level of family life
cycle etc.
The houses of village are permanent and enough sized so it is seen that the use
of heavy big sized wooden furniture is more. Among the furniture bed, chowki,
chair, table, tool, bench, kitchen shelf, cupboard, clothes’ rack etc. which are
used in village mentionable. According to the need of the person these furniture
can be made at home by the carpenters with the wood of mango, black berry,
jack fruit, koroi etc. trees.
In town areas the number of temporarily living working people are more. Most
of the people live in rented houses. Those who live in own house, because of
the limitation of the size they also use light and contemporary furniture to
fulfill their needs. Rather than these the light and good taste’s furniture are used
as these are not difficult to carry from one place to another place. Among the
furniture which are used in town, bed, box bed, different sized table, wooden
cupboard along with mirror, sofa set, cushioned chair, etc. are mentionable. ,,
S
I

Interior decoration of Home 41
There is tendency of using limited size- designed, luxurious and modern
designed furniture in town areas. Along with the wood of mango, jack fruit,
koroi, other artificial woods like ply wood, Partex etc. are commonly used. In
town areas use of readymade furniture is more visible.

Now a days in village and town everywhere the plastic made furniture like-

chair, table, bed, rack etc. are commonly used.

!
———,
SST —,
NSS A ais
* (=7 tp
Different type furniture

Concerned matter for selecting the furniture are discussed below-

@ Necessity- Before buying the furniture it is needed to determine that whether
it is essential or not. If it is not essential though it is bought whimsically,
than later it seems unsuitable. Rather than this if the old furniture is used
after burnishing then there will be no need to buy new furniture and it will
seem wastage of money.

@ Family Income- Furniture to be selected according to the income of family.
If the furniture is bought according to income then it is more acceptable by
the society. Otherwise it looks odd to society.

@ Cost of Furniture- The price of the furniture depends on its material. The
Teak, mahogany etc. made furniture is more expensive. The cane, plastic or
rod made furniture is comparatively less priced.

@ Comfort- To select the furniture comfort is an important matter. If
furniture’s size, height, depth are not comfortable then it is not easy to use.

42 Home Science
Such as- if the table is very high than it is difficult for working. And if the
chair is not comfortable than it is difficult to work.

@ Utility- The utility of the furniture is its ability to meet the need. Small
children’s furniture will be appropriate for age. Bed, chowki these meet our
need of lying. And stool, sofa, couch, chair meet our seating need. In addition
utility depends on material with which the furniture is made. Such as, the
cushioned furniture is more comfortable than wooden furniture so its utility is
more.

@ Taste and Choice- To select the furniture family’s taste and choice is most
important. The beauty of the home enhances if it is decorated according to
the income of the family as well as the size, floor and wall of the house.

e@ Durability— Durability of furniture depends on the material and
manufacturing process. If the furniture is made with raw wood then termite
spoils. And the furniture made with seasoned wood and good manufactured
lasts long.

@ Standard of Lifestyle- The standard of lifestyle depends on professional
position and wealth. Holding higher position and rich family’s furniture is quite
expensive. In these families the drawing rooms are specious and gorgeously
decorated. On the other side in lower class family, sitting arrangement is in one
comer of the bed room.

@ Design- The design of the furniture needs to be of good taste In this case
contemporary, comfortable and artistic design is acceptable. As well as the
design would be in such a way so that it doesn’t take longer time or energy
to clean.

@ Various Uses- Flexibility is the multiple use of the furniture. Such as, divan is
used for sitting and sleeping. Dining table is used for eating, studying, discussing.
In present time because of the smaller size of the room flexibility of the furniture
is to be considered.

@ Size of the Family- If the size of the family is big then the flexibility and
multiple use of the furniture needs to be considered.

@ Nature of Job- If the job is transferable then the light and able to meet
daily need furniture will be selected. More furniture brings hazard while
transferring. The furniture becomes damaged too.

@ Weather- In our country hot and dust is more. So light designed and
colored furniture is more suitable and easy to care. s

Interior decoration of Home 43

@ Care- To select the furniture it is needed to think about the care. Because
longevity and beauty depend on care and maintenance.

@ Size of Room- If the furniture is selected according to the size of room then
it represents the taste and enhances beauty.

Task- What are the matters you will consider while buying furniture for your family?

Lesson 2- Arrangement of Furniture

After selecting the furniture it is needed to arrange it. Arrangement of furniture

is not only to decorate home. Through proper arrangement interior decoration

of home becomes attractive, comfortable and convenient. As such the members
of family get more comfort and satisfaction.

Either village or town there are some rules which need to be followed for

arranging the furniture to decorate the interior of home. Such as-

Essentials of Furniture arrangement- To arrange the furniture first of all it is

to remember that there should not be excessive furniture in room. Before

arranging furniture for home it is needed to consider the reason of using that
room. Such as-

Bedroom- Bed, wardrobe, cloth’s rack, cupboard etc.

Drawing Room- Sofa set, caned chair, centre table, showcase, bookshelf etc.

Dining Room- Dining table, showcase, refrigerator etc.

Study Room- Bookshelf, table, chair, computer etc.

@ Practical Use- To arrange the furniture it is needed to consider the practical
use of that furniture. Means according to the function of that room the
furniture to be arranged.

@ Mobility — In the home while arranging it is needed to consider the mobility,
facility to accomplish the work. For going from one place to another place in
room and to accomplish the work there should not be any problem of
mobility. Such as the bookshelf should be kept just beside the study table. It
is better to arrange the furniture accordance of the child’s activities if there is
child at home. It is essential to notice that the children are able to move
around the room freely and safely.

S e According to the work- Furniture arrangement will be in such a way so

44 Home Science
that there will be harmony among the works. Means in which room what
function happens furniture should match with that.

@ Well Ventilation- The furniture will be arranged in such a way so that to
open the door and window there will be no problem. If the house is not well
ventilated then hygienic condition hampers.

@ Distance from the wall should be maintained- While arranging the furniture
it is to be remembered that table, chair, sofa should not be kept by touching
the wall. A short distance from the wall should be maintained. Otherwise the
wall will be discolored with the graze and furniture may be damaged.
Arrangement of furniture can hide the structural fault of the home or rooms.

@ New touch in home decoration- Furniture is not to be kept permanently in
the same place. Therefore the monotonousness comes in home decoration.
Time to time it is essential to rearrange the furniture by changing taste for,
that new touch comes in home decoration.

@ Applying Art Principles- The beauty of home depends on the arrangement
of furniture. To create the artistic effect the principles of creating art such as-
proportion, consistency, balance, rhythm and emphasis will be maintained.
Application of art principles/rules are described below-

a. Proportion- To arrange the furniture according to the size of the room if
the size of furniture and the furniture’s relative size is proper then the
arrangement can be told as well matched. In big room big sized furniture
and for small room small sized furniture is suitable. And where it is needed
to keep big and small sized furniture together then by keeping balance with
big furniture two/three small furniture can be kept.

b. Balance- It is essential to keep balance while arranging the furniture.
Furniture of the room’s one side to another side, furniture of the middle and
comer’s to be balanced. In one side if there is more and another side less
furniture it does not maintain balance. If the furniture of one room is kept in
two sides with the same importance then it is known as direct balance. On
the other hand if there is more furniture in one side with importance is
known as indirect balance. Indirect balance brings new dimension and
attraction in room.

ce. Harmony- Good relation among everyone is harmony. It is not enough to
keep expensive furniture, art work, showpiece in room. There should be
harmony among all of these. 2

S
AQ

Interior decoration of Home 45

d. Rhythm- If there is rhythm in arranging furniture then the look does not fall
on just a furniture, it moves simply and naturally to other furniture as well.
The look moves from one corner to another corner of the room. This ups
and down and speed of the rhythm creates new dimension which bring
attractiveness in the arrangement of furniture.

e. Emphasis- One of the principles of arranging furniture is emphasis.
Emphasis means the main centre point of attraction. Nice flowers in the
flower vase which is kept on the centre table of the drawing room,
decorating the bedroom with nice furniture or carpet can create emphasis of
the room and furniture.

Task- Write the things you will keep in mind to arrange the furniture in your
home.

Lesson 3- Arrangement of Furniture in Different Rooms

Bedroom

After the daylong work people come back home. The peaceful environment of

home gives us comfort. So we should be careful while selecting the bedroom

furniture.

Noticeable matters-

@ In bedroom bed or chowki, dressing
table, cloth rack, cupboard, wardrobe [| qs bie)
etc. furniture is kept. The placing of L= {FN \ (
bed or chowki has to be in such a way 2 =a Wer bisof | ae d\
so that light can’t fall on eyes. | We SLaed

@ The wall will be preferably light ~ PZ Fi,
colored. ‘ <i 74) | |

e A side table can be placed beside the SL) ean
bed to keep book or news paper. If . ey
there is table lamp then enough light ie Soom:
can be get while reading.

@ Art work can be hanged to decorate the wall. A bunch of flower on the

2 dressing table or side table enhances the beauty of room more.
S
N

46 Home Science

Drawing Room- OS ai

Known persons and relatives sit in drawing ut se A F] I ‘s

room while they visit. To maintain the aes < mt j =I

socialization, drawing room is the centre ees % See Te

place. The arrangement of this room ies e FRAT —

represents the taste of the house owners to Se * atatehal:

the outsiders. = 2 ee |

Noticeable matters- Prawing Room

@ On the drawing room sofa set, divan, stool, book shelf, showcase are
placed.

@ To make the room attractive flowers in the big vase, aquarium, art work,
picture of renowned person, carpet etc. can be kept.

@ Furniture is to be arranged according to well ventilation, mobility, artistic
principals.

Dining Room - ;

Dining room is the meeting place of the /[ I | { Bea

family members. While all the members of O) a ~ oo

family sit for having food a happy CH, Dork, fo.

: | tt eu Ap |
environment appears. p IEE! Zi |
Noticeable matters- em Re oo A 1
In the dining room dining table, chair, ~ | Y mW
meat safe, refrigerator, trolley etc. are YO" of ff
kept. Table may be round, oval or Dining Room
rectangle shaped. The top of the table is
made with formica, glass or wood.

@ It has to be ensured that the dining table gets enough light.

@ At the centre of the table keeping flower in flat vase or fruits in the
basket enhances the beauty.

@ Table should be placed in such a way so that there will be no problem with
mobility.

@ The water filter should be kept at one side in a little high place. The
refrigerator should be placed beside a big wall while keeping distance from %

the wall for ventilation. S

Interior decoration of Home 47
Guest Room- = ah
It is better if the guest room is beside the C\ 5 a -
drawing room. This room does not need much a 2h) |
furniture. Bed, dressing table and wall closet ==> THe
are enough for the room. ‘\ _ Sa]
4
Guest Room
\) Living Room-
Hk a. AA. There are plying room and living room in
« ete wy present modern homes. The members of the
(ples. Mis a) family pass their leisure time in this room.
Lh pr Sy / In this room there are facilities for watching
ee television, sitting and lying. Guitar, key
See a > eA board etc. entertaining things are kept there.
Living Room | 4 ii ( |
Reading Room wr Tus| a Ke
The reading room will be in such a >= i a te K a
place where the sound and L al NES t | fila ul ‘) |
conversation can’t create problem to a Ne =S {\
study. In the reading room table, Be = DSS
chair, bookshelf, computer etc. are Een , | = i
placed. It should be considered that | as i
the table gets enough light. H
Kitchen ‘Reaiinpetioan
The kitchen is located next to dining | =e fi
room. As such it is easy to serve the LH | ane
food. If the stove is placed beside the LH Ee | | ——
window then the smoke goes out easily. ts = ES
Stove can be gas, kerosene or soiled. In Le FB As EES eA
town areas gas burner and in village for KOZ J
stove dry wood/stick or kerosene is sf Sy
being used. And some people cook in : 1 / ;
x heater too. If the tap is at one corner of Butcher
the kitchen then it is better. To keep

48 Home Science
the pots, shelf is being used. Heavy and usual knives, boti (native cutter) etc.
sharp things should be kept on the top which is unreachable for the children. If
there is wall cabinet up to the selling high then many things can be kept. It
needs to be careful that insects can’t stay.
Lesson 4- Enhancing the Beauty of Home
After Selecting and arranging the furniture people want to enhance the beauty
of home through decorating the floor, curtain and flower. Bringing the
consistency among everything make a home elegant and represents good taste.
Covering of the Floor-
In our country the floor is made of a
cement or colored cement. In village the :
floor is soiled. But in modern home tiles =I
and mosaic floors are seen. In town area —
carpet is being used. The carpet should Se
be suitable with the furniture. As in our Se
country dust is more it is better to use BEBE IEE ca
small sized carpet so that it is easy to a ee
care. Picture of the floor cover (carpet)
==
| Wall Decoration-
a | In every house there are art work in
_ — | different rooms. In interior decoration
| eine | | the role of art work is enormous. The
¥r ‘ee! pictures of the renowned persons are
ae the symbol of pride. The picture of
; motherland, natural scenery gives
Arrangement of Picture on the wall i C
pleasure in mind.
There are some rules to hang the pictures. Such as-
@ To hang the picture selecting the place is very important. On the big wall
big picture and in the small wall few small pictures can be hanged.
@ Picture is to be hanged at the eyesight level. If it is hanged very high or low,
it does not become prominent and looks disproportionate. co
e@ According to the function of the room the picture to be hanged. In the S

Interior decoration of Home 49
drawing room the picture of renowned person, natural scenery, art of
renowned person, in dining room picture of food, in living room family
pictures can be hanged. Hanging family picture in bed room stands for
taste.

@ Wall can be decorated with other things like- showpiece, flower,
branch-leaf, wall mat, pottery, folk art. But it is essential to follow the
principals of art.

Curtain- oe TTD |

ime we eial

Curtain is the cover of door, window. a

Curtain should be selected according ST

to the color of wall, carpet, and other mT FTN

furniture. ti Wi

eer eg PATS

Necessity of the Curtain in Room- Different Types of Curtain

@ Maintains the privacy

@ Brings coolness feeling

@ Protects from dust

@ Enhances beauty

Our country is mainly a hot country so light colored curtain is more suitable for

us. It creates coolness. But in winter deep colored curtain can be used. The

cloth of curtain will be such type so it is easy to care.

Flower arrangement- .-

Flower arrangement is one of the —~ Si Nt Mp

main parts of home decoration. To ’ Ni Ye NY),

: rc OZ) ore S/
arrange the flowers different types of ee PFS SWB ((y \\ :
vase or pot needed. These pots can <Gpl@pyars uuu (25 iy (Z
be made of china clay, plastic, glass, KOU <n G Ze “\ WA
bamboo, different metals. Flower rx Gea = rs
vase or pot can be round, flat, oval 6a ie C=) Sete

a 4, “Us 4a
or square shaped. Sy Gam

50 Home Science

Rules of Flower Arrangement-

@ Color- To arrange the flowers it should be noticed that the color of the
flower will attract everyone

@ Structure- Flower’s one of the main characteristics is its structure or stroke.
The stick of lily, tube rose is tall. And marigold, jasmine, rose are suitable
for dumped arrangement.

e@ Artistic Principal- To arrange the flower if the principals of art are
followed then its beauty enhances. Such as flowers must be proportionte
with vases.

@ While arranging the flowers its natural rhythm is to be maintained. Means
the flower blooms as in the tree if it is arranged in that way then it looks nice.

@ Flower should be arranged by giving the emphasis on most attractive
flower. According to that other flowers, leaves to be arranged.

@ The flower will get more emphasis rather than vase. According to the size of
the vase the flowers are to be arranged.

@ There should be enough water in the flower vase.

@ To arrange the flowers pin holder should be covered.

@ Many flowers are not needed to arrange the flowers. Just two or one flower
can be arranged along with branch, stick, leaves. Flower can be arranged by
using the pin holder on bowl and saucer.

@ Ifthe flower is picked in early morning or late afternoon then it stays fresh.

@ In the water of vase if sugar is added then it stays fresh for long time.

Lesson 5- Maintaining Hygienic Environment at Home

Decorating the room with furniture is not enough, maintaining the hygienic

condition should be thought. If the home is well decorated then it represents

good taste. Expensive and attractive furniture can be used to decorate the home
though it should be neat and clean. The beauty of home destroys with the dirty

and dusty furniture. The longevity reduces due to lack of care. Spider web, ant,

insects’ disturbance increase and germs spread.
Therefore to maintain hygienic environment the essential factors are- x
g

Interior decoration of Home 51
@ Ensuring Well Ventilation at Home:
Sun is the never ending source of light, heat and anti germicide power. The
sunlight eliminates darkness. Heat kills germs. So the furniture should be
placed in such a way so that enough sunlight can come in room.
The oxygen of the air keeps alive our body’s cells. The impact of air is very
much on health. As such to maintain well ventilation, the home is to be
faced preferably towards south or east.
@ Keeping the Floor and Furniture Neat and Clean
Every day the floor and Furniture need to clean up. Because of the mobility at
home the floor becomes dirty and dust falls on the furniture. Sneezing,
coughing caught from this dust. So every day it is needed to clean and wipe the
room’s floor, kitchen, bathroom’s floor and furniture. For that using anti
germicide once in a week is essential. Other things like door, window, kitchen’s
wall, sink, toilet’s pan-commode etc. should be cleaned once in a week.
@ Keeping Curtain, Bed sheet, Table cloth, Covers of different Furniture
Clean
Dust develops in home’s curtain, bed sheet and in covers. Bed sheet needs to be
cleaned once in a week. By giving 3/4 months break the curtain and covers of
furniture need to be cleaned. As such dust goes off and enhances the brightness
of home.
e@ Arranging Artificial Light for Night According to the Work
If the light is not sufficient according to the work then eye sight damages.
So enough light should be arranged for reading, kitchen’s work, dining
table etc.
@ Keeping the Internal and Surrounding Environment Clean
To maintain good health it is essential to clean the surrounding
environment clean. The pests/insects, mosquito stay if the home is
surrounded by dirt, garbage, open drain, bush etc. Serious diseases spread
too. So the surrounding of the home needs to be cleaned. Trashes should
be thrown in proper place or in dustbin. The surrounding of the home’s
unwanted bush should be cut and anti insecticide should be sprayed.
Water should be removed from the flower pots or surrounding places, to
20 keep safe from aedes mosquito.
S
Q

52 Home Science
Lesson 6- Recycling the Unused Things for Interior
Decoration
People worship beauty. So for comfort and beauty of the home they use a lot of
other things along with furniture. But it is not necessary that for decoration of
home only the expensive things to be bought from market. Rather the artistic
things made with own creativity by recycling the unused things can be used.
Creating art and craft is human’s by born nature. To create this art and craft
there is no need to use the expensive things. Easily available things or the
disposed things can be used to make artistic things and by these own creativity
can be exposed.Such as, artist creates art work on the white canvas with color
and brush and makes it worth. Potter makes designed pottery with clay.
Name of the Different Unused Things of Home
Water or cold drink’s bottle, can, tissue box, old calendar, old cloth, egg shell,
biscuit, chocolate or chip’s hard box, ink over ball pen, small pencil etc.
Now we will discuss about the procedure of using unused things:
Egg Shell
Egg is every day’s common item in our food menu. We throw away its shell.
But we can create art work with this disposed thing. Like-
A small hole to be made at one side of the egg and the inner substance should
be removed and dried under the sunlight. Then drawing nice art work with the
colors and can be used to decorate home.
The egg shell can be broken in small pieces and those can be pasted on art
paper with glue, after drying it up different scenery can be flourished.
— Grane
b , Gpeiasy ee SOY NY
, SP OXY
a hs
Home decoration pieces made with egg shell s

Interior decoration of Home 53
Making home decoration pieces with old paper/card/board etc.
Sample- 1: Doll shaped holder making eee aes
Calendar’s page, hard paper,
disposed old cloth, wool, jute rope,
black tassel, lace, round shaped —L
dotted material (tip), ribbon and '
aica/glue etc. are needed. According f \
to the following picture (No. 1) cut
the calendar’s hard paper and make
the main structure of forma. To SL
enhance its beauty use glue to stick Bicone of Forma tna,t)
lace, make braid with flower/ jute
rope/ tassel, with the round dotted
material (tip) or color draw/make eee Dy
ox, Sa ee
eyes, nose, lips. At the back side of re *&
the hard paper the ribbon can be A i oy
assembled to make hook for ae
hanging. After making the doll it mites ai
can be kept beside telephone set, for foe
keeping clip/pin or can be used as ere
message holder by hanging on the & PERL
wall. cal
Message Holder
Sample-2: Wall Pocket Made with Sack
Cloth —— wl ——
“ a “t .
Used Elements- Sack cloth, colored cloth aa oor ge
for border, needle-thread for sewing etc. "Wi cccesaadle |
The wall pocket made with sack cloth can Pe
fi . ee
be used as home decoration piece as well Sots ssscprepraserg Lid
as the essential things can be kept in F E - i
convenient place. a
Liki Pe ereere
°6 POOLS WSF PAS
8 Sample of Wall Pocket

54 Home Science
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Friendship among everything is called -
a. equality b. rhythm
c. consistency d. emphasis
2. Why the surrounding of the house should be clean?
a. to get light and air b. to keep away from insects
c. to keep the bushes clean d. to maintain good health
Read the following paragraph and answer questions 3 and 4
While cleaning, Shefali disposes the unused things in the house. Her mother
advises her to use these things in different ways.
3. How can Shefali make something new with the unused things?
a. To buy new things from the market by selling the old/unused one
b. Exchange the unusable things with friends
c. Reuse old things by making some changes with art work
d. Decorate home with some of the unused things
4. By using the old/unusable things Shefali could:
i. Maintain a balance between old and new things
ii. Have the chance for innovating things
iii. Have scope for creativity
Which one is correct among the followings?
a. iand ii b. ii and iii
c. iand ili d. i, ii and iii
S

Interior decoration of Home 55

Creative Questions:

1. Mr. Kalam wants to buy new furniture. He does not like to use the old
furniture. He purchases new furniture by taking loan from other people.
When arranging the furniture at home, he faces many problems. As a result
family members are not happy with him.

a. Which part of home decoration depends on arrangement of furniture?

b. Why interior decoration of home is necessary?

c. In selecting furniture which things Mr. Kalam should consider? Explain.

d. Can the purchase of furniture by Mr. Kalam be justified? Give reasons
in favor.

2. Mrs. Zarifa returns home after her whole day work. She always feels tired
when she enters into her bed room. The setting of bed, dressing table,
cupboard etc. is in such a way that it does not attract her at all. When her
sister comes to her house, for a moment she sits in the drawing room, then
she comes to Mrs. Zarifa’s bed room and tries to give her idea about the
arrangement of furniture by following art principles.

a. Which is the main part of home decoration?
b. Why arrangement of furniture is so important?
c. Describe, how Mrs. Zarifah can arrange the furniture in her bed room.
d. By following proper art principles Mrs. Zarifah can make her home more
attractive. Explain
2
&

Part-B
Child Developoment and Family Relation
r iw TT aET
ee
4 J = a J
Se ; oe ma a q
After studying this part we will be able to-
@ Describe the concepts and characteristics of growth and
development of a child ;

@ Identify the steps or stages of development ;

@ Describe the developmental task of different stages;

@ Analyse the heredity and environmental affect on child development:

@ Describe the importance of family bondage on child development ;

@ Explain the concept of different types of family crisis and their nature ;

@ Describe the principles of guiding children;

@ Describe the different types of psycho-social problems of adolescence

age;

@ Identify the causes of retardation and describe the ways of prevention; I
>
N

Chapter Six

Growth and Development of Child
Lesson 1: Idea of Growth and Development
Ramin is two years old. He plays with his toy cars. He plays more practically
now than how he used to play a few months ago. He makes ‘Boo Boo’ noises
now when he plays with them. When the toy cars collide or fall down he makes
a different noise than he used to. That means he has more experiences. Before
Ramin could only say ‘Ba Ba’ and ‘Da Da’, now he uses different sounds to
express himself. Not limited to just sounds, Ramin can now walk, run and
climb, which he was unable to execute just a few months ago. Just like Ramin,
with age, every child is slowly able to perform tasks which are expressed
through their behavior. This is called child development. Development is a
qualitative change, and a continuous process. From birth till death, this
development process never ceases.
We use the words ‘Growth’ and ‘Development’ interchangeably. Growth is a
quantitative process. Whenever any part or whole of the body grows and
changes in shape, it is defined as ‘Growth’. Height and weight increase are
easy examples of this process. Growth and development do not have the same
meaning. When a child is born, it weighs about 3 KG. In six months, this
weight doubles and almost triples in a year. This weight change of a child is a
quantitative change or growth. As a newborn starts to gain weight, some parts
of its body acquire strength. Right after birth a child can only play with his own
hand and feet. Within five years, he/she can draw with their hands and within
ten years, can throw a cricket ball skillfully and with ease. The child’s arm not
only grew in length, but also had qualitative changes. This is development.
Development is far more encompassing than growth. Growth is only a part of
development.
Development is a complicated and continuous process. Maturity and
experience are the drivers for changes in development. Development increases
and decreases simultaneously. At the beginning stages of our life cycle,
increase in development is prominent, and near the end, development decreases
more than it increases. Hair and nails grow even at an old age, but
unfortunately, both physical skills and mental abilities deteriorate.

58 Home Science

Characteristics of Growth and Development:

@ Changes in physical size and shape are defined as growth. Development on
the other hand is changes in behavior, skills, abilities.

@ Growth is a quantitative change. Development is a qualitative change, but it
is directly related to quantitative change. Development is the effective result
of quantitative change.

@ Growth takes place in human life up to a certain 9 [| Sag
point. Generally, growth continues up to the age = [ =
of twenty five. On the other hand, development rH
continues till death. There is no specific f
limitation.

@ Growth has an upward trend. But the trend of im
development is upward in the beginning of life,
slows down in the middle and _ gravitates
downward at an old age. Example:

The ability to understand and logical thinking .

increases during adolescence, but at an old age,

thinking ability decreases and memory loss

increases. Hearing, vision and understanding Growth - Increase in height

decrease. Both increase and decrease is part of

development.

2 = .
Motor development- can sit, can walk S

Growth and Development of Child 59
Areas of Development are -
Physical Development — Changes in shape and size of different parts of the
body, weight increase, height increase, widening of chest and shoulders,
physical health etc.
Intelligence Development — Paying attention,
trying to understand a subject, memorization,
factual thinking, creative thinking, problem solving
etc. i
Motor Development — Hand and foot movements =. k
after birth, ability to sit, walk, run, catch, and kick, wed viz i
and to keep balance etc. ar
Language Development — Speaking one or two Timctional oer at
words and short sentences, answering questions, lia tee Bebo Rape
ability to talk systematically etc.
Emotional Development — To smile when happy, cry when sad or physically
hurt, being scared of loud noises, displaying anger when not given what is desired,
etc. are expressions of emotion. Emotional development is the ability to control
emotions when necessary, and appropriately express feelings of good and bad.
Social Development — Ability to adjust with parents, siblings and others
according to age after birth and slowly develop the ability to adjust with family
according to rules and regulations of the society. For example: to help others,
show kindness, sense of respect, common feelings etc.
Moral Development — Sense of good and bad, right and wrong, remorse for
any wrongdoing, sacrifice for doing the right thing on the basis of social and
religious rules and regulations is moral development. To tell a lie, harm,
deceive etc. - all works are against morality.
The developments of different areas of children are intimately related to each
other. When a child learns to sit, crawl and walk, he learns about the world
around him. When a child learns something new, the older members encourage
him in various ways, making him happy and comfortable. Through these
events, a child develops socially and emotionally. Therefore it can be
concluded that the full development of a human child is the combination of all

~ types of development.

S

nN

60 Home Science
2 J a ® Po yf gn ed pra

Motor development-can sit, can walk Social deekiianeat friends sh ip 7

Task- Make a chart to show the differences between growth and development
Lesson2- Stages of development
We all know that life begins at mother’s womb. A child is born 280 days or 40
weeks or nine months from mother’s womb. An individual becomes old by
passing the stages- childhood, adolescence and adulthood after birth. The
characteristics of human life is not same from the beginning to the end, there
are many differences between the child of 2 years old and a child of 10 years
old. Again the development of adolescence and adulthood is never the same.
The life span of human are divided into some stages. These are called the
stages of development. These stages are —
Prenatal period - This period starts
from the beginning of the life until birth.
The prenatal period is a time of rapid ret
growth. Within this short time one cell | »
(zygote) becomes a full human child. y ee, nA A ae
Great changes occur in the newborn a
child to adjust with the outside i
environment of mother’s womb after a
birth.

Me
&

Growth and Development of Child 61
Neo natal Period- The duration of a 4
neonatal period is after birth to 2 weeks.
The child has to adjust with the new . MI
environment during this period. For a
breathing, taking food & eliminate bowel
his glands becomes active. He has to |
balance with the environment of low i
temperature from the warmth environment 7
of mother’s womb (100°F). After delivery es Ni j
the healthy child cries loudly. They sleep
20 hours out of 24 hours. Crying is one of the media to express his any
discomfort. In the context of our country the normal weight of a neonate is
from 2+ to 3kg.
Babyhood & Toddlerhood- The duration of this stage is
from 2 weeks to 2 years. Some days ago which child was |
very helpless now he can sit, walk and can talk. Within ;
these years develops intimacy with others. First one year :
is babyhood and up to 2 years is toddlerhood. The first
step of self dependency begins within two years which
helps him to be more independent.
Early Childhood - This stage is from 2 years to 6 years. In i
this time the child becomes tall and thin. Acquire more | &
skills in walking, running, climbing and catching etc. They te e nna
can do more works for themselves. e.g. eating, dressing and ae
cleaning etc. by himself. They play by imitating the [aX ‘
members of the family. Begins to make relation with peer [ a
group (same age). They become more curious and ask | Gi"
many questions. “,
Middle Childhood- This stage is the age from 6 to 11
years. The child of this age knows many things about their > ie at Maat ee
environment and becomes skilled to take various new /) Gil
responsibilities. Skilled in sports and games and participate '¥j % /2, as
in lawful sports (e.g. Gollachut, Bouchi, Cricket etc.). He Pa * ,
acquires logical thinking, language skill and their { ,
e conception becomes more clear about good and bad, right —_ ae “ a
S and wrong. They keep a role on making friends. —_ —

62 Home Science
Adolescence period - The age of this stage ™& Fw hl eel
start from the age of 1! to 18 years. This is * vati- rs 4 hi
the time to proceed to adulthood. During this | 4 ey \ /
time the structure and shape of the body of aN Eb ae" ‘
adolescence is become like adulthood and - B, e \ Nie) 2 i‘
acquire sex characteristics. After full bh i ~ AY ke 2
development of sex ability they acquire the | 4 \y ~g
ability of reproduction. They can think about ~~ : =
abstract things that means which is not seen by eyes, e.g- honesty, affection, love
etc. can understand. Study in accordance to his profession. Own goals and values are
created in him. He begins to feel attraction toward opposite sex. Their attention
towards their face increases.
Early adulthood- The age of this stage is from 18 ses so Re
years to 25 years. One of the functions of this stage is (7 . ¥
preparation for profession and selection of partner. i 7 a
The interest grows for marriage and formation of Mg GY ua
family, can take proper decision about profession. Fay) — = a
After passing S.S.C and H.S.C, selection of profession PUj@@7 “- - “a
is settled. They become interested in the role of Z 'y Bh
spectator than participate in sports and games. They } -
exchange their views of thinking about government, ‘ V :
politics and world situation with their friends. We |
Late adulthood- This stage starts from the age of 25
years and end at the age of 40 years. The important
characteristics of this stage is taking responsibility of §
the family as parents. During this period he/she has |) f
to learn to adjust with his/her partner who comes \ | ae
from different environment. To rear the child is a [0 Pin,
new task which they have to do. The success of i
home management comes from the understanding of ||) 3
husband and wife. They become so busy with job, wae a
marriage, children etc. that they do not find leisure |) .
time to become attentive in any other outside matters. ‘
Lo)
s

Growth and Development of Child 63
Middle age- The age of the stage is from 40 to 65 i” on
years. The duration of this stage is until retirement. <) iy & % i
This is the mid-time of adulthood to old age. This is [Ee ~ eS ar ee!
the age of success in working place or giving A me we a
leadership. The main physical changes are- gain [ae Vs > Sel
weight, gray hair, wrinkles in skin, pain in the joint of My ~~ ein
hands and legs, problems of eye sight etc. - ~
Old age- It begins from the age of 65 and ends until ee |
death. This period is the last stage of human Fg oa : q
development, old age is the beginning of decay. During ff = “= IN
this period the physical & mental conditions deteriorate J) ——e
continuously. The strength to do work decreases. % 2g
Elderly people think themselves unwanted. They can FF “a4 .
do less creative work. Their interest toward religion “
increases. If frustration, apathy about life, fear of death |
can be faced during old age then feelings of satisfaction ip ~~ es x
comes.
Lesson 3- Developmental task
We know that development is a continuous process. It never stops. There are
some specific expectations of the society in each stages of life about
development. The expectation of the society about an adult is that he will earn,
will take different responsibilities of family and society, when an adult is
dependent on parents they cannot do activities according to the expectation of the
society properly. In every stages of life when specific task is completed
successfully then life becomes happy and can complete the task of next stages
successfully. In other side failure brings tranquility and it hinders the success of
next stage. According to social expectations the task of different stages of
development is called developmental task. The developmental tasks are-

@ Some tasks which society expect on the specific stages of life.

@ Success of this stage helps to pass successfully to the next stage, it

brings happiness in life.

@ Failure of this tasks hinders to pass to the next stage, it brings tranquility.

Developmental tasks are -
<0 @ Developmental task are those task according to physical maturity --
a learning to walk, learning to speak, skills in sports and games etc.

64 Home Science

S . er f = WF

=f} r BS at [
Developmental task Developmental task

@ Task according to society and culture - to study, develop own-self as

good citizen, be disciplined to rules and regulations etc.

@ Task according to self interest and values - self expectations in
selection of profession and interest etc.

If we have conception about developmental task the advantages are —

®@ It becomes easy to behave properly if we know about developmental task.

@ Parents or guide will know the normal development of a child according
to age and can help to achieve social skills in that way.

@ Developmental task gives pre-preparation and inspiration to behave
according to social expectations. So it becomes easy to adjust in each
stages of development.

Some developmental tasks of babyhood & early child hood-

@ Learning to walk — within 12 months to 15 months the child acquires
physical ability to walk.

@ Learning to take solid food within two years the child becomes able to
suck food and chewing solid food.

@ Learming to speak -- The child makes meaningless sound within 6
months. At the age of three the child is able to speak sentences of two or
three words. Within five years the child speaks full sentences by using
many words,

@ Learning to control bowel movement -- within two years the place and
time for elimination of bowel is specific. Training is necessary to control.

@ Acquire physical skills —- Within five years the temperature of the body,
balance of metabolism and stability in physique comes. So that the =
possibilities to become sick is less. 8

Growth and Development of Child 65

@ Learn to distinguish between right and wrong - In early childhood
when parents give reward for the good work or say good to good work
and when instruct them not to that work as it is bad work, this way they
get a conception of good and bad.

Some developmental tasks of middle childhood-

@ Learn to behave properly with peers - This age is called gang age. By
mixing with peers they learn social exchange, compete in good work.

@ Learn necessary physical skills for general play and games - acquire
physical ability to learn technique by throwing something correctly,
catching and kicking ball correctly.

@ Learn social rule according to sex —- The boy imitate the role of father
and the girl imitate the role of mother and learn role according to sex .

@ Learn the basic techniques of reading and counting -- Nervous system,
muscles of finger, arm are not ready to write before the age of six. After
acquiring physical fitness, the skill of reading and writing increases with age.

@ Development of understanding about essential subject of daily life --
The child acquires concept about many things after going to school.
e.g.- time concept (concept of hour, minute and second), distance
(distance from house to school, distance from Dhaka to Chittagong),
weight (cotton is light, iron is heavy) etc. From this concept their
beginning of thinking started.

Developmental tasks of adolescence-

@ Learn to behave maturely with peer group of both sexes.

@ Emotional dependency decreases from parents and others -— Dependency
of childhood decreases from the period of adolescence. They become
self dependant. Many times they feel the affection of parents is
excessive. There is a need of independence among them.

@ Preparation for vocational choice and profession — During childhood the
plan about profession is not clear and not real. In the light of own ability
and skill interest grows in adolescence towards profession and becomes
practical.

®@ Interest in taking responsible social behavior — one of the main
developmental tasks of this time is interest in participation of social and

66 Home Science
political activities through his own behavior. They become interested to
work in group for the good of the society.

@ Achieve morality — within this time own concept develops about
good-bad, right-wrong and just-unjust. Before that the basis of right and
wrong would depend on punishment and reward from parents.

Task- The developmental task of middle childhood and adolescence - list
separately.

Lesson 4 & 5- Heredity & environment on child development
Why do the people around us not look alike? What potentials are there among
children from fertilized time that the physical size, shape, facial behavior,
qualities are different from others? Or the development of his whole life is
controlled by the environment that he lives in. The Psychologist, Educationist,
Doctors are doing research for ages, , from research they got perception that
how heredity works, what is the role of environment in child development etc.
Now we will know about these subjects.
Heredity-
The color of the skin of the girl is like her grandma. The boy is courageous or
the girl sings like her mother. Always we hear statement like this. Heredity is
what characteristics the child gets from his parents or ancestor by birth. The
child begins his life by heredity. Human children looks like human not like
other animal because of heredity. Again height, physical shape, hair, nail, color
of skin etc. physical quality and different mental quality becomes different
from one another due to heredity. The influence of heredity begins from the
beginning of life and continues until death.

Heredity starts from mother’s womb. After fertilization of sperm and ovum it

becomes one cell or zygote. The three main phase of zygote are cell wall,

protoplasm and nucleus. Nucleus is the centre of chromosome. The zygote has 23

pairs or 46 chromosomes. Of each of pair one comes from mother and another

from father. From 23 pairs of chromosome 22 pairs of chromosome are same in
boys and girls. These are called auto some. The rest one pair in boys and girls is
different which determines whether the child will be a boy or girl. This twenty
third pair of chromosome is sex chromosome. The 22 pairs of chromosomes

(auto-some) transmit different inherited characteristics among children. &

S
Q

Growth and Development of Child 67
The sex determinant chromosome which Parents
comes from mother is always XX type J }
chromosome, sex determinant chromosome
which comes from father is XY type va a N
chromosome. When X chromosome of soem Un Be) (2 , Ee iogs
mother unites with the X chromosome of [SSE
father the child will be girl child and if X géme = a)
chromosome of mother unites with Y
chromosome of father the child will be a as+xx sae sexy aa xy
Female Female Male Male
boy. Process of sex determinant
We see two children never look alike. There are differences between siblings. Why
it happens? One pair of gene determines one characteristic. That’s why someone
is more intelligent, somebody is less and someone is short in length and
someone is tall. It is mentioned here that there is no fixed law that which genes
of chromosome of mother will be paired with the genes comes from father’s
chromosome. For this the differences are seen among the children of same
parents. Now certainly question arises in your mind that why the physical
feature and behavior of twin are same? It is found only in identical twin.
There are two types of twin. Identical twin and fraternal twin. When one
zygote breaks into two zygotes then the twin are of same sex, and their
characteristics are also same. They are identical twin. In the case of fraternal
twin more than one ovum is fertilized by more than one sperm. In many times
it is found that when more than one ovum is matured and more than one sperm
is fertilized and form zygotes by more than one ovum, this type of twin may be
two boys or two girls or one boy or one girl. If zygotes are more than two then
the number of child is more than two. In fraternal twin characteristics of each
child are not similar. Their characteristics becomes like normal siblings, only
difference is that siblings are born one year after or more. Fraternal twin are
born in same day.
Environment on the development of child —
In the development of a child both prenatal and postnatal period keeps
important role. Prenatal period is when a child stays 40 weeks in mother’s
co womb, The normal physical and mental growth and development of fetus
S depends on physical and mental health of mother, e.g. if the pregnant mother is

68 Home Science
malnourished then the intelligences and development of brain of the child is
hindered. Again if the age of mother is below 18 years there may be hazards in
the life of both mother and fetus.

Postnatal environment begins after the birth of a child. There are two types of
environment; Natural environment and social environment. Nature of soil,
weather, climate, light and air, trees and plants, rivers and brooks, hills and
mountain, animal and bird are natural environment. Differences can be seen
between the boys of hill tracts with the boys of plain land. Survival for life is
difficult in hilly areas than plain land. So the boys and girls of that area are
becomes hard worker and industrious.

In social environment there are families, educational institutions, play-mates,
neighborhood, relatives, native culture, economic condition, environment of
working places etc. Parents, siblings, love and affection of family members,
correct guiding methods helps the life of a child for proper development. On
the other side deprivation of love and affection from parents, neglect, excessive
control, impediment etc. hinders the development of a child. Boys and girls are
sent in the educational institution for long period of their life. Environment of
educational institution, discipline, subject matter of study, methods of learning
and the whole environment of education influences on the development of a
child. Without these with the help of class mates, playmates, neighborhood,
relatives etc. and with the help of all members a helpful environment may be
created for the development of a child.

Heredity and environment, which one has more influence on the development
of a child? This debate is for long time. Some says the development of a child
depends absolutely on heredity. Other’s opinion - the role of environment is
major for the development of a child. Those who give importance of heredity
their opinion is — in whatever environment the child is born, only hereditary
characteristics influence his development. For example, the children of a
intelligent parents mostly becomes intelligent. Research on identical twin
shows that though brought up in different environment until 14 years the taste
of identical twin, their liking, behavior, character and nature had no differences
(Researcher- Gessel and Thompson). ~
On the other side environmentalists think for the development of an individual s

Growth and Development of Child 69
as whatever the heredity is, if given proper training by keeping them in a
suitable environment, the expected development is possible. An identical twin
name Gladis and Hellen at the age of 18 months were sent in different
environment. Hellen got opportunity for study but Gladis did not get any scope
to study. When they were compared at the age of 35, Helen was superior to
Gladis in their structure (shape) of mouth, face, behavior, mental strength and
intelligence. Both of their characteristics should have to be same as they were
identical twin. But this didnot happen. It proved that development differs for
environment.
Those who support both heredity and environment, according to them-
development determines by the interrelated action of these two factors --
heredity and environment. Best quality seeds yield best quality product, but to
get tree from seeds there needs fertile soil, adequate water, light and air etc. It
is not possible to get best quality product even from best quality seed for want
of these elements of environments. Again though fertile soil, adequate water,
light and air and good environment exists yet for non availability of best
quality seeds good production cannot be expected. That means for the proper
development of a child the importance of both heredity and environment is
unlimited.
If low intelligent child from birth are nurtured in a best environment there
remains some limitation for his mental development. In same way if a child
born with more intelligence and if he does not get conducive environment
and scope to get education, his intelligence does not fully bloom. The
characteristics which he inherited by birth is fully developed if he get
suitable environment. So it can be said that interaction of both heredity and
environment determines the development of a child.

Task- Heredity and environment-which one is more important in the

development of a child? Justify with examples in favor of your answer.
=
R

70 Home Science
Exercise
Multiple Choice Question:
1. Which time is called neonatal period of a child?
a. Birth to 1 week b. Birth to 2 weeks
c. Birth to 3 weeks d. Birth to 4 weeks.
2. The reason for being more active among boys and girls of villages are ?
i. Geographical condition
ii. Weather
iii. Nurture
Read the paragraph below and answer the question no. 3 and 4:
Tahmid, a student of class IV, has no limitations of curiosity. To know the
different subject around him he asks many questions to his mother after returning
from school. Recently he learned to play chess. For this he is very delighted.
3. Tahmid belongs to which stages of development ?
a. Period of neonate b. Middle childhood
c. Adolescence d. Adulthood
4. Tahmid belongs to that stage-
i. Can analyse the thinking power.
ii. Becomes attracted to his own feature.
iii. Can differentiate between right or wrong.
Which one of the following is correct ?
a. iandii b. ii and iii
c. iand iii d. i, ii and iii
Creative Question: ie
1. Rafi, a student of class (VI), wants to be a pilot after becoming mature. He 8S

Growth and Development of Child 71
knew that to be a pilot he must know science subject quite well. So he is
studying science subject with much encouragement. Mother gives Rafi the
opportunity to study according to his choice. He has to play according to
the time which his mother selected. Rafi does not like it.

a. Growth continues in human body until which age ?

b. Why does the ability of an individual to work decreases in old age ?
c. Explain in what stage of development Rafi belongs ?

d. Do you think Rafi will develop fully ? Justify your answer.

2. Jawyad and Jarif are two brothers. Somehow they look like their
grandfather. Their elder uncle also has two sons. Some days ago a first son
was born to the younger uncle of Jawyad. To hear this news their
grandmother becomes disheartened. So Jawyad’s grandfather forbids the
grandmother of Jawyad not to be saddened and also said that ‘Man has
nothing to do about the birth of a child’.

a. How many chromosomes are there in the nucleas of human cell ?
b. What is meant by child development ?
c. Explain the causes of look alike to see Jawyed and Jarif.
d. Analyse the authenticity of grandfather’s comment.
2
&

Chapter Seven
Child development & Family environment

Lesson 1- Attachment of children with parents
Let us talk about a plant, when the plant germinates from seed it remains
week. The survival of the plant depends on proper care and nursing. Once if
the root of plant is steady in soil later without special care the tree will grow.
Just like that the care and nursing for first few years in the life of human child
makes the foundation for later life.
The first five years after birth begins the basic foundation for the full
development of a child. This is a time of rapid physical growth and
simultaneously his behavioral changes also occur. During this period the
physical care and intimate communication with people around him are
necessary. Warmth response helps him to achieve new skills. The child who
gets conducive environment in early life for his development he becomes
more intelligent, more social and acquire good health than others. His social
skills, skill of language, creativeness, self confidence etc. develops, which
help him to become happy and nice in late life.
All families love their child. But many of us have wrong conception about
child rearing practices and do not know how to give him suitable
environment. Many of us do not know that exchange of feelings is very
important for first few years of child’s life. Mother is the first and important
person for development of attachment or bonding with the child.
Breast feeding and different types of nurturing by mother are the great
contribution of mother in the development of child’s physique, mind and
emotions. Recently in some research findings it was clear that breast feeding
one hour after birth and attachment of first few days between both mother
and newborn grow a deep bondage which continues to flourish and remains
permanent year after year. Some of the steps to make ties with children are-

@ Breast feeding within one hour after birth.

@ Response as quickly as possible to the cries of child.

@ Sleep closely with the child.

@ Give adequate time to the child. ~

3
I

Child development & Family environment 73

Breast feeding within an hour after birth

@ In many cultures gold is considered as valuable. Bronze is valueless in
comparison to gold. In place of mother’s milk the artificial milk for the
child is valueless like bronze against gold. Breast feeding within an hour
after birth is the best beginning
in the life of a child. Immediately after birth for warmth the healthy
newbom is kept on the belly and chest of mother. The child starts sucking
mother’s milk. As a result love of mother increases to the child.

@ Breast feeding is important for sound | 9% - a |
health and better living for a child. During gilt ™
feeding the touch of mother skin gives E's fi
warmth, This condition is especially -
important for the child whose weight is tr i tl, '
less than 24kg. 7 %*. iy & i (

@ Colostrums as a first food for the child Aer ~~ alt
works like a first vaccine. Colostrums have be CS
various immunological active cell, BO ep aD, Ps
antibody and other protein rich curative = « a = ree
food which prevents from any contagious Breast feeding is the greatest beginning in the
disease: life of a child within one hour after birth.

® First five days colostrums of mother’s milk releases in small quantity. But
this amount is enough for safe physical protection of neo-nate, It stimulates
the digestive system of the child. As a result miconium (first stool) releases
from intestine quickly. This condition helps to release germs of jaundice
from the body of the child,

@ During breast feeding hormone like oxytocin of the body of mother
teleases. So mother feels quiet and free from stress and bondage of love
becomes strong with child.

@ With this first communication with child the mother becomes very much
glad. This way the process of bondage between mother and child begins.
This way only mother’s milk is sufficient for first six months for the child,
and after six months to two years mother’s milk can be given along with
supplementary food.

74 Home Science
To feed breast milk to the child mother needs a conducive environment. To
create this environment the role of father is much more. He can help the
mother in different ways.
@ Make arrangement of necessary foods —
for the nutrition of mother. = | & ae
@ Make opportunities to keep the mother aS f Se Ai
and child together. Se 7 iT aan
@ Help mother in essential work at home. “3 Naa ay él
@ Help mother to take care of the elder # >, Kh oy
child of the family. Co-operation of father with mother creates
e Be sympatheti c to the lactating mother. conducive environment for the child.
The father keeps role in making bondage indirectly with child through his works.
Response as soon as possible while the child cry —
Usually children express their needs and discomfort through crying before
development of language. In babyhood the child usually cries for two reasons.
These are due to hunger and for any type of discomfort. Giving foods when
the child is hungry and making arrangement to remove physical discomfort,
e.g.- not to keep the child in wet bed, clean bowel secretion properly, take
correct measures for stomach pain etc. give comfort to the child. If the child
can sleep with comfort, parents response quickly while crying, take him on lap,
then the child’s trust and sense of security grows toward parents. On the other
hand when the discomfort of a child is not removed timely or the child does not
feel comfort then feelings of mistrust and insecurity grows. Lack affection,
care and love creates mistrust towards parents and at the same time the child
develops mistrust, insecurity and frustration regarding environment.
Sleep with child together —
Different type of needs of a child are to be fulfilled at night like day time. To
sleep at night with parents is one of the needs. In the first few years of life it is
necessary to sleep with the child. So that mother understand the needs of the
child at night and it becomes easy for breast feeding. Besides that presence of
parents near the child at night creates a safe environment for the child. Every
child wants to be near the parents before going to bed. This is very common
feature before schooling. Many times elder child wants to tell his parents about
their activities of the whole day. iS
N

Child development & Family environment 75
¥ ‘ - es bs on
AEE = Slay | G * Me
One of the ways to make bondage between parents and child-give adequate time and
company to the child
Give adequate time to the child —
Children usually depend on mother for food and different types of physiological
needs. If father also helps for these needs the dependency on mother decreases
and attachment grows with father. If you have to give adequate time to the child
you have to do-
@ Play with child, sing song recite rhymes, storytelling — which develops
social skill and intelligence of a child.
@ Getting out with the child —-From outing child achieve experience about
outside.
@ Take child in family works (e.g. watering in the garden, clean house
etc.)- So the child can trust himself about his skill.
Other than these keeping the child together for more time with parents for first
few years of life, physical contact, love and affection etc. strengthen the
bondage with parents. If parents give more time and love to the child their
bondage will be strong and this bondage helps to keep the good relationship
with parents in later life.
Task- "Breast feeding to the child- is the great beginning for bondage with
mother". Make a report on this subject.
5

76 Home Science
Lesson 2 & 3 : Importance of family relation on child development
One of the function of the family is to help the child to become worthy to the
society. After birth a relation develops between the families and the child.
Within 7/8 months the child can make relation with parents or with those who
take care of them. If observed any child of this age, it is found that they
specially try to get affection from parents.

When mother enter into child’s room then the child becomes happy. If mother
takes him in lap he keeps hand on her mother, play with hair. The child takes
shelter in mother’s bosom when he becomes afraid. Relation with mother
begins immediately after birth. Soft touch of mother, affection, laugh
everything develops deep relation with the child.

Researchers found that intimate relation with father keeps positive role in the
development of a child. Participation of father in nurturing a child is not less
important compared to the mother. On the other hand sometimes it keeps more
strong contribution in intellectual, social and emotional development of a child
than mother. In those families where father gives adequate time to the child,
participate affectionately to nurture the child, then behavioral problem of the
children of those families becomes less. Even participation of father helps to
prevent drug addiction or criminal activities of adolescence period.

Not only intimate relation of parents with children but there should be a good
telation between themselves as a husband and wife. Because child of happy
parents also becomes happy. From attachment with parents the child feels more
secure and gets pleasure. When there is absence of good relation between
mother and father then they cannot give attention to nurture the child. So the
development of a child is harmed. If a child gets adequate food but not nurtured
properly, the development of brain is less than those children who got adequate
love, attention and stimulation.

Flexible inter relation between siblings obstructs the self concept of a child. How
siblings evaluates the child that means when they say he is good or bad, that
concept is established toward him. By following the elder siblings the child learns
good or bad behavior. With closeness of siblings the child feels security. Again
for future life the child acquires experiences by mixing with group. Good relation
between siblings like parents is necessary for the proper development of a child.
If good relationship exists with siblings in a family closeness between them ,.,
comes and their time becomes cheerful. ES

Child development & Family environment 77
makes good relation and helps the family relation and obstruct
in the development of a child. the development of children.

- Co-operate to take care of younger siblings.| - No time to give companionship to younger siblings.

- Share something. - Priority in self interest.

- Help each other. - Jealousy.

- Give them company, play with them. - Avoid the company of siblings.

- Live together with all. - Quarrel, hitting others.

- Create affectionate relation with them. - Neglect them, feeling superior of himself.
In joint family system of our country there live many members in a family who
helps parents to nurture a child. Specially in case of working mother the role of
other members are more to take care of the child. It is noticeable the attitude of
relatives toward the child. When somebody thinks that their task is to look after
the child, not to hear the vocabulary of the child, there is no need to play with
them, in that case the intimate relationship never grows with that members.

A_ hee
~. a LL. ,
If good relationship exist with siblings their time becomes
cheerful by companionship of both of them
In the family paternal grand pa and ma, maternal grand pa and ma tells story
with the child, tells many events of their life, they hear the discomfort of the
child and try to solve this and give affection and love to the child. In this way
exchange of feelings with all the family members is very important in the first
few years of the child. Exchange of feelings with the people surrounded him
and on the basis of interpersonal relationship the brain of the child develops.
If the foundation of good relationship is created with the members of the
family, in future the child will learn to think about parents, siblings and other
members of the family as friends.
© Task 1- Write some ways to develop relationship with siblings in a family.
& Task 2- Mention your duties about what to do in the financial crisis of a family.

78 Home Science
Family disaster (Crisis) —
Every child needs such a family where he gets care, affection, love, security,
trust, well protection and fulfills his basic needs. Family is such an
organization where husband and wife live together. Nurturing the child and
educating him are the responsibilities of the family.
The child is born in a family and learn to earn when he becomes adult. In this
lengthy period the family faces various crisis. These family crisis are illness of
mother or father, emptiness due to death, separation of parents or divorce.
Besides these continuous quarrels of parents, differences of opinion, want of
understanding to each other, absence of father in the family or dismissed from
service, loss in business, physical torture on mother etc. Whatever the family
crisis is it gives painful experiences to the members of the family. So the normal
development of a child is hampered.
Death of father/mother-
The death of father or mother in the family creates great crisis for the child.
Usually father earns for the family. This is why the financial crisis becomes
severe at the death of the father. If there lives different aged children it
becomes difficult for maintenance and bearing the expenses of education.
Child becomes helpless at the death of mother. They are neglected in taking
care and in nurturing. At the death of father or mother, the children are
deprived of affection.
Severe illness of father/mother-
If suddenly severe illness of father or mother is diagnosed the family falls in a
disaster. IIIness of mother or father for long period creates crisis in a family.
For sudden severe illness or sickness for longer period financial crisis arises
there. The children are deprived of good companion of parents. For illness of
parents they become afraid and despaired of losing parents. Without parents
severe illness of any member of the family also create crisis in the family.
Broken family-
Differences of opinion between husband and wife, want of mutual
understanding, second marriage etc. are the causes of broken family. In many
cases the possibilities of break down is much more when the children are under
age. Divorce or separation of parents brings frustration, conflict, want of
attention in education etc. x
8

Child development & Family environment 79
There arise mental problems among the children. If the younger child has to
stay with father he is deprived of the affection of mother. So his development is
severely affected. In case of elder children they suffer from inferiority
complexes. By the bad comments of school going children, become mentally
shocked. Some times they do not like to go out, stop socialization to avoid the
created situation and they become introvert. In many times their sorrows of
mind may become physical pain, as-headache, apathy towards food,
sleeplessness etc.
Problems of family disaster can be reduced if all the family members unitedly
face the crisis. In most of the cases during family disaster the basic problem
arises is financial crisis. To remove the financial problems of the family and to
fulfill the developmental needs of a younger child of family the adolescent can
play important role. What they can do is-

@ Try to increase money income,

@ Reduce expenditure of unnecessary account,

@ Reduce expenditure by participating in different works of family-

@ Do the works of servant by yourself,

@ Take responsibilities for different care and nurture of younger siblings,

@ Give adequate love and affection that they do not feel deprived,

@ Spend more time with younger siblings,

@ Share difficulties, hardship, sorrows between each other,

@ Face the situation with patience,

@ Work double to solve problems,

@ Try to be free from mental pressure,

@ Search the positive situation,

@ Give more attention to prepare yourself for future profession.

Task - Write what type of problem arised in the crisis of a family that you
know. Mention what you can do to help the family.
es
&

80 Home Science

Lesson 4- Principles of guiding children:

Many child psychologists, at the moment of the birth of a child, compared him

with white papers. When a picture is drawn on a white paper it becomes like

what you have drawn. Just like that the life of a newborn child has no
experience. He learns to behave what experiences he achieves from the
environment around him. By proper guidance a child can be developed
properly; like that for want of proper guidance, there may develop various
types of behavioral problems in a child which hinder his present development
and future development. Children are like mud. A child can be brought up
according to our own desire and the ability can be developed by proper
guidance. For that it is necessary to know the principles of guiding children.
Some mentionable principles for guiding children —

@ Present ideal behavior in front of a child — The child imitats, those who live
near him children tend to imitate more what the elders of the family do than
to do what they are asked and what they are forbidden. For this reason it is
necessary to present good behavior in front of children. Elder person should
habituate that behavior which he wants to teach to the child. As for example,
respect elders, help each other etc. Elderly people should also refrain from
those behavior which they prohibit the child to do e. g. not to tell a lie and
not to quarrel ete.

@ Praise the child— Praise increase the power of understanding among
children, gives experience of success, it teaches them how to praise others. If
the child’s work is praised his self confidence increases, acquires good
concept about himself. He can understand that he keeps power of doing
many things. By searching the good virtues of child we should praise him
for that. This praise should be related with his works. In every child some
good virtues or good behavior are seen. If these virtues or behaviors are
praised the child will do good works again and again. He will understand
that what he can do and what virtues he has.

@ Not to punish the child -If a child gets punishment for his work it keeps
harmful effect on the child. There are two types of punishment- physical
punishment and mental punishment. Physically hitting, beating, not giving
food etc. are physical punishment. Mental punishments are - bad comments
regarding children, scolding, accusing, not giving attention, put into shame,
locked in a room etc. Whatever punishment is given to the child it cease the S

Child development & Family environment 81
self confidence, the child grows up as fearful and shameful. Many times it is
not understood that the behavior shown to the child it is mental punishment
for him or not. Mental punishment keeps a bad effect in later life on the child.
If it is necessary to correct any behavior of the child he should be warned
about that behavior. Why this behavior is bad, the bad result of that behavior
should be explained about to the child.

@ Say ‘yes’ for the child- Many people thinks that say yes to the child means
to permit him to do whatever he likes or give him whatever he wants is
permissible or to give him everything. But this is completely a wrong
concept. To say yes to the child means guiding him in a positive manner. Any
command to the child should be always in a positive manner, not to
command in a negative way. For example, do not do it, do not touch that,
you can do nothing etc. These commands should be expressed as ‘yes’ way.
The following some examples of speaking positively-

1. Instead of telling ‘do not keep the wooden pieces on the table’, you have
to tell ‘put them on the floor’;

2. Instead of saying ‘it is not a play time’ you have to say ‘now eat your
food and will play later’;

3. Instead of saying ‘do not spend so much time to wash face’ you have to
say ‘wash your face quickly’;

4. Instead of saying ‘nothing can be accomplished by you’ you have to say
“you can do if you try’.

Positive direction brings less protest than negative direction. It works better.

Positive comment makes the child confident. He tries to become successful. It

inspires him to work.

@ Exchange feelings with children - To talk with children the voice should
be low, soft and language should be easy. Loud and harsh voice makes the
child scared and he avoids him. While talking with child to understand the
child’s feelings one has to speak by keeping eye to eye like a friend. So it
becomes easy to understand the child. One has to become a good listener
while talking to children e.g. listen attentively what he says, no interruption
while he speaks, ask him question to understand well etc.

@ Make an ideal environment for the child - Suitable environment is
one of the elements for guiding children. The child disturbes less and

82 Home Science
spends his times happily when he finds suitable environment. Play is
one of the job of a child before going to school. There should have a
safe play space and play elements. For this there is no need of
expensive or costly elements. The elements for play can be arranged
with less cost or no cost e.g. leaves, plastic elements, cartoon etc.
Beside these sing song for child, recite rhymes, story telling, play with
them, inspire them to see, to hear, to catch, to taste something new. It
is necessary to supply proper elements and create opportunity
according to their age.

e@ Fulfill the psychological needs of children -

Another important subject in guiding children is to fulfill the psychological

needs of children and make them happy. Every child has psychological needs

which in english it is called “three A’s” for happiness.
Acceptance
A-Acceptance
A- Affection- Hater
A- Achievement Child
Affection Achievement

Acceptance-The characteristics of all children and virtues are not same. If

anybody looks beautiful, then everybody accept him with pleasure. Here

acceptance means accept the child as it is whether the child looks good or bad,
disabled or normal, more or less intelligent, boy or girl etc.

Affection- Every child needs affection, attachment and love. If taking care, nurture

properly, giving him time, teach something etc. is done with love then the feelings

of trust and security comes in him. Then he is not afraid of his environment.

Achievement- Every child wants success. If he can do any work he becomes

happy. For that if good work and areas of good work are praised he can detect

the powerful characteristics of himself or can understand what he can do. This

encouragement gives him experience of success and the child becomes
satisfied and happy.
Task 1- List the result of praise and punishment in the development ofa child.
Task 2- Change some of the negative sentences into positive sentences.
Read out in the class. S
g

Child development & Family environment 83
Exercise
Multiple Choice Question :
1. What is oxytosin?
a. Cell b. Hormone
c. Antibody d. Miconium of a newborn.
2. Due to long illness of father, the children-
i. Cannot develop normally
ii. Become afraid and frustrated
iii. Are deprived of affection.
Which of the following is correct ?
a. iandii b. ii and i
c. iand iii d. i, ii and iii
Answer the question no. 3 and 4 by reading the stimulant of the following:
China is a housewife of a joint family. She has to manage most of the work in
the family. After finishing the work she often sees that her seven months old
child is sleeping in a wet bed.
3. What type of feelings will arise in the child of china?
a. Satisfaction b. Mistrust
c. Sympathy d. Sense of security.
4. In future the child of china will-
i. Acquire more confidence
ii. Grow with frustration.
iii. Suffer from behavioral problems.
Which one is correct of the following ?
a. iand ii b. ii and iii
c. iand ili d. i, ii and iii
S

84 Home Science

Creative Question:

1. Eight year old Sezan always sit to read with self interest. After finishing
study he puts books in a bag himself. Father thanks him after watching this.
One day in school his mother sees that he quarrels with a friend. After
returning home she wants to know the causes of quarrel and direct him not
to do so. She never talks loudly with others in front of Sezan and does not
behave un-respectfully with others.

a. In which age the life of a child does not have any experience?

b. Write the meaning of say ‘yes’ to the child.

c. What type of influences will be on Sezan for the behavior of father?

d. Do you think that the parents of Sezan are guiding him properly? Justify
your answer.

2. Azad Rahman and Chaya Hossain often retort for small subject. Once in
this moment their 4 year child Enan expressed his desire to play with
mother. Not getting any response from mother he insists his father to go
outside for walking. Father snubs him and says to sit quietly. By watching
this, his grandmother called him near her to tell a story. This type of event
occurs very often in the family of Enan. For this type of reason a quite good
relation develops with grandmother of Enan.

a. Which one is important for good health and living of a child?
b. Write down in detail the benefits of colostrums.
c. Explain- what is the role of grandmother in that family for the
development of Enan.
d. Family environment of Enan is an obstacle for proper development.-
Analyze it.
ES
Rg

Chapter Eight
Psycho-social problems of adolescence- Remedies
and Prevention
Lesson 1 & 2- Psycho-social problems during the period
of adolescence
Ridita is a girl of 18 years old. Ridita is the only child of parents who is
meritorious and gifted child. Everybody from parents to relatives is expecting
great success of her. Parents fulfill all needs of their only child which makes all
types of opportunities to become best. Now Ridita is more tensed. Will she be
able to fulfill the dream of her parents? Will she be able to bring success in the
next admission test? She does not like anything, she becomes angry and feels
tired of simple matter. Recently she cannot sleep at night, she feels restless for
acute headache.
The above incident tells about the physical and mental problems of an
adolescent girl. The scenario of psycho social problem arises through these
problems. Do you know the meaning of psychosocial problem? Let us start to
know in detail about the problem.
Majority adolescent boys and girls pass their age without any big problem. But
some of them not only harm their life but their problems become the causes of
all of problems of their family members, neighborhood and classmates. All
these problems indirectly influence on all in the society. These problems are
psychosocial problems. Among the psychosocial problems of adolescence are
different types of criminality, drug addiction, depression, flee away from school
etc. The student who leaves from school before final examination, he not only
spoil the life of himself, he also becomes the burden for the society.
Two types of psychosocial problems are seen during the period of adolescence.
One is introvert and another is extrovert. The introvert boys and girls suffer
from various types of mental and emotional complexes, e.g. frustration, anxiety
etc. These types of problems are less expressed from outside. In real sense
perhaps on seeing them you may think as if he is in a normal condition. But he
suffers badly inside. This types of emotional problems later turn into different
physical problems, e.g. from frustration and depression there may arise apathy
in taking food and sleeping problems.
vey
S

86 Home Science
In case of extrovert the problems of problematic boys and girls are expressed
from their behaviors. The psychosocial problems of extrovert are drug
addiction, prone to different types of crime. Usually want of family bondage or
excessive indulgence of family brings problems of extrovert. In other side over
protection of parents is identified as main cause of problem of introvert.
Repressions for everything, the child always under surveillance are the
characteristics of over protective parents. Problems of both extrovert and
introvert are interrelated to each other e.g. many criminal suffers from
depression, again frustrated adolescent becomes addicted.
Juvenile delinquency -
An important phase of human development is the period of adolescence. This
time the physical and mental changes become rapid. Boys and girls of
adolescence period have to adjust with their changes. Adolescence period is the
time of reaching towards adulthood. Usually adolescent period is from the age
of 11 to 18 years.
If any adolescent engaged in unlawful work is called juvenile delinquent.
According to the child law of 1974 in the case of juvenile delinquency, if boys
are between the ages of 8 to 16 and girls up to 18 do antisocial activities they
have to be presented before court for correction. Juvenile delinquent is who
does not obey existing social system and behave against lawful behavior from
immature age. If those activities which are punishable crime for adult, are done
by the boys of below 16 years and girls below 18 years is juvenile delinquency.
If juvenile delinquency is proved there is no system of punishment. They are
kept in the correctional center to correct behavior.
The crime of aged are planned but the crime of adolescent is unplanned and more
than count. Those types of delinquency which are found in our country are flee from
school, bad behavior to girls, theft, hijacking, murder, dacoits, attacking others,
taking drug etc.
Psychologists identify juvenile delinquent in some different ways. Any type of
unacceptable work if not punishable in the eyes of law is also juvenile
delinquency. e.g. unlawfully possessed asset of anybody, make loss of
anybodys properties, create dangerous situation for the life of others etc. Flee
away by throwing stone to any car, set fire without any cause, spoil anything in
the purpose of only amusement, any kind of unlawful behavior are considered
as juvenile delinquency. x
8

Psycho-social problems of adolescence-Remedies and prevention 87
Many children are engaged in criminal activities before adolescence period.
They usually commit criminal activities continuously from the age of 7/8 years.
e.g. attacking each other, spoil things of others, theft etc. The causes of these
types of crimes are mental problems or disaster of a family. It was proved from
the research of juvenile delinquency that those who are habituated in criminal
activities from early age they continue the criminal activities in adulthood as
well . More suggestions of researcher about them are-

@ The numbers of boys are more than girls among these criminals.

@ Among them more families are poor or broken family that means
divorce of parents or living separated.

@ The rearing practices of parents of delinquent are not proper because
want of discipline, avoidance of parents towards them exists in these
families.

@ Heredity is also considered as responsible for these types of crimes, that
means the father and other members of the family are also criminal.

@ Many times the criminal cannot be free from criminal world, for that
crime becomes permanent.

Those who are engaged in criminal activities before adolescence period among

them some symptoms are seen from their early age. They are inattentive in

school than their peers, their IQ is less and there is no friendship relation with
peers. These types of symptoms increase the potentialities of a younger child to
become juvenile delinquent.

There is another type of criminal who comes to the criminal world at the age of

adolescence. They become criminal for the pressure of peer group. These

criminality is not so severe. They do criminal work with the group of same age.

The results of research about them are —

@ Parents of this type of adolescents are not so aware to guide their child.

@ They do crime to stay with group.

@ The rate of crime is more in the middle period of adolescence.

@ It removes after late adolescence.

Remedies and Prevention (Curative and Preventive Services) -

For any kind of problem prevention is better than cure. To solve when some
« problems arises is called remedies or cure. A preventive measure is taking
bind .

S measures when the problem does not arise.

88 Home Science
Tn our country there are correctional institutions to cure juvenile delinquency. In
these institutions according to the rate of criminal job, time span is determined.
That criminal is kept in the correctional institution for the specific time. There is
arrangement for vocational training along with general education in the
correctional institutions, ¢.g. work of sewing, wooden work, automobile work
etc. The objectives of these training are after finishing their when correctional
times when they return home they can be self dependent, can earn for living.
During staying in the institution they have to obey some rules and regulations.
The executive of the institution evaluate after observation of the criminal boys
and girls and make arrangement for them to leave the institution.
To prevent juvenile delinquency, what to do -
@ Children of every family should have a [gyrase ay
strong bondage with parents. Ke a SS Uris
@ Among the each member of the family Pe - Se od
there must create interrelated good ~~. Se
relationship among the members of the on ‘ Lett a
family. There will be no distance of 7 sok — ¥ y
relationship between them. z= <a
@ Should prevent from breaking the family. | $ |
Must develop understanding between mother “|: : ~« M
and father. Preventive measures
@ Must arrange training about child rearing methods.
@ Try to solve if any anomalies created in the school. By the joint efforts of
family and school authority any problem of student will be easy to solve.
To free from juvenile delinquency the adolescent has to do something. At first
the boys and girls of adolescent period have to refrain from giving
encouragement to their friends group from criminal activities. Secondly they
have to select group of good friends for mixing. Those who break the rules and
regulations should be known as bad friends.
Parents have to keep special eye for the child so that the child cannot be
attached to any criminal activities. Always site an example of bad areas of
criminal world in front of the child so that they can understand its severity and
abstain from these types of activities. If the relation between parents and
children are like friends, then the problems of adolescence decrease.
Task 1- What are the causes of juvenile delinquency existing in our country? 2
Task 2- List what to do for prevention and remedies of this crime. R

Psycho-social problems of adolescence-Remedies and prevention 89
Lesson 3 — Frustration and Depression
Shapna wake up from sleep at late mid night. But still lies on the bed. She
becomes disturbed when anybody calles her and shows tantrum. Shapna, a
student of class nine does not go to school for few days. Whole day she stays at
her room. Does not keep contact with friends. She does not get any joy from
any work. There is no eagerness to watch television serial. The characteristics
of Shapna were not like these. The cheerful Shapna has changed.
Depression of adolescence period

Different events in our daily life bring mentally disturbances. It is natural to
dislike any work. But when this condition of mind continues for some weeks
and it influences the body then it also becomes the causes of anxicty.
Depression is one kind of mental condition where there are unhappiness of
mind and feelings of monotony. As a result the interest of common daily
activities is lost, and he/she suffers from frustration apathy for taking food,
disturbances in sleeping etc. For the event mentioned upward the symptoms of
depression is clearly seen in Shapna. If the depression is severe the fallowing
symptoms can be found -

@ Most of the time of the day becomes mentally disturbed or feelings of

irritation.

@ Interest decreases in any delightful work.

@ Loss of body weight or loss of body strength.

@ Disturbances in sleeping and duration of sleeping cannot maintain. Awake

again and again, sleeplessness or woke up at mid night etc.
@ Want of attention, if tension is more, cannot remember anything.
@ Think about harm of own, plan for suicide.

90 Home Science
Depression is seen very much among girls than boys. It was seen in research
that depression of adolescence period has relation with the mental condition of
early life. The family where the relation between parents and child has no
strong bondage in early age, deprivation of love and affection in child rearing
practices and negative mental feelings developed due to the death of mother or
father in the family, the boys, and the girls of these types of families are
affected and there are probabilities of frusration and depression among them.
The causes of frustration and depression

@ Excessive strictness in child rearing practices may bring depression. The
independent entity of an individual never developes in them. They
themselves cannot take decision, lose confidence. Boys and girls of
these types of families become frustrated, think themselves criminals.

@ Marital maladjustment of parents in the family and divorce creates
depression among children. Financial crisis of family brings depression
among boys and girls during adolescence period.

@ Deteriorate the relation with peer group, misunderstanding with intimate
friend, rejected by friend and broken friendships create depression.

@ Unsuccessful in study, unsuccessful in love affairs, excessive mental
stress brings depression.

Remedies and prevention (curative and preventive measures)

In depression boys and girls feel themselves very lonely and helpless. They cry
in small reason, lose their skills of works and if severe then think about suicide.
This type of depression can create very dangerous end.

To prevent depression and in remedies which is to be done are-

@ Learn to evaluate any situation positively.

@ Learn to search the good areas of any events.

@ Be patient to accept the complex situation. Express your own thinking
and feelings to parents or any one dependable.

@ Keep busy yourself in hobbies, amusement, creative works and sports and
games.

@ Give companion in the depression of others, be sympathetic to him.
Create situation where he can express his personal feelings to others.

Task 1- Mention the causes of depression, along with suggest curative)
measures. g

Psycho-social problems of adolescence-Remedies and prevention 91
Lesson 4- Mental stress (pressure)

In daily life due to various reasons our mind is filled with sadness. Sometimes
rudé talk of others or ill behavior makes us feeling hurt in mind. If own desire
or rteeds are not fulfilled it creates sadness in mind. Again any bad news and
events are the causes of our sadness in mind. From these sadness of mind
credtes mental stress. Mental stress is one of the painful and uneasy emotional
conditions which create conflict and frustration in our mind. So we become
restless and excited and the internal balance of the body is destabilized, we feel
mental stress. Sometimes this stress becomes severe and sometimes mild.
Mental stress can be positive or negative.

Positive stress - In everyday life we have to face many types of mental stress. If
it is under controllor or can be controlled then this stress in many times develop
our work ability and brings success. e.g. - during examination which mental
stress is created it increases the attention of study. Again interview for job or new
job, responsibility to arrange different activities or functions create positive
mental pressure.

Negative stress - Some stress in human mind may create negative stress. So,
negative reaction arises in mind. This is negative stress. We cannot control this
stress easily. In our healthy normal life it creates obstacles or lack of rhythm less.
Negative stress creates various physical reactions among us, as-

@ Palpitation, shivering hands and legs, dryness of tongue, restlessness,
feeling excitement, disturbances in behavior etc. creates various
reactions.

@ Longitudinal and severe mental pressure influences badly in the body.
e.g. - it creates heart disease, high blood pressure, memory loss, lack of
appetite and sleeplessness etc.

Mental pressure or stress is often visible in our life. It is understood easily from
the following two events:-
xc Teacher observed that Mina is seated in the class room with sadness. When
8 teacher wanted to know the cause about crying of Mina, she informs that her

92 Home Science
younger brother is ill. Doctor visited him but his fever is not cured. She is very
much concerned about her brother. So she cannot give attention in her study.
Rafique is the student of class nine. His father is dead. There is hardship in the
family. So he works in a bookshop along with his studies. He has desire for
studies. Due to his financial hardship he always thinks how he can carry on his
studies.
The ability to bear the mental pressure is not same for all. Again the reaction to
pressure is not same for all. During pressure many of them remain steady and
quiet, many of them become restless and exited. Personality of a person, age,
mental form, feelings of respect etc. are intimately related with mental pressure.
Causes of mental stress - Mental stress may be created for various reasons.
@ Any unexpected event or bad news.
@ Family disturbances, poverty,
deprivation, sorrows and pains, want | Rs r,
fy 1&
of security etc. x I, oy rs a
@ Social torture, social discrimination, AA SAA Vi
deterioration of morality. NW Oe Sa =
@ Non fulfillment of own desire. i A (
@ Continuous pressure of work. (Z is |
@ Lack of adequate preparation at the |
time of examination. Meena is in frustration
@ Always in great fear or anxiety.
Ways to protect oneself from mental stress -
@ Mental stress must be protected in any painful situation or in accident.
@ Must keep patience. Patience is a great virtue of human.
e@ If any family matter is the cause of mental stress it must be faced by
consultation with all family members.
co}
S
AQ

Psycho-social problems of adolescence-Remedies and prevention 93
e@ If mind is saddened by the discriminating behavior of any person must
try to convince by speaking with him about your condition of mind.
@ Study quite well timely so that you will not become frustrated after
failing in the examination.
@ Finish all the works timely by time planning or work planning. So that it
will not create mental stress and success will come in life.
e@ If any pain, fear or anxiety arises in mind you have to talk with faithful
dependable friends, relatives and teacher to free from that.
@ Must be careful in selecting friends. Friendship must be with good and
honest man.
@ Ifanybody makes disturbance or speak illogical you have to face him
strongly.
Task- If any matter or event creates mental stress then what will you do.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Question:
1. What is the age limit of adolescence period?
a. 8-16 b. 8-18
c. 11-18 d. 16-18
2. Which one is the psychosocial problem of adolescent?
a. Apathy to food b. Depression
c. Disturbance in sleeping d. Fatigue
Answer to the question no. 3 and 4 by reading the following paragraph.
Suman is the student of Class IX. He is inattentive in the class. He gives
~ importance to saying of friends than parents. When mother says anything he
S breaks the household articles of the home.

94 Home Science
3. What symptoms of problem are seen in Suman?
a. Depression b. Anguish
c. Juvenile delinquency d. Anxiety
4. How is it possible to bring him out from this phase?
i. By selecting good friends.
ii. Discourage in criminal activities.
iii. Establish strong parent-child relationship.
Which one is correct of the following ?
a. iandii b. ii and iii
c. iand iii d._ i, ii and iii
Creative Question
1. Emon is thirteen years old. He often flees from school, he is inattentive in
school. His school teacher comes to his house and could know that both of
his parents doing job and lives separately.
a. What are preventive measures?
b. Explain the causes of apathy towards food during adolescence.
c. Explain the causes of delinquency among boys and girls of same age of
Emon.
d. Justify in favor of your answer whether it is possible to bring back Emon
from this condition.
2
8

Chapter Nine
Retarded Child
ro) \
=> {
\ .
Lesson 1- Retarded Child
It is expected for all of us to have a healthy child. Such a child is found in families
whose physical structure is not normal, has no hand and feet, does not hear, so
cannot talk. Many of them do not see anything by their eyes or see less. Due to low
intelligence, cannot behave socially and cannot exchange feelings rightly. They are
retarded children. They are one of them in our society, so it is necessary to know
about them. If there is any concept about retarded child it would create for all to
show the positive attitude towards them and the retarded will not think himself
separated from others or will not feel helpless.
Causes of retardation: There are different causes to become a retarded child.
e.g. — (1) Hazards of prenatal period (2) Hazards of delivery time (3) Various
influences of postnatal period.
1. Hazards of prenatal period-
In prenatal period the physical and mental condition of mother and environment of
womb influence the developmental pattern of a child. During this period the normal
development can be hampered for various reasons and a retarded child can be born.
The causes are-
=
R

96 Home Science

@ Diseases of mother- If mother suffers from german measles, chicken
pox, mumps, tuberculosis, malaria, rubella virus, aids etc, within first
three months of pregnancy their influence on the embryo becomes
harmful. As a result the child may become physically deformed and
mentally retarded. Besides these the physical condition like diabetes,
high blood pressure, problems of kidney, problems of thyroid gland of
mother may affect the prenatal child and may become retarded.

@ Malnutrition of mother - If pregnant mother suffers long time from
anemia and does not get adequate nutritious food then the embryonic
structure may become deformed, the development of brain is hampered
and the child becomes retarded.

@ Medicine of mother- If mother takes medicine without consultation
with doctors it becomes harmful for the embryo. There are many
medicines which block to create limbs of embryo and the child may bear
with having defective limbs or any type of retardation.

@ Age of mother- Whether the age of mother is less or more at the
moment of pregnancy both are hazardous for the embryo. The
development of sex organ is not completed in immature age so there is
possibility to give brith to a defective baby of immature mother. Again
normal functions of glands decrease in aged mother. Woman who give
birth to her first child after the age of 35 the probability is much more to
have a retarded child.

@ Repeated convulsion - If mother is attacked by repeated convulsive
disease, the child of mother’s womb does not get adequate oxygen and it
harms the brain of the fetus. So the child may be retarded.

@ Marriage with relatives - Marriage with cousins with whom has blood
relation there may be possibilities to become a retarded child

e@ Affect of radiation - If x-ray or any way radiation enteres into the body
of mother during first three months of pregnancy the nervous system of
embryo is affected, so the child becomes mentally retarded.

e@ Rh factor in blood of parents - If the blood group of mother is Rh
positive and blood group of father is Rh negative then the blood group of
fetus may be Rh positive or negative. If there are no similarities between
the Rh elements of mother with embryo then it is called Rh imbalance or
Rh incompatibility. Due to this a still born baby may be born. If the fetus %
is alive, it will born with, paralysis or born with defect of brain. s

Retarded child 97
2. Length of gestation period (hazards of delivery time)-

@ Ifthe length of gestation time is long, if the umbilical cord is twisted in the
neck of the fetus, if unable to take breath immediately after birth and
inadequate oxygen etc. can affect the brain cell and the child becomes
intellectually disabled.

@ Any type of head injury during delivery time e.g. any type of fall down,
pressure on the head may be the cause of retardation.

3. Various influences of postnatal period --

@ If the newborn is attacked by jaundice or if the amount of bilirubin
abnormally increases in blood, the brain cell may be affected and the
child becomes mentally retarded.

e@ If the child suddenly falls down, gets injury of head or the victim of
physical or mental torture, so there may be probabilities to become
physical and mental retardation.

@ Poisonous elements of environment e.g.- Chemicals to kill insects,
fluoride, water mixed with arsenic etc. if enteres into the body of a
child, there may develop poisonous action, the child may become
retarded.

@ For normal growth and development of child different types of
nutritious foods are necessary for the child. Intake of inadequate
nutritious elements, the normal growth and development is hampered
and the child may become mentally and physically retarded.

Task- Write how you will create awareness among people of your locality
to prevent retardation of postnatal period of children.
Lesson 2- Identification of retardation
If retardation can be identified immediately after birth of a child then it can be
possible to reduce retardation by taking proper precaution measures or it is
possible to save the child from severe retardation. In babyhood if any
symptoms mentioned in the following are seen then you have to understand
that there are possibilities of retardation in the child. To become certain about
the matter you must take suggestions from doctor.

98 Home Science
Identification of Physical retardation - Many of the physical retardation can
be understood by seeing the child after birth. Some physical retardation are
expressed with the development of a child.
Cleft lip - In this case the upper lip is not formed properly; there remains a gap
in the lip. So it creates problems of taking food and speaking.
. )
G =,
/
Cleft lip telepage

Cleft palate - The bone of palate of upper side of the mouth and muscle do not
form properly. It creates problems in taking food, speaking and hearing.
Telepage - One or both the legs are bended inside or behind.
Spina bifita - The bone of spinal cord is not attached properly. As a result
spinal fluid comes out and swells in back side and it looks like a tumor or bag.
It creates problem to walk.
Cerebral pulsy- Many times during birth the newborn child seems slack or tardy.
With ages the child cannot move his hands and legs like other children. To rise
the head, to sit etc. become slow. It becomes uncomfortable to suck or swallow
milk.
Absence of different limbs of the body or deformed structure- The child is
born without limbs or incomplete limbs of the body, that means no hands or
legs, no finger or incomplete growth of finger. The physical shape of the body
may deform.
Identification of intellectual disability (mentally retarded) - Intellectually
disabled is one type of inability and the nature of this inability is permanent.
There is no treatment for this type of retardation. But behavior of children can
be improved by proper nurturing and learning. So we should arrange proper
care and learning by identifying it quickly and show sympathetic behavior
towards the child. But all the intellectually disabled are not same. g

Retarded child 99
Intellectually retarded child can be identify by seeing some of the
characteristics of the following-
@ The development of walking, movement, sitting, speaking etc are less
compared to his age.
@ The Child cannot give attention in any matter.
@ Can not understand any directives easily. Same directions have to be
given repeatedly.
@ The child cannot take any learning easily. Even learning of toilet training
cannot take easily.
@ Cannot do any kind of sharp work. Shows unwanted behavior.
@ Cannot mix with peers. Cannot show social behavior properly.
@ Faints frequently and shows convulsion.
Intellectual disability can be identified easily by seeing some diseases
related intimately with retardation.
Microcephaly - The size of the head is abnormally small. They are severely
retarded.
Hydrocephaly- Liquid gathered inside the head so the size of the head
becomes abnormally big. They are also severely retarded
Down’s syndrome- Round face, sharp eyes and eyelids become thick, the child
is weak and slack or loose at the moment of birth. Head, feet and shoulder
become short. To turn turtle, to sit and to walk are delayed and they are
intellectually retarded.
Cretinism- The physical and mental development is delayed. The production
of thyroid hormone is less in the body of child. For this reason which
symptoms are seen- The child develops slowly, forehead is small, faces and
hands are swollen and intellectual retardation remains.
Task- Write about the necessity of quick identification of retardation.
2
4

100 Home Science
Lesson 3- Identification of visually retardation and
hearing retardation and prevent of retardation.
If the fallowing condition of eye and ear are seen you have to go to doctor.
Identify the types of retardation and you have to take consultation.
Identification of visual retardation-
@ Red and swelling of eyelids. Dry plaster in the corner of the eyes.
@ Liquid secrets from eye or eyes.
@ Frequently rubbing and shrunk eyes.
@ Make error to know the alphabet and see alphabet reverse.
@ Irregular gap seen during writing, cannot keep the lines straight.
@ Problems arise to see near and far.
Identification of hearing retardation-
@ Problems of deformed ear and defect in ear, diseases of ear etc.
@ Pronunciation is not clear, difficulties to pronounce the alphabet of
consonant or talk less.
@ Try to hear anything by keeping hand on ear, hearing radio and
television increasing the volume or hears by going closer.
@ Ask any question repeatedly and for one question answer differently.
@ Exchange feelings without speaking but through movement of hand and
face or exchange feelings through sign language.
Prevent retardation- To prevent retardation is very important matter. Awareness
is needed for all so that the retarded child cannot be born and after birth the child
should not be the victim of retardation. For this what you have to do is —
Taking adequate nutritious food during pregnancy-The mother has to take
adequate nutritious food during pregnancy. In many cases due to
malnourishment a child is born before full trimester or the child is born with
low birth weight. These types of children can become mentally and physically
retarded. To prevent retardation nutritious food is more important for first few
months of pregnancy. Taking iodized salt during pregnancy prevents the mental
and hearing retardation of a child.
Careful to take medicine- By taking medicine during pregnancy by
consultation with doctor, prohibit drug and cigarette, the birth defect and mental
retardation can be prevented. 8

Retarded child 101
Taking preventive vaccine- To prevent mentally retardation, mother should
take preventive vaccine of rubella virus or german measles before pregnancy.
To save from tetanus all the women of 15-49 years of age should take TT
vaccine.
Give adequate nutritious food to the child and the adolescent- Eye defect is
seen among the children due to deficiency of vitamin rich food. Defect can be
prevented if children take deep green leafy vegetables and yellow fruits.
Immediately after birth the child should take the first milk (colostrums) of
mother because this milk contains yellow color colostrums which increases the
ability to prevent diseases-
Preserve healthy environment- One of the causes of severe retardation is
dense population and unhealthy sewerage system. So you have to try for good
provisions of healthy environment.
Prevent pregnancy at late age- One of the causes of mental retardation is
pregnancy at late age. So you have to discourage pregnancy at late age.
Prevent Marriage among blood relation- All kinds of retardation can be
prevented if marriage among blood relation is stopped.
Take quick measures in injury and contaminated diseases- Injury in ears,
eyes, head and contaminated diseases of the child should be prevented as soon
as possible and consult with doctor.
Careful to use chemicals- One of the reasons of health problem is the use of
those chemicals which are used to kill insects. Many people of the society,
without conception about different hazards and prior warning, directly use
chemicals to kill, insects in the field. As a result many of them become the
victim of visual retardation and subject to paralysis.
Hazardous working place- Many children of our country work in a hazardous
environment, though it is prohibited in labor law. But due to poverty children
are engaged in hazardous work. As a result they are burnt by fire, lose limbs
and become blind. Due to injury of backbone or head injury etc. the child may
becomes the victim of retardation. In our country many children at the time of
harvesting get wounds in eyes by shooting paddy and become retarded.
Task- Discuss about your duty to increase social awareness to prevent
x retardation.
N

102 Home Science
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Mention the age of a woman to have a child which is more alarming as a
retarded one.
a. 25 years b. 30 years
c. 35 years d. 40 years
2. Which disease harm the embryo during prenatal period?
a. Influenza b. Common fever
c. Chicken pox d. Rheumatic fever
Answer to the question no. 3 and 4 by reading the following paragraph:
The child of Rimi cannot take breath immediately after birth. Nurse runs here
and there. After sometimes the breathing of the child started. So the life of the
child is saved. Later on, the child becomes intellectually retarded.
3. What should the nurse have done immediately after the birth of the child?
a. To give water to drink b. Give honey to taste
c. Provide oxygen d. Rubbing oil
4. Which one is the reason of retardation of the child of Rimi?
1, Gestation period was lengthy for the child
2. Damaged the cell of the brain of the child.
3. Pressure on the head during birth
Which one is correct of the following?
a. iand ii b. ii and iii
c. iand iii d. i, ii and iii
Creative Question
1. The age of Kana is 35. She suffered from malaria during pregnancy. Even she
does not eat properly. She does not care for herself. The rate of bilirubin of
blood of the child increases immediately after birth. In growing time he could
not give any attention in any matter, the development of walking and
movement etc. also was less.
a. What do you call the dissimilarity in Rh of mother and child?
b. Why a child is called retarded? Explain.
c. What kind of Kana’s child can be identified? Explain.
d. Kana’s unawareness has brought the end result of the child. Give your &
suggestions about matter. 8

Part—C
Food and Meal Management
2 a Oe a
ee ; ~B
: AF a:
After studying this section we will be able to
@ Explain the functions of food:
@ Know the structure, source and functions of various nutrients of food
and classify them;
@ Define different diseases which occur from lack of mutrients;
@ Have a conception of digestion of food:
@ Know the need of food and importance of nutrients in adolescent period:
@ Describe a disciplined life;
@ Advise proper lifestyle to patients suffermg from different diseases, such
as diabetes, heart disease, high blood pressure, etc.;
@ Describe the purpose of recipe in preparing food ;
@ Explain various ways of serving food.
SD
3
N

Chapter Ten
Functions of Food and Nutrients

Lesson - 1: Functions of Food

To survive in life, food is inevitable. Various nutrients which we get from foods

perform different functions in our body. Functions of foods are —
1. They build our body and help us to grow
2. Prevent decays
3. Produce heat and give us energy for work
4. Regulate internal functions of our body
5. Produce preventive to fight against diseases.

1. Build Body and Help to Grow: Protein in food builds up our body.
Nutrients are the vital elements of our biological structure. A child grows up
from a single cell in a mother’s womb. By receiving nutrients from the
mother this single cell gradually grows up and divides to form two cells.
Innumerable cells are developed by this process and later on a whole of a
human child is borne this way. Thus while being in mother’s womb a child
needs foods for nutrients. Foods help us to grow by building our body.
Different nutrients present in food perform the job.

2. Prevent Decays: Every single moment we are going through decaying. To
prevent and repair this decay, is a major function of food. Old cells die and
some of the nutrients pass out from our body. The rest of the nutrients take
part in producing new cells. New nutrients which we get from food, unite
and help them in this function. We can understand this fact from a simple
example. If we use the same pair of shoes regularly then they are eroded but
our feet are not. This is because every moment new cells are produced in
place of old decayed cells. When we get hurt or become ill new cells are
produced in our body and our wounds get healed this way.

Building body “ helping to grow
Repleting decay 4@—___Finetions ef food Producing heat and energ
ea ES Producing preventive

Regulating internal functions power against diseases

Functions of Food 20
8

Functions of Food and Nutrients 105

3. Produce Heat and Energy: For example a car needs fuel, such as petrol or
gas, to run its engine. This fuel burns to produce energy so that it can run. We
can compare our body with an engine. The nutrients of food burn as fuel in
our cells and produce energy. This energy keeps us moving and helps us doing
our actions properly. Heat which is produced in our body gives us the power
to work. Heat is necessary for blood circulation, respiration, digestion,
defecation and some other vital functions of life. Loss of energy occurs even
when we are asleep. Energy is required to maintain normal body temperature,
build up cells, produce fluids in the body, produce milk in lactating breast
feeding mothers and for many more internal works. Moreover we need energy
for moving around, playing, interacting with others and many more external
functions.

4. Regulate Internal Functions: Several chemical reactions take place in our
body for which we must have food. When we take food it burns to produce
energy. This energy is used for muscle movements, new cell and fluid
production, fluid ejection and many more. Some nutrients are very important
considering these chemical reactions. These are vitamins, minerals, proteins
and water. Proteins and minerals take part in producing several enzymes and
hormones in our body. Our internal reactions and processes are controlled by
these enzymes and hormones. Thus we can say, we cannot deny the necessity
of food for our internal functions and processes.

5. Produce Preventive Power to Fight Against Diseases: Everyday we are
attacked by different microorganisms or contagious agents. Our body’s
natural defence system give us protection against this attack. Our defence
mechanism is built up by taking in different nutritious foods. Proteins,
vitamins and minerals play the vital parts in developing our own immune
system. Food keeps us healthy. On the other hand our body becomes
malnourished if we do not take enough food for longer period. Our body
loses its natural power to fight against diseases and different symptoms of
various diseases expose. We get ill very often. When any contagious agents
attack us some of our cells die and sometimes even tissues are affected.
Tissue replaces this loss by building up new cells in our body and to do this
job it needs energy, proteins and other nutrients.

From the above discussion it can be said that food not only fulfils our hunger

but performs many other functions in our body that are of foremost importance.

So to be healthy we must take foods in adequate amounts.

106 Home Science
Lesson — 2: Nutrients of Food
When food splits up different types of bio-chemical ingredients are found.
These ingredients keep us healthy and active by performing various functions
in our body. They are called nutrients. We use these nutrients for our different
purposes. Nutrients are of six types. These are-
So we can say that we can have six types of nutrients from our foods. These
nutrients are very necessary for building up our body, guarding it and
producing heat. These six nutrients perform more than one function in our
body. We shall now discuss about these nutrients.
Proteins
The word ‘Protein’ is derived from the Greek word ‘Proteos’ meaning ‘to
take the first place’. Proteins play a significant role in all activities of
living organisms. We cannot even imagine a living being without proteins.
They are essential for both animals and plants. For this reason protein is
considered as main element of food.
Formation of Proteins: Proteins are complex organic compounds which
contain carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen. Certain proteins contain
sulphur, phosphorus, iron, iodine, copper and other inorganic elements. On
hydrolysis protein first gives out smaller units called amino acids and then
carbon, hydrogen and other basic elements.
Amino acids: On hydrolysis large molecules of protein give out smaller units
of amino acids. Amino acids contain a carboxyl group (-CooH) and an amino
group (-NH?). They are thus known as the amino acids. Amino acids are of two
types.
gee imino acids ~~,
Essential amino acids Non-essential amino acids

a. Essential Amino Acids: Some of the amino acids are not produced in our

body and we must meet their requirements through our food. These amino

acids are known as essential amino acids.
b. Non-essential Amino Acids: Some amino acids are manufactured in our ©

body from available chemicals. So we do not have to meet their requirements &

Functions of Food and Nutrients 107
through our food. These amino acids are termed as non-essential amino acids.

Classification:

a. On the basis of sources: Proteins are divided into two groups. These are:

1. Animal Protein: Proteins which we get from animal sources are termed
as animal protein, e.g. fish protein, meat protein, egg protein, etc.

2. Vegetable Protein: Vegetables are the sources of this kind of protein.
Nuts, soybean, etc, are some of its sources.

b. On the basis of presence of essential amino acids: Proteins are classified
into three groups based on the presence of essential amino acids in them.
These are:

1. Complete Proteins: A complete protein food contains all essential amino
acids in proper proportion to promote growth, maintenance and repair.
Examples of complete protein foods are milk, egg and fish.

2. Partially Incomplete Proteins: Partially incomplete proteins lack some
essential amino acids and so they help to maintain our body but growth
is not promoted. Vegetable proteins such as rice, pulse, flour, nut, potato
etc. are examples of this group. Lentil lacks methionine, rice lacks in
lysine, ete.

3. Incomplete Proteins: Incomplete proteins lack all the essential amino
acids, Thus they neither help maintenance nor growth. Zein of maize is
an example of this type of protein.

Sources of proteins- a ANS,
Animal proteins: fish, meat, egg, milk, a eee
cheese, -*< a %

, posset, etc. ty 7
Vegetable proteins: lentil, soybean, = ¥,. % ail
nuts, rice, wheat, etc. othe

Protein foods
Functions of Proteins:
1. Build body and help to grow: The most important function of protein is
= to build up our cells and help us to grow. Muscles and other tissues, bones,
8 cartilage, hair, nails and skin contain fairly high percentage of protein.

108 Home Science

2. Replete decays: Every moment our old cells are dying and new cells are
formed. Protein builds up new cells and replenishes the decay of cells.
Protein also heals our wound.

3. Produce heat: Proteins produce heat when our body meets the scarcity of
fats and carbohydrates. 1gm of protein can produce 4 kcal of energy.

4. Give immune power against diseases: Different types of external
organisms enter our body and become the cause of diseases. Proteins
produce antibodies which fight against these organisms and give us
preventive power against diseases.

5. Develop mental ability: Protein is necessary for mental growth. Mental
power or the development of brain retards if necessary protein is not
available during the development period.

6. Control internal functions: Enzymes and hormones are made up of
proteins and they play vital roles in regulating the internal functions of our
body.

7. Transport important elements in our body: Hemoglobin, a blood
protein, carries atmospheric oxygen to different parts of our body.

8. Regulate water balance: Plasma is another kind of blood proteins that
regulates water balance in our body.

Symptoms of Protein Deficiency:

In children —

Children face various symptoms due to deficiency of proteins. Some of them

are as follows —

al Retarded etooril Bt bady @ Mental retardation

& Weighbloss @ Reduced secretions of enzymes

@ Cracks in the skin a

; : @ Indigestion
mi Discolomiion ofhait @ Reduced resistance to infection.
@ Mental irritation
These symptoms are found in the pre-kwashiorkor state. %

3
AQ

Functions of Food and Nutrients 109
A marasmus affected child Akwashiorkor affected child

If these conditions persist for long symptoms such as swelling of face, hands
and feet occur and this condition is known as kwashiorkor. Children aged
between | to 4 are mostly affected by this disease condition.
Marasmus occurs when the diet is low in both protein and calories. The body
looks shrunken. The child has an emaciated look and wasting of muscles
occurs.
In adults —

e@ Ascites of hands and feet

@ Anaemia

@ Reduced prevention power against diseases.

Task - Describe the necessity of proteins in our body.
Lesson — 3: Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates occupy the major portion of our daily diet. Foods containing
carbohydrates are cheaper than other foods. They are the main sources of heat
and energy for our body.
Formation of Carbohydrates: Carbohydrates are compounds which contain
carbon, hydrogen and oxygen as their basic elements. Carbohydrates are called
“Hydrates of Carbon’ since they carry hydrogen and oxygen in the ratio of 2:1
respectively just as water does. Thus we can say that any compound containing
hydrogen and oxygen in the ratio of 2:1 can be termed as carbohydrate.
« Classification - Carbohydrates are classified, based on the number of
S saccharide groups in them:

110 Home Science
1. Monosaccharides 2. Disaccharides 3. Polysaccharides
1. Monosaccharides: Carbohydrates formed by a single simple carbohydrate
molecule are termed as monosaccharides. On hydrolysis or by digestion,
monosaccharides cannot be simplified as they are the simple form of
carbohydrates. In human nutrition only hexoses are of importance. The three
monosaccharides of hexose group are glucose, fructose and galactose.

a. Glucose: The most common simple carbohydrate is glucose. It is
present in fruits, cereals and honey.

b. Fructose: Fructose known as fruit sugar is found in honey, ripe
fruits and in very few vegetables.

c. Galactose: Galactose is not present in nature. It is present only in
milk sugar lactose; on hydrolysis lactose yields galactose and glucose.

2. Disaccharides: They are complex sugars with two saccharide groups and are
formed by the condensation of two monosaccharides. Commonly found
disaccharides are sucrose, lactose and maltose.

a. Sucrose: Sucrose, otherwise known as invert sugar, is present in
sugarcane, beetroot and in many fruits and vegetables, and honey.
Either by hydrolysis or by enzyme action it is simplified into one
molecule of glucose and fructose.

‘

b. Lactose: Lactose is also known as milk sugar and contains glucose
and galactose.

'

c. Maltose: Maltose or malt sugar is a disaccharide which contains two
molecules of glucose.Starch is converted to maltose before breaking
down into glucose.

:
el
3
aq

Functions of Food and Nutrients 111
3. Polysaccharides
On hydrolysis polysaccharides are simplified into large complex molecules of
monosaccharides. Several hundreds of glucose units are linked together in
polysaccharides. Starch, glycogen and cellulose are the common forms of
polysaccharides.
a. Starch: Starch is the main source of nourishment for human race.
Plants store carbohydrates in the form of starch. All starches are
broken down into glucose in the digestive system. Rice, wheat,
potato, tapioca, cassava, etc. contain considerable amount of starch.
By hydrolysis with different enzymes they produce glucose in the
body. It is not available in animals.
--->[Glucose n| + Here, n means lots of molecules
b. Glycogen: Glycogen can be described as the animal starch as it is in
this form animals store carbohydrate in the body. It is not found in
plants. When we fast for long or do continuous hard labor glycogen
is broken down into glucose to meet the immediate need of energy
for the body.
Glycogen | --->__ |lots of glucose molecules
ce. Cellulose: More than 3,000 glucose units are there in cellulose. It is
found only in plants and not of human utilization. Our body cannot
split cellulose due to the absence of necessary enzyme. It has an
important role in defecation. Cereals, such as rice, wheat, barley,
chick-pea, etc. and the outer most cover of vegetables contain
cellulose.
\ See Cellulose /
Sources of Carbohydrates:
The following foods are arranged according to the amount of carbohydrates in
them (from larger amount to smaller amount) —
% @ Sugar, candies, chocolates, sweetmeats.
S
N

112 Home Science

@ Sago, arrowroot. el ia |

@ Rice, maize, barley, wheat. 1a, oa es

@ Potatoes. . Gt = a

@ Dry fruits, e.g. dates, raisin, etc. = cae at = A

@ Lentil, soybean, nuts. Carbohydrate Foods °

@ Fresh fruits, e.g. grape, banana, apple, mango, jackfruit, pineapple, etc.

@ Green vegetables, e.g. spinach, cabbage, kitchen-vegetable, pumpkin etc.

One should meet 50 to 60 percent of total calories from carbohydrate foods.
Functions of Carbohydrates:

1, The most important function of carbohydrate is to supply energy or
fuel for the body. Thus it is called as body fuel. 4 kcal energy is
produced by 1 gm of carbohydrate.

2. Carbohydrates prevent ketosis by sparing fats from extreme burning.

3. If carbohydrate supply is enough in the diet, protein is spared for important
functions of it. This effect exerted by carbohydrate is called protein-sparing
effect.

4. In the presence of carbohydrate a certain kind of organism produces
vitamin ‘K’ and vitamin ‘B’ in the intestine.

5. Cellulose prevents constipation. Liver is protected against bacterial
toxins by producing glucuronic acid or acetyl groups from
carbohydrates. Thus carbohydrates have protective and detoxifying
action in liver.

6. Nervous tissues use glucose as the sole element for their energy.

7. Helps to consume protein, vitamins and minerals.

8. Prevents foods containing partially incomplete protein to produce heat,
as a result protein is not consumed. It is called protein sparing action.

2
&

Functions of Food and Nutrients 113
Symptoms of Carbohydrate Deficiency:
1. Production of heat and energy reduces when carbohydrate becomes
deficient in our body.
2. Constipation becomes a common problem when we avoid cellulose in
our diet.
Task: Which type of carbohydrates is more useful for us and why?
Lesson - 4: Lipids and Vitamins
Among the six nutrients lipid or fat produces the largest amounts of energy in
our body. Nearly all natural foods contain lipid. Fats are esters of fatty acids with
glycerol. True fat has one molecule of organic ester of glycerol and three
molecules of fatty acids.
Classification of fats:
a. Fats are classified, based on their nature:
1. Solid Fats: Fats that remain solid at room temperature and in normal
pressure are termed as solid fats, e.g. animal fat, butter etc.
2. Liquid Fats: Liquid fats remain liquid at room temperature and in
normal pressure, e.g. soybean-oil, mustard-oil, etc.
b. According to their sources fats are classified into two groups:
1. Plant Lipids: Fats we get from plant sources are known as plant lipids,
e.g. coconut-oil, mustard-oil etc.
2. Animal Lipids: Animal lipids are available in animals, e.g. ghee, butter,
fish-oil, etc.
c. Fats are grouped into three, based on their sources:
1. First Category Lipids: Soybean-oil, ghee, butter, mustard-oil, cod
liver-oil, shirk-oil, etc. contain 90-100% lipid.
2. Second Category Lipids: In these sources lipid content is 40-50%.
Almond, peanut, cashew nut, walnut, coconut, etc. belong to this group.
3. Third Category Lipids: Here available lipid counts for 15-20%. Milk,
egg, fish, meat, liver, etc. are the best sources of this kind of lipid.
20-25% calories should come from fats in our daily diet.

114 Home Science
Functions of Lipids:
The main function of lipid is to supply heat and energy for the body.1 gm of
lipid yields 9 kcal of energy. Lipid is stored as fuel in the body and burnt for
energy whenever needed.
1. Cholesterol and phospholipids are two general elements of cell walls.
2. Fats are the carriers of fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E and K.
3. Adipose tissue, where fat is stored, serves as an insulation material in injury.
Vital organs of the body are thus protected.
4. Lipid keeps our bodies warm by preventing the wastage of heat.
5. Essential fatty acids help to maintain tissues, their normal structure and
efficiency. Thus we are protected from any kind of skin diseases.
Deficiency of Fats:
1. Fat-soluble vitamins cannot function without the presence of fats.
2. Skin becomes dry and itching . During infancy a deficiency of essential
fatty acids results in eczema.
Lesson - 5 : Vitamins
Research results showed that natural foods contain some chemical compounds
other than carbohydrates, proteins and fats and their absence results in various
diseases such as beriberi, nyctalopia, ricket, anaemia, etc. These diseases can
be cured by taking adequate amount of some special substances known as
vitamins. Vitamins can be defined as complex organic compounds needed in
small quantities by us but necessary for the growth and maintenance of good
health in human beings. If vitamins are not present in sufficient quantities in
the diet, vitamin deficiency diseases occur. Other nutrients depend on vitamins
for their vital roles in our body.
Classification: Vitamins may be classified broadly into two groups, based on
their solubility: =
S
Q

Functions of Food and Nutrients 115
™.2. P e! ; e . ee xd

Q . Se -

me % " & me f a
ahi / . . a” . 4 “« a

- 3 r é ‘
Fruits and Vetgetable

1. Fat-soluble Vitamins: Fat-soluble vitamins are soluble in fats and fat
solvents but insoluble in water. Four of them are: vitamin A, D, E, and K.

2. Water-soluble Vitamins: Water-soluble vitamins are soluble in water but
insoluble in fats or fat solvents. Vitamin B complex and vitamin C belong to
this category.

Functions of Vitamins:
® Vitamins keep us healthy and active by increasing our preventive power
@ Help us to grow. Vitamins are vital elements for proper growth of a zygote.
® Has a tole im reproductive function.
@ Keep our eyes and skin in their perfect condition.
@ Build blood in our body.
@ Help other nutrients to perform their works properly.

Task: Describe the functions of vitamin.

=
&

116 Home Science

Lesson — 6: Vitamin ‘A’ and ‘D’

Vitamin ‘A’

Vitamin A is a fat soluble vitamin. Retinol is the generally accepted chemical

name for vitamin A. It is colorless and stable to heat but unstable to ultraviolet

rays.

Functions of Vitamin A:

@ Vitamin A plays important role in the | @ Vitamin A keeps our glands normal and
maintenance of normal vision in dim light. active.
. . ; @ Vitamin A is also known as anti-infective
@ It is essential for normal bone formation. vitamin as it provides resistance power
@ It also helps in the integrity of the epithelium, | _ * the body. ;
especially the mucous membranes. @ Vitamin A plays an important role in
maintaining the structure of myelin sheath.

Sources of Vitamin A

1. Animal Sources: Preformed vitamin A (retinol) is supplied by foods of
animal origin; they are egg, liver, fish liver oil, kidneys, butter, milk and the
fat of muscle meats which is very rich in the vitamin. Milk especially
colostrums contain a lot of vitamin A.

2. Plant Sources: All pigmented (particularly yellow) vegetables and fruits
(e.g., Sweet potatoes, carrots, pumpkins, papayas, tomatoes, apricots, and
peaches) and the leafy green vegetables which supply provitamin A
(carotene) in the diet. Cereals also contain carotene.

Deficiency Symptoms -

1. Night blindness (nyctalopia) is one of the earliest signals of vitamin A
deficiency which is impairment of dark adaptation.

2. Thickening and loss of transparency of F z
the bulbar conjunctiva with yellowish &
pigmentation known as Xerophthalmia. ~ , —S

3. Defective vision due to keratinization of > aA, is
epithelium of cornea occurs which is © aS A “%
termed as Keratomalacia. FBS & ! -_

4. Skin becomes rough and dry and papules © adit ee dg
of varying sizes are observed. This is Different diseases occurred
known as Follicular Hyperkeratosis of from vitamin A deficiency %
the skin or Phrynoderma. =

Functions of Food and Nutrients 117
5. Anti-infective power is reduced.
6. Clinical manifestations of vitamin A deficiency in children are retardation of
growth and lowered resistance to infection.
Vitamin ‘D’
Vitamin D is otherwise known as ‘sunshine vitamin’ as it can be synthesized
from sunlight by our body. Its chemical name is calciferol. It is also referred as
Rickets Preventive Vitamin since it prevents rickets. It is a fat soluble vitamin
and insoluble in water. It is stable to heat. It is a group of different sterol
compounds with antiarchitic properties.
Functions of Vitamin D:
@ It promotes the absorption of calcium and phosphorus from the small intestine.
@ It helps in the development and growth of bone.
@ It also maintains the concentration of calcium and phosphorus in the
blood.
@ Helps in the functions of parathyroid hormone.
Sources of Vitamin D:
@ Fish liver oils, liver, milk and milk products, egg yolk, etc. are the best
sources of vitamin D.
@ Sunlight forms D, from 7-dehydrocholesterol in the skin.
Deficiency of vitamin D:
1. Rickets: The name ricket is given to vitamin D
deficiency. It is a disease of infancy and childhood. f
The symptoms are: ,
@ Bones are soft and growth is retarded. inl
@ Bow legs and knock knees occur due to its deficiency. :
@ Chest gives pigeon breast appearance. a
i oe 2 :
@ Formation of teeth delay. Deformed leg bones of
® Children cannot walk properly. rickets affected Child.
2. Osteomalacia: Osteomalacia occurs among adults. It is often known as
= ‘adult rickets’. Osteomalacia is most common among pregnant women and
N

118 Home Science
lactating mothers. Symptoms are-
@ Depletion of calcium and phosphorus occurs which results in softening
and tenderness in the bones.
@ Legs become weaker and unable to bear the weight of the body.
@ Pain in waist and legs.
@ Due to the deformity of the pelvis, normal delivery of the baby becomes
difficult.
Task- What kind of problems occurs due to vitamin A and D deficiency?
Lesson — 7 : Vitamin E and K
Vitamin E
Vitamin E refers to a group of compounds known as tocopherols. Tocopherols are
soluble in fat solvents and insoluble in water.
Sources of Vitamin E:
Cereal germ oils i.e. wheat germ oil and corn germ oil are the richest natural
sources. Vegetable oils and fats are good sources. Cereals and animal foods
such as liver, egg yolk, milk are fair sources of tocopherol. Vegetables and
fruits are poor sources.
Functions of Vitamin E:
@ Vitamin E prevents peroxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids in tissues
and cell membranes.
@ It plays vital role in the protection of cell membranes.
@ It protects fatty acids of the body from oxidization.
@ It protects red blood cells from haemolysis by oxidising agents.
@ Vitamin E is essential for normal reproduction in man.
@ Prevents oxidation of vitamin A and carotene.
@ It offers protection to liver injury caused by carbontetrachloride
poisoning.
~
@ It prevents cataracts. g

Functions of Food and Nutrients 119
Deficiency of vitamin E:
@ Reproductive failure.
@ Muscular dystrophy and paralysis are the other symptoms of vitamin E.
@ Resorption of foetus.
Task: Write down the functions of vitamin E in our body.
Vitamin K
Vitamin K is chemically known as phytyl naphthoquinones. It is otherwise
known as antihemorrhagic vitamin. It is yellowish in color, soluble in fat but
insoluble in water. It is stable to heat, wind and moisture but is easily oxidized
by light.
Sources - The best sources of vitamin K are the green leafy vegetables e.g.
alfalfa, spinach, cabbage, kale etc. Good sources are cauliflower, soybean, wheat
bran, wheat germ etc. Carrots and potatoes are fair sources. Animal sources are
sea fishes, egg yolk, meat, liver, cheese, milk all of which are considered as poor
sources of vitamin K.
Functions of Vitamin K:
1, Vitamin K is essential for the formation of prothrombin which helps
normal clotting of blood.
2. It is essential for regulating the normal bile flow.
Deficiency of Vitamin K:
@ Low prothrombin level in blood. @ Increased clotting time of blood.
@ Lack of bile in the intestine.
Task: What are the problems that we face due to the deficiency of vitamin K?
2
&

120 Home Science
Lesson — 8: Vitamin B-complex B, and B,
Vitamin B is not a single vitamin. Nearly 15 different vitamins are collectively
known as vitamin B-complex. The most important among them are-
@ Thiamine or B,
@ Riboflavin or B, @ Folic acid group
= Siem @ Vitamin B,,
@ Pyridoxine or B;
Vitamin B,
Vitamin B, is chemically known as Thiamine. It is readily soluble in water and
is destroyed even at room temperature in an alkaline medium. It is easily
washed away with water and destroyed by cooking for longer period.
Functions of Vitamin B, :
@ Thiamine has a significant role in carbohydrate | @ Maintains the nerves in healthy
metabolism and thus helps in the release of energy. condition.
@ Helps to keep normal appetite. @ Regulates normal actions of heart.
Sources of Vitamin B, :
Plant Sources: Raw milled rice, coarse flour, legumes (chick pea, pigeon pea),
nuts (peanut, cashew nut), soybean, potatoes, etc.
Animal Sources: liver, meat, fish, egg, milk, etc.
Effects of Deficiency:
a. In minor deficiency-
@ Physical and mental depression @ Loss of appetite
@ Irritability @ Loss of weight and fatigue
@ Insomnia @ Palpitition.
b. Severe deficiency of thiamine causes beriberi. Two forms of beriberi occurs
in human beings. They are wet beriberi and dry beriberi. &
3
I

Functions of Food and Nutrients 121
Symptoms of beriberi are- are
@ Numbness of the hands and legs. al ste oy
@ Weakness of heart. pei = ¢ é
@ Ocdema of legs and between cardiac muscle ‘ s " 3
fibres is observed in wet beriberi. i lS
@ Nervous system is affected and results in fee mi h\ | \
paralysis | il t
@ Anaemia occurs. f f 1 a a
@ If wet beriberi is untreated it leads to death «40 ee
within hours. Beriberi
The disease is common among adults and infants.
Vitamin B,
Riboflavin is the chemical name given to Vitamin Bp. It is a light yellowish
compound which is stable to heat and acid medium but easily destroyed in
alkaline medium.
Functions of Vitamin B, :
@ It yields energy by taking part in carbohydrate, fatty acid and amino acid
metabolism and helps in utilizing that energy.
@ Riboflavin is essential for the health of skin and mucous membranes.
@ For normal vision riboflavin is essential.
@ Proper digestion of food depends on this vitamin.
Sources of Vitamin B, :
a. Animal sources: Milk, liver, cheese, egg, fish, meat and kidneys.
b. Plant sources: Green leafy vegetables, legumes, oilseeds, nuts, milled
cereals and cereal products.
Effects of Deficiency-
Riboflavin deficiency symptoms are generally known as ariboflavinosis. This
includes

122 Home Science

@ Retarded growth

@ Angular stomatitis with cheilosis ;

@ Papilae of the tongue are peeled off and % 4 ; ; r
the tongue Angular stomatitis shows a _ £ pr #
‘magenta’ or red tint on the surface. This is a é
referred to as glossitis. Angular stomatitis

@ Extreme hair fall occurs. Soe

@ Vascularisation of the cornea, burning and ' s /
watering of the eyes, abnormal pigmentation ee
of the iris and blurred vision may occur in nS
riboflavin deficiency.

Glossitis
Task: Describe the symptoms that occur in vitamin B, deficiency.
Lesson - 9 ; Vitamin C
Vitamin C is called ascorbic acid due to its antiascorbutic properties. It is soluble
in water and destroyed by heat. It is also called anti-scurvy vitamin since it
prevents scurvy.
Sources of Vitamin C:
Plant Sources: Amla, guava, lemon, tomato, orange, cabbage, spinach, etc.
Animal Sources: Vitamin C is hardly found in animal, we can get it from mother's
milk.
Functions of Vitamin C:
@ Vitamin C gives us preventive @ It is essential for rapid healing of
power against diseases. wounds.
@ itis essential for the formation of @ Ascorbic acid reduces the ferric
collagen present in the tissues. dena. tosteeroua dion and dean is
@ Ascorbic acid is also necessary absorbed only in this form.
for the formation of osteoblasts. é ‘att P
@ It is essential for cholesterol ° mee AE ond complexes. 2
metabolism.
Deficiency Results: 5
Prolonged deficiency of vitamin C produces scurvy. Its symptoms are — s

Functions of Food and Nutrients 123
@ Swollen gums. E.. "
@ Spongy bleeding gums. x
@ Loose teeth. ele

; > <u
@ Anaemia. Swollen gums in scurvy -
@ Seperation of ribs through beading is also observed. ak.
@ Swollen joints. ba
@ Susceptibility to infection. et)
@ Delayed healing of wounds. Skin’change‘in‘scurvy
Task: What are the deficiency symptoms of vitamin C in our body?

Lesson — 10: Minerals, Calcium and Phosphorus

Minerals are second to proteins in building the body. In an adult 4 percent of the

body weight is from minerals. There are 24 minerals in the body. These include

calcium, phosphorus, potassium, sodium, chlorine, magnesium, iron,
manganese, copper, iodine, zinc, aluminium, nickel etc. Each one of these has
some role in maintaining the structure and function of vital organs of our body.

According to their need in our body these minerals are divided into two groups:

Major Minerals and Trace Elements.

1. Major Minerals: Calcium, phosphorus, sodium, potassium, magnesium,
sulfur are considered as major minerals.

2. Trace Elements: Iron, iodine, chlorine, zinc, manganese, copper, cobalt,
molybdenum, etc. are needed in small amounts by us. Although they perform
very important functions in our body, they are termed as trace elements.

Functions of Minerals:
e As constituents of bones and teeth. @ Control muscle irritability and
: : coagulation of blood.
e Essential elements for hard tissues & ‘Canes oxysen to different pane of
fo @ Essential elements for soft tissues. the body.
s @ Necessary substances for body fluids. © Help in enzyme actions.

124 Home Science
We shall discuss about calcium, phosphorus, iron, iodine, zinc, sodium and
potassium.

Calcium

The most abundant mineral element in the body is calcium. Nearly 99 percent
of the calcium in the body is present in skeleton. The remaining part of calcium
is present in blood, body fluids and soft tissues.

Sources:

a. Animal sources: Milk and milk products are the best sources of
calcium. Bones and small fish eaten along with bones are excellent
sources of calcium.

b. Plant sources: Green leafy vegetables, ladies fingers, cabbage, peas,
soybean, beans, potatoes, lentil and dried fruits are rich in calcium.

Functions of Calcium:
@ Calcium is essential for the formation | @ The mineral has been shown to activate
of bones and teeth certain enzymes, especially lipase and
: -_— ® certain proteolytic enzymes, adenosine
@ It helps in the coagulation of blood. triphosphate and rennin.
Deficiency Syndromes:
Rickets Xray figureofthelegs Calcium deficiency
of a rickety child Osteomalasia
@ Deformation cf bones results from + ‘ ‘
galainen defidderiey e Calcium deficiency for prolonged period
ee causes rickets.
@ Pitting of teeth occurs.
@ Lack of calcium leads to impaired @ Coagulation of blood is delayed.
growth of children. P=
3
N

Functions of Food and Nutrients 125
Phosphorus
No other mineral takes part in a number of functions as phosphorus in different
parts of our body. Phosphorus is present both in organic and inorganic forms in
our body to perform various functions.
Sources:
Animal Sources: Animal foods like milk, meat, fish, poultry and eggs are
excellent sources of phosphorus.
Plant Sources: Raw milled rice, lentil, parboiled rice, legumes, carrots, etc. are
good sources of phosphorus.
Functions of Phosphorus:
e@ Phosphorus along with calcium takes an
important role in the calcification of bones. is phone keepeuplne balance of boxty
e@ It also plays an essential part in helps i ‘
carbohydrate and fat metabolism. @' It helpsin enzymie’actions.
@ It is an essential constituent in protein © It keeps our nerve cells healthy.
synthesis. @ It builds up our body cells and help in
@ Phosphorus compounds control the storage their development.
and release of energy through ATP, ADP system.
Deficiency: Deficiency of phosphorus is a very rare condition.
Task: What are the symptoms of calcium deficiency in our body?
Lesson - 11 : Iron and Iodine
Tron
Iron is an essential trace element for human being. It is a component of the red
blood cells. Of the 3 to 5 gms of iron present in our body more than half 65%
of it is present in haemoglobin. The rest of it is stored in the liver, spleen, bone
marrow and 5% in muscles.
Sources of Iron:
Animal sources: Liver, kidney, heart, lean meat, egg yolk are the best sources
of iron.
Vegetable sources: Green leafy vegetables, whole cereals, apple, molasses,
x dried fruits etc. are good sources. Milk is a poor source of iron.
S
N

126 Home Science
Functions of Iron:
@ The most important function of iron is to form a constituent of
haemoglobin.
e@ Respiratory enzymes and certain flavin enzymes contain iron in them.
e Iron is essential for the respiration of all living cells.
Deficiency Disorders: Anaemia is a condition where the haemoglobin level is
lowered in the blood. Shortage of iron in the diet is the most common cause of
anaemia. Symptoms of anaemia are as follows:
e Anorexia, impaired development are e Inactiveness.
common in children.
e Pallor of the skin and tissues. e Difficulties in respiration.
e Fatigue.
Task- Write down the iron deficiency symptoms in our body.
Iodine
The total content of iodine in human body is 12-15 mg. The significance of
iodine as an essential trace element lies in its role in thyroxine production.
Todine is the main component of thyroxine. Two-third of total iodine remain in
the thyroid gland.
Sources of Iodine: The best sources of iodine are sea foods, common salt and
vegetables, meat etc.
Functions of Iodine: Thyroxine is the hormone produced by the thyroid gland
and iodine is the main component of thyroxine. Thyroxine plays important
roles in —
e@ Normal physical and skeletal development of the child during growing period.
e@ Carbohydrate metabolism.
@ The development of brain and nerves.
Deficiency Disorders: Iodine deficiency in food results in —
1. Goiter: If sufficient iodine is not taken in the diet, thyroxine is not
produced in the thyroid gland. Thyroid gland then becomes more active to
produce the needed amount of thyroxine and enlargement of the thyroid takes
place. The gland becomes visible from a distance. Mental and physical
retardation of growth, contraction of muscles, weakness of nerves are common %
symptoms of goiter. 8

Functions of Food and Nutrients 127
2. Hypothyroidism: Hypothyroidism results when thyroxine hormone is
not produced in necessary amounts. Lethargy, dry skin, irritability to cold,
constipation etc. are some of the symptoms of hypothyroidism. Autism
tesults in small children,
3. Cretinism: During the growth period if severe deficiency occurs it results in
tetarded growth and the condition is known as cretinism. _
bes P , 7
iy it ae I Dd
= G it = C so.
Task- Write down the deficiency symptoms of iodine.
Lesson — 12: Water
Man cannot live without water. Man can live without having food for weeks
but cannot live for more than a single day without taking water. About
55%-75% per cent of the total body weight of a person is water. Water is
present both inside and outside the tissues. Water is lost through urine, skin,
lungs and faecal matter. Our body cannot store water and that is the reason we
have to take pure water everyday. Physical activities, kind of foods taken daily
etc. are important key factors of deciding how much water is to be taken. Water
intake and loss must be balanced. 1 litre of water is ingested through food and
the rest as drinking water. 2.5 to 3 litres of water are lost from our body per
day. A normal healthy person needs to take 6 to 8 glasses of water daily. Water
requirements of a person increases with —
@ Too hot weather when increased sweating occurs.
@ Fever that increases the need of water.
- @ Diarrhoea and vomiting.
FY @ Increased physical work.

128 Home Science

e Extreme physical exercise.

@ Having bulk foods.

e Lactating mother nursing her child.

e Air traveling when 1.5 liter of water is lost during the travel.

@ Certain medicines.
Sources of Water: Natural drinking water, coconut water, milk, fruit juices,
soups etc. Other sources include various juicy fruits, e.g. water melon.
Functions of Water:

e Every single cell of the body needs water for its normal functions.

e@ Water helps in digestion and absorption of food.

e@ It is essential to regulate the excretion through kidneys, lungs and skin.

@ Water plays important part in maintaining the normal temperature of the

body.

@ It acts as a vehicle for nutrient transport.

e Prevents constipation.
Deficiency Disorders: Severe water depletion is known as dehydration.
Dehydration occurs due to —

e@ Extreme hot weather, humidity, extreme sweating from physical

exercise or high fever.

e@ Not taking enough water or scarcity of water in foods.

e Diarrhoea.

e@ Extreme vomiting.
Symptoms of dehydration are-

@ Headache e@ Dark color of urine

@ Weakness

@ Dryness of the skin and lips
Dehydration can lead to severe fatal condition. Thus enough water must be
taken in dehydration.
:

requirements increase? S

Functions of Food and Nutrients 129
Exercises
Multiple Choices Questions
1. Which one these help in oxygen transportation?
a. Enzyme b. Hormone
c. Haemoglobin d. Antibody
2. Which of the food elements protects us against different microbial attacks?
a. Protein b. Carbohydrate
c. Fat d. Water
Read the incentive below and answer the question no. 3 and 4:
Nasima Khatun always cut vegetables in small pieces. She then washes them
thoroughly with water and cooks. One of her neighbour saw her doing so and
said, “Your food is losing an important nutrient”.
3. Which of these nutrients is being lost by the way Nasima Khatun cooks
food?
a. Vitamin A b. Vitamin C
c. Vitamin E d. Vitamin K
4. The members of that family —
i. May suffer from eye problems
ii. May loose teeth untimely
iii. May suffer from cold and cough very often
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii b. iand iii
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii
Creative Questions
1. Sana is five years old of age. She looks younger than her year mates. These
days she gets irritated at simple matters and her hair is also getting dull.
When her mom took her to a doctor he queried about her food habit. After
satisfying his queries he told her mom that she was suffering from

130 Home Science
deficiency of a specific nutrient and advised her to give that food to Sana to
avoid further complexes.

a. Without which we cannot think of the existence of a living thing?

b. What is meant by amino acids? Describe in your own words.

c. Which of the nutrients is deficient in Sana? Describe in your own words.
d. Evaluate the doctor’s advice on Sana’s physical improvement.

2. Purni reads in class ten and going through a pressure of study these days.
Every day she returns home from school by walk. She gets soaked by
sweat. When she returns home she changes her soaked dress as quickly as
possible and again leaves home for tuition. At that time she refuses to take
coconut water, lemon juice or any kind of fruit soups that her mother insists
her to have. She takes minimal water after her lunch and dinner. That is
why she is facing some physical problems these days.

a. Which one of the nutrients does produce the most of the energy in the
body?
b. Food is the main factor of living — What do you understand by that?.
c. What kind of physical problem is Purni suffering from— Describe in your own
words.
d. Only Purni herself can help her out from this physical problem. —
analyze it.
x
8

Chapter Eleven
Digestion of Foods and Planning of Meals
Lesson — 1: Digestion of Foods
We take food from different sources to live. These foods do not function
directly in the body. This is because all the foods are of large molecules of
complex structures. A very few of them, e.g. glucose and minerals act directly
in the body. Most of the foods are broken down into simpler forms to be
absorbed by the body. For example, starch is the main component of rice. Heat
and energy are produced from starch when it is broken down into glucose and
absorbed in the body. Proteins are broken down into amino acids and fats are
broken down into fatty acids and glycerol in the same manner. These new
compounds are then absorbed in the body.
; __ Digestion offoods | Foods are brokendown into |
Various Foods ——— simple compounds
Digestion of Foods
Our digestive system breaks down foods into simple forms. The body absorbs
simple smaller compounds of foods after digestion.
Digestion
Large molecules of nutrients are broken down into small particles and absorbed
in the blood. Several reactions proceeded forward by the action of acids and
enzymes forms simple small molecules of nutrients from the big ones. The
whole process is termed as digestion.
Thus it can be said, “The process by which large complex food particles are
broken down into absorbable simple small molecules is called digestion”.
Acid+ Enzyme + Water
Large and complex molecules —> | Simple absorbable molecules
Digestion
~
4

132 Home Science
After digestion carbohydrates and proteins are broken down into glucoses and
amino acids respectively. Fats are simplified to fatty acids and glycerol in the
same way. All the foods transform into simple compounds and then nourish
the body. Digestive system is involved in digesting foods.
Digestive System
Digestion is not occurred in a single organ. Several organs are involved in this
process. Teeth chew the foods to form small and soft compounds. Oesophagus
passes this soft foods towards the stomach. Digestion begins here.Foods are
partially digested in the stomach and enter into the small intestine. Here rest of
the digestion takes place. Digested simple particles enter into the large intestine
where they are absorbed for our nourishment. The rest indigested foods are
then extracted out from the body.Different parts of our body take part in
making food absorbable for the body. “The organs by which foods are ingested,
digested, absorbed and extracted out from the body are collectively known as
Digestive System”. Human digestive system consists of an alimentary canal
and alimentary glands.
Alimentary canal + Alimentary glands
—— Digestive system «————_

A canal entering from buccal cavity into rectum is called as the alimentary
canal. The various parts of the alimentary canal are as follows:

a. Buccal cavity d. Stomach

b. Pharynx e. Small Intestine

c. Oesophagus f. Large Intestine

2
Ss

Digestion of Foods and Planning of Meals 133
Alimentary glands
Salivary glands, liver and pancreas
(
Parotid gland
(a Sublingual gland
Ocsoptuagus —tll nesses 7 Submendbular gland
i
| a Diaphragm
Liver fay Cardiac stomach
Gall bladde: Lf ay 4 Spleen
re eat Pyloric sphincter muscle
Bile-duct ig Lam E-. it Pancreas
we eae eee 1]
Duedenum aii Pyloric stomach
Pancreatic duct .
. Horizontal colon
Ascending colon Iw |
rej a 1 Descending colon.
Tliam i
Caecum RAS
Appendix
Rectum
(| Cloaca
Digestive System
Task: Draw a picture of our digestive system and identify the different
parts of it.
Lesson - 2: Digestion of Carbohydrates, Proteins and Fats
Different foods are digested in different parts of the digestive system. Here
foods are broken down into simple forms, absorbed and enter into the main
blood stream to reach various parts of the body. Necessary enzymes for
digestion are present in salivary glands, digestive juices, pancreatic juices and
succusentericus. Bile also has a role in digestion.
Different foods get digested by the help of various enzymes in different ways
and at different forces. Carbohydrates and fats need the maximum time to get
x digested. Twelve to fourteen hours are needed for foods to reach rectum from
& buccal cavity. Digestion of different foods are described below.

134 Home Science
Digestion of Carbohydrates: Carbohydrate is the main source of energy. We
get 60%-80% of our total calorie needs from carbohydrates. Carbohydrates
supply the necessary heat and energy for our importatnt activities. Rice, bread,
sugar, molasses, honey, fruits etc. are the main sources of carbohydrates. These
foods turn into simple forms by digestion and produce energy.
Monosaccharides do not need digestion. They are readily absorbed in the blood
stream. Disaccharides are broken down into two monosachharides.
Polysachharides are first broken down into disaccharides and later into
monosaccharides.
Carbohydrates are digested in different parts of the digestive system to form
absorbable compounds which are then absorbed in the body.
Digestion of Fats: Fat is known as the source of reserved energy. That is
because fat supplies most of the needed heat and energy other than any
nutrients. Edible oil, ghee, butter, meat fat, oily fishes, egg yolk, milk butter
etc. are the best sources of fats. Fats are simplified into glycerol and fatty acids.
Fats are not completely digested in the stomach since it lacks bile salt.
Digestion of Proteins: Protein is the most important among all other
nutrients. Every plant and animal cell contains protein. Functions of proteins
are to build, replenish the decay, develop and protect the body. It is the most
complex organic substance. Protein is of no use unless it is broken down into
its structural unit, amino acids through digestion.
After digestion of proteins absorbable amino acids are formed and they are
carried to the tissues or to the liver.
Task: What are the derived products of carbohydrates, proteins and fats
after digestion takes place?
Lesson — 3: Planning Meals for Adolescents
Adolescent is a period of rapid growth after infancy. As per WHO this period
remains through 10-19 years of age and children of this age are called
adolescents. The rate of growth reaches its peak between eleven and thirteen
years for the girl and between twelve and fifteen years for the boy.
During this period the need of proteins, vitamins and mineral salts along with %
energy increases since the rate of growth remains high.Since the period of &

Digestion of Foods and Planning of Meals 135
adolescence is accompanied with considerable stress due to physiological and
psychological changes energy expense is increased. The development of
muscles, teeth, bones, blood etc. leads to extreme need of nutrients.
Importance of a Healthy Diet in Adolescence:

@ The rate of growth reaches its peak in this period and to maintain the rate
adolescents should be provided with enough calories or energy dense
foods and protein foods.

e@ During this period normal physical activities, loads of study,
participation in sports increase the need of energy than any other period
of life. Thus boys and girls need foods rich in carbohydrates and fats to
meet up this increased requirements.

@ Vitamins and minerals play important roles in preventing diseases in this
period.

@ Adolescents should take necessary amounts of calcium and vitamin D
for the proper development of teeth and bones.

@ Pubertal growth of girls demands more iron and folic acid than boys
since every month they lose a considerable amount of blood and these
two elements are needed to replenish the loss and creating blood.

@ Adolescents need foods rich in vitamins — A, B, and C for their healthy
complexion and eyes.

The Nutritional Requirements During Adolescence:

@ Need of Calories: The rate of development increases and so do the need
of calories. Boys need more calories than girls.

@ Protein: To maintain the normal rate of growth sufficient amount of
protein is very important. 12%-15% of total calorie needs should be
met by protein foods. Girls of 10-12 years of age need protein a little
more than boys of this age.

@ Mineral Salts: During this period need of calcium increases due to the
increased development of bones. To assure this developmental growth
of bones 150 mgm of calcium must be stored in the body daily. If the
body lacks calcium in this period, chances of osteoporosis increases in

&9 the later period of life. Increased demand of iron is observed for
R haemoglobin synthesis. Adolescent girls need more iron due to its

136 Home Science
monthly loss during menstruation period. The requirement of zinc also
increases. Anyone can suffer from decreased rate of normal physical
development in absence of zinc.

@ Vitamins: Increased demand of energy leads to increased need of thiamine,
riboflavin and niacin. The requirements of folic acid, vitamin B,. and
vitamin Bs are also increased since they are needed in tissue synthesis.
Menstruation causes increased need of vitamin B,, in girls. Both the boys
and girls require vitamin D for their normal development of bones. In this
stage the wellness and normal growth of reproductive system very much
depend on vitamin A, E, and C.

Thus we can see that adolescents need the six basic nutrients in sufficient

amounts dailyfor their normal weight, height, health, study and sports. Boys and

girls should take foods from basic food groups to meet the up excess need of
calories and nutrients.

We must keep in mind the following points while preparing a food list for

adolescents. These are:

@ Adolescents must be given three large meals and snacks two times a
day. In this period boys and girls spend most of their times at school.
Beside studying they do sports and for this reason they lose more energy
than any other age groups. They should be given one nutritious meal for
school and one for home. Thus they will be able to protect themselves
from diseases.

@ There must be three large meals and foods from basic food groups must
be included in these meals.

@ To meet the calorie needs adolescents should have sufficient amounts of
cereals and cereal products daily.

@ Proteins from both the animal and plant sources must be included in
daily diet. Animal protein is a must diet for at least once in a day.

@ Various seasonal and colorful vegetables and fresh citrus fruits must be
included for adolescents while planning their daily diet.

@ Adolescents should take enough water. 6-8 glasses of water for a whole
day can keep anyone healthy. In this period all kinds of soft drinks,
sweets, oily foods must be omitted from daily diet. These foods contain
more calories and that is harmful for adolescents who do less industrious
works or take part in sports. Otherwise they will gain weight and face
many undesirable health problems. S

Digestion of Foods and Planning of Meals 137

@ Most of the adolescents enjoy fast foods. But these foods help to gain
weights and overweight leads to health risks. So these foods must be
taken on a special day or a special occasion.

@ Adolescents themselves must be alert for taking healthy diets. All those
delicious foods that may increase health risks must be avoided and must
build up habits of taking nutritious foods that help to gain health.

A sample diet for a day for adolescents
Foods from different F Male Female
Cereal and ¥ cup of rice, one chapatti, one
cereal products | _.
piece of bread
One egg, one piece of fish or meat,
: one cup of cooked semi thick lentil,
Rrotcin foods ¥, cup of cooked thick lentil, % cup a a
of cooked pulses, 1/3 cup pf nuts.
1 cup salad of green vegetables,
Vegetables 4 cup of cooked vegetables, 4-5 3-4
¥% cup of cooked spinach, | potatoe.
. 1 medium sized banana, guava, mango,
eat orange, % cup of sliced fruits 34 3-4
Milk and milk | 1 cup of milk or yoghurt, 9.4 94
products ¥ cup of curd. ° "
Oil and ghee Vegetable oil, ghee, sugar, Less calorie Less calorie
molasses and sweet deserts.
Sugar, molasses, sweet deserts and salted foods should be taken in minimal
amounts to keep fit. We must remember that foods prepared at home and
seasonal fruits and vegetables are more nutritious than fast foods or street
foods. Thus adolescents must be aware of taking more of foodsmade at home.
Task - Make a diet chart for yourself for a single day.

138 Home Science
Exercises

Multiple Choices Questions

1. Which one of the following is a digestive gland?
a. Pharynx c. Pancreas
b. Stomach d. Large intestine

2. Which of the following food is necessary for the formation of teeth and
bones of adolescents?
a. Cheese c. Lemon,
b. Potato d. Nuts

Read the following description and answer the question no. 3 and 4:
Tasnim is 12 years of age. Her mother gives her curd, cheese, kabab, tikiya
etc. for tiffin at school.

3. Which of the nutrient will tasnim receive from the above mentioned foods?
a. Carbohydrate c. Fat
b. Protein d. Vitamin

4. The reason behind mom giving Tasnim these foods is—
i. To help the development of the body.
ii. To replenish the decay.
iii. To produce energy for work.

Which one of the following is correct?
a. iandii c. iand iii
b. ii and iii d. i, ii and iii

Creative Questions

1. Shampa and Litu are two siblings.They both read in school. Nearly every
day when the school breaks Litu takes burger, sandwich, drinks, etc. Mom
noticed that day by day Litu was getting fat; on the other hand Shampa was
gaining less height than her age. When mom talked to a nutritionist he
advised her to give Shampa necessary foods for her growth and help Litu to
build up the right kind of food habit.
a. What is the particular age of adolescent?
b. Why is the digestion of food necessary for us?
c. What kind of foods is needed for Shampa? Describe in your own words. 6
d. Analyze the role of mom in building up Litu’s right choice of foods. R

Chapter Twelve
Meal Planning and Disciplined Lifestyle

Lesson — 1: Disciplined Living
Health is the key to success and happiness for every human being. Living a
disciplined life maintains good health.
Importance of Disciplined Living:
With the advancement of science, urbanization has been widened and we are
experiencing so many changes in our life style. We are trying hard to establish
ourselves in a machine dependent competitive life and by doing so we are
making our normal lives more complex. This is leading us to various health
risks. Changes have brought with them undisciplined life full of risks in place
of previous disciplined life.
Taking fast foods every now and then, having soft drinks in place of water,
smoking, avoiding health rules, going to bed late , waking up late in the morning,
following no routine, watching television for long, being busy with computer
games, always going through mental stresses, neglecting physical works or
exercises, ignoring religious activities etc. are the bars of a disciplined life. These
are the factors that affect numerous health problems, weight gaining, and various
diseases such as diabetes, high blood pressure, heart diseases etc. The rate of
these diseases is increasing quite high in our country these days. Health related
research reports show that people who lives a reluctant life without maintaining
discipline easily gets affected by diabetes, high blood pressure, heart diseases
etc. at an early age and as a result working efficiency decreases, gets old early,
moreover lifespan cuts short due to long term effect of the complexity of these
diseases. Thus it can be said that there is no substitute of living disciplined life.

Ways of living a disciplined life:

1. Following healthy food habit: To live a disciplined life one should follow
a healthy food habit. Having a balanced diet, following a specific time for
meals, taking limited food and water, omitting unhealthy foods from diet,
maintaining the rules of healthy diets, being alert of unwanted weight gain,
leaving away all kinds of harmful superstitions related to food etc. can help
us to follow a healthy food habit and that can lead us to a disciplined living.
To maintain a proper healthy food habit from an early age is foremost
importance for any person.

ve)
S
Q

140 Home Science

2. Doing physical works or exercises regularly: To live a disciplined and
long life it is necessary to do physical works or exercises regularly. The habit
of doing one’s own household works such as washing clothes, cleaning rooms,
dusting furniture etc.
and participating in sports keep one healthy. People who do not do own
works nor take part in games must do physical exercises regularly. Regular
physical activities or exercises help to maintain normal weight and keep the
body fit.

3. Maintaining a specific time for going to bed and waking up in the
morning: To enjoy good health we need to go to bed at a specific time and
also wake up at the same time every day. Research reports have proved that
people who goes to bed late and does not follow any time table for sleeping
they develops a tendency of putting on weights and suffers from various
health problems. 6-8 hours of sleep is obvious for good health. Going to
bed late must be avoided. A regular habit of sleeping early at night and
waking up early every day should be practiced.

4. Controlling mental stresses: Mental stresses are at the highest peak due to
uncontrolled and complex life style which is the infringement to health and
the main cause of high blood pressure and different complex mental
diseases. Living easy, simple, disciplined life helps to get rid of mental
stresses and there is no substitute of that. We have to be calm in distress and
face the problems of life with intelligence. To do the right job at the right
time in the right way, control hyper tension and keep calm in any
unfavorable situation help us to control our mental stresses to an extent and
by this way we can prevent many mental disorders.

5. Planning of time and getting used to it: Disciplined living demands well
planning of time and getting used to it.To get the best out of time one needs
to utilize his time properly from the childhood or else suffers from the
negative result of being ignorant to time. Living disciplined life becomes
easy by planning the time accurately and practicing it.

6. Giving up smoking: Disciplined living demands a healthy body. We all
know that smoking is injurious to health. Demand of several nutrients is
high in smokers and some of the nutrients cannot function perfectly or get
destroyed. Smokers live under the risk of easily getting affected by various
diseases. Smokers do not only harm themselves while smoking, they harm &

g

Meal Planning and Disciplined Lifestyle 141
people living around them. Thus it can be said that never can a smoker
preserve health nor live a disciplined life. So we should quit smoking.

7. Following the religious and social bindings: Disciplined living becomes
easy if we can follow the rules of religion and society from the very
beginning of our lives. For example limited intake of food, avoiding over
eating, restraining from drinking alcohol, building up safe and healthy
relationships with others etc. help us to establish a happy disciplined life.

8. Establishing self-discipline and maintaining it: A easy life is achieved by
establishing self-discipline and maintaining it from the childhood. It is of
foremost importance to adjust with a healthy life style to keep fit and
healthy.

The above mentioned eight factors play important roles in living a disciplined

life. These must be followed from the early childhood to achieve a disciplined

and healthy life. We should always remember that there is no substitute of
disciplined living for a healthy and disease free life.

Effects of living a non-disciplined life: Risks of various health problems

increase with a non-disciplined life —

e Increased weight, diabetes, high blood pressure, heart diseases, stroke
etc. become common.
e Short life span.
e Decreased power of activities.
e Increased possibilities of attack of non-curable diseases.
The above stated problems are very common in our country at present. Now we
shall know about diabetes, heart disease and high blood pressure.
Task: Describe how you can maintain your life in a disciplined way.

Lesson — 2: Diabetes

Diabetes is a chronic metabolic disorder. The body lacks a hormone named

insulin and this insufficiency prevents the body from using energy from

carbohydrate. Thus the amount of glucose increases in the blood stream.

Diabetes is neither a communicable disease nor fully curable. But it can be

suppressed by following the rules of treatment. Diabetes cannot be controlled

8 without limited intake of foods and disciplined living. Anyone at any age can be
“affected by this disease. But the chances are high at following circumstances —

142 Home Science
e Genetic factors contribute if the patient’s one of the parents or any close

relatives suffer from diabetes.

e Over weight is a predisposing factor in diabetes.

e Reluctances to physical work or exercise leads to diabetes.

e Unruly lifestyle develops diabetes.

Ways of controlling diabetes-

Diabetes cannot be fully cured but it can be kept under control. There are four

important rules to be followed while controlling diabetes —

e Proper diet e Medicines
e Physical work outs e Learning about the disease.

Discipline must be maintained in every step of the above mentioned rules.

Then diabetes can be kept under control.

A. Diet in diabetes: Blood glucose level increases in diabetes. This glucose
comes from food. For this reason rules in food intake should be maintained
strictly. There are no changes in demands of nutrients before or after
diabetes occurs. But following a planned diet can help to control diabetes
and keep the body fit.

Rules of choosing foods —

e Can be taken as desired: Fibrous foods do not increase glucose in
blood. Thus these can be taken as much as one desires. Spinach,
vegetables like eggfruit, bitter gourd, cauliflower, cucumber, cabbage,
ladies fingers, lettuce, etc. and fruits like green mango, pumpkin, green
tomato, berry, lemon etc. can be taken in large amounts.

e Must be taken in limited amount: Some foods increase glucose level in
blood slowly. If these foods were taken in larger amounts they could
negatively affect blood sugar level. So these foods must be taken in
limited amount. These include rice, breads, perched rice, puffed rice,
biscuits, potatoes, sweet potatoes, milk, curd, cheese, meat, fish, egg,
pulses, nuts, sweet fruits e.g. banana, ripe mango, ripe papaya, etc. raw
milled rice and wheat flour are preferable to pearled rice and white flour
respectively. These do not increase the blood sugar level fast. %

S
aq

Meal Planning and Disciplined Lifestyle 143

e Foods to be omitted: Sugar, molasses, juices, soft drinks, sweetmeats,
pastries, cakes etc. increase blood glucose level fast and for this reason
these foods must be omitted from the diet.

e Weight must be reduced to normal if overweight. Normal weight is
preferable to underweight. Preferred normal weight should be
maintained for all time.

e There must be a specific time for meals and the amounts of foods must
also be specific. Skipping meal is harmful and at the same time
overeating at one meal and eating less at the next meal is also injurious
to health.

Thus we can say that diabetes is mostly controlled by disciplined food intake.

B. Physical works or exercises: Physical works or exercises hold a very
important role in controlling diabetes. These help in the secretion and
functions of insulin that controls diabetes.

C. Medicines: All diabetic patients need to follow a controlled diet, physical
exercises and discipline. But in severe cases diabetic patients must take
medicines or insulin.A diabetic patient should continue his regular diet,
physical exercises along with prescribed oral medicines or insulin. Medicines
alone cannot control diabetes and moreover it can bring risks for life.

D. Learning about disease: Being incurable diabetes is a disease which
remains for the whole life. For this reason learning about the disease by the
patients and their relatives are of foremost importance. There are no
alternatives for that.

Following discipline in living: The most important thing in the life of a

diabetic patient is his disciplined living. One must ponder on the following

points to establish discipline in his life —

e Having a regular balanced diet in} @ Continuing the treatment for diabetes.
limited amount and follow the rules :

e Checking the blood sugar level regularl
related to thes, ; and keep a record oft. “ey

e Doing paveical works or exercises © Quitting smoking and drinking alcohol.

. Following doctor’s advice while| © Trying one’s best to follow a disciplined life.
taking oral medicine or insulin. e Having necessary knowledge about the

e Keeping clean in every sphere of life. treatment of diabetes.

@ Taking regular and good care of legs. e Taking advices from the doctor during

any critical physical occurrences.
2
S Task -Describe the ways of disciplined living for controlling diabetes.

144 Home Science
Lesson — 3: Heart Disease

The number of heart patients is increasing day by day in our country. The main
causes of heart diseases are living an indiscipline life, having foods rich in
saturated fats, taking foods more than the requirements, not going through any
physical works or exercises, genetic factors, metabolic disorders etc. Only a
discipline life can help anyone out in heart diseases.Here are some important
points to ponder on while following a disciplined living —

e Having a regular balanced diet in e Following a specific time for going
limited amount and follow the rules oo ane ete ip fiom neal
related to foods. © SIsepms TOF O-® HOUES. .

e Controlling mental stresses, excitements

e@ Doing physical works or exercises and anger.
regularly. e Keeping clean in every sphere of life.

@ Quitting smoking and drinking alcohol.

e Following doctor’s advice and @ Trying one’s best to follow a disciplined
prescription while taking treatment. life.

@ Taking advices from the doctor during

e Measuring blood pressure regularly. any critical physical occurrences.

Diet in Heart Diseases:
A balanced diet with an adequate amount of energy is prescribed for patient of
heart disease. Intake of sugar, salt and fat must be limited and large amount of
fibrous foods must be included in the diet. Moreover the following points
should be remembered —
e Raw milled rice and wheat flour are good for health but the amount
should be limited.
e Fibrous foods like spinach, vegetables etc. and citrus fruits such as
lemon, orange, pineapple etc. must be included in diet.
e Colorful vegetables like spinach, carrots, cucumber, beetroot, etc. must be taken
regularly. A habit of taking seasonal fresh fruits helps a lot in heart diseases.
e Pulses and nuts must be taken in limited amount.
e Fish, lean meat, chicken, eggs should be included in the diet in necessary amounts.
e Skimmed milk and yoghurt are good for heart diseases. 8
&

Meal Planning and Disciplined Lifestyle 145
e Excess use of salt in cooking and having extra salt during meals are
forbidden.
Foods that should be omitted are —
e Butter, ghee, dalda, cream sauce, coconut, all kinds of oily fat foods.
e Ice-cream, sweet deserts, etc.
e@ Meat rich in fats, liver, chicken or duck.
e Cooking salt, salted preserves such as cheese, pickles, sauce, soya sauce,
chips, chanachur, salted nuts, salted fishes, canned fish etc.
e Fast foods e.g. fried chicken, pizza, nuggets etc.
e Bakery products such as biscuits, pastry, cake etc.
e Soft drinks, energy drink, dark coffee etc.
e Salt and salad dressing in salad are forbidden.
e@ Chinese salt must be omitted.
Task: Which points related to diet must be remembered by heart patients
while following a disciplined living?
Lession - 4 : High Blood Pressure
Hypertension:
High blood pressure is commonly known as hypertension. Indiscipline life,
genetic factors, overweight, metabolic disorders etc. cause hypertension.
Medicines along with a balanced diet and regular physical exercises can help
control hypertension. Reducing extra weights by regular physical works or
exercises is the best thing in hypertension one can follow.
The most important thing is disciplined living when affected by high blood
pressure. The followings are very important for a discipline life —
e Having a regular balanced diet in  @ Sleeping for 6-8 hours.
himited amour and follow the rules Controlling mental stresses, excitements
related to foods. and anger.
e Doing physical works or exercises e Keeping clean in every sphere of life.
regularly. e@ Quitting smoking and drinking alcohol.
e Following doctor’s advice and Trvi 5 b foll
pres-cription while taking treatment. © Irying one’s best to follow a
: disciplined life.
e@ Measuring blood pressure regularly. : : .
. teu: . e Taking advices from the doctor during
e Following a specific time for going any critical physical occurrences or
to bed and waking up from bed. extreme variances in blood pressure.

146 Home Science
Planning Diet in Hypertension

e Fibrous foods like spinach, vegetables etc. and citrus fruits such as
lemon, orange, pineapple etc. must be included in diet.

e Coconut water is effective in hypertension.

e Rice, bread and foods made of rice and flour must be taken in limited
amounts. Raw milled rice and wheat flour are better than pearled rice
and white flour respectively.

e Fish, lean meat, egg can be taken in necessary amounts.

e Hypertension patients can have pulses and nuts.

e Skimmed milk and yoghurt is good for high blood pressure.

e Excess use of salt in cooking and having extra salt during meals are forbidden.

e Excess of calories should not be taken.

Foods to be omitted —

e Salty foods e.g. cheese, pickles, sauce, chips, chanachur etc.

e Any salted preserves such as canned fishes, salted ilisha etc.

e Butter, ghee, dalda, coconut, oily foods.

e Meats rich in fats and foods prepared from it.

e Fast foods e.g. fried chicken, pizza, nuggets etc.

e Bakery foods such as biscuits, pastry, cream cake etc.

e Soft drinks, energy drinks, dark coffee etc.

e Salt and salad dressings should be omitted from salad.

e Soya sauce, Chinese salt and tasting salt are forbidden.

Living a normal healthy life is possible if blood pressure is controlled. When
blood pressure exceeds kidney failure, brain stroke, risks of heart diseases and
other physical complexes become common occurrences.
Task: Which points are to ponder on while living a disciplined life for
controlling hypertension?
x
8

Meal Planning and Disciplined Lifestyle 147
Exercises
Multiple Choices Questions
1. How many hours of sleep are needed for achieving good health?
a. 3-4 hours b. 4-5 hours
c. 6-8 hours d. 9-10 hours
2. Why controlling mental stress is necessary?
a. People living around do not —_b. We can control ourselves while
mind for anything. moving forward in our lives.
c. Wecan protect ourselves from d.Save from hypertension and several
various infectious diseases. other mental disorders.
Read the following description and answer the questions no. 3 and 4:
Mrs. Jharna is 50 years of age. Fishes and meats rich in fats, full eggs with yolk
are always present in her meals. She is physically feeling quite uncomfortable
for several days. So her daughter took her to a doctor.
3. What kinds of foods should be taken by Mrs. Jharna?
a. White flour bread and pearled rice
b. Cheese and meat kabab
c. Skimmed milk and sour yoghurt
d. Cake and sweet yoghurt.
4. What are the reasons behind Mrs. Jharna’s problems?
i. Excess of fats in foods
ii. Excess intake of protein
iii. Taking carbohydrate more than required.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iand ii b. iand iti
c. ii and iii d. i, ii and iti
S

148 Home Science

Creative Questions

1. Mrs. Sheela is of 45 years. She has two maids for cooking foods, washing
clothes and preparing other household works. Every day she wakes up late
in the morning. She takes her breakfast with paratha, meat, sweets and egg.
After that she goes through the newspaper and watches T.V. She sleeps for
2 hours after taking her shower and lunch. Never did she has her two times
meals without fish and meat. She watches T.V. for late night and goes to
bed just after taking her dinner. After some days she puts on much weights
and becomes ill.

a. What is the key to preserving health?

b. Why is living disciplined life important?

c. What will be Mrs. Sheela’s exact food habit? Describe in your own words.

d. Mrs. Sheela cannot get rid of her physical problems unless she improves
her life style — do you support it? Analyze it in your own words.

2. Masuma Begum is a middle aged woman. She is also overweight. She has
to look after her ill parents, give them insulin two times a day and prepare
foods for them. She does not follow any discipline in her life since she does
all the household works by her own. She likes to have sweets, payes, soft
drinks and juices. Masuma becomes ill and her doctor advises her to be
conscious of her future health.

a. Write down the name of a metabolic disease.
b. Why are fibrous foods important to health? Make it understand.
c. What kind of diet Mrs. Masuma has to prepare for her father? Describe in your
words.
d. Define a suitable disciplined life necessary for Mrs. Masuma’s
wellbeing.
3
8

Chapter Thirteen
Preparing and Serving of Food

Meal is planned to meet the daily requirements of foods and nutrients of our
family. Foods must be prepared properly to make the plan a success. There is a
specific process of presenting foods that makes them more lucrative. This
method is known as food serving. To make foods tasty and have the best out of
them one must cook and serve foods following scientific ways.
Lesson — 1 : Menu Planning :
To satisfy hunger is not the only purpose of having foods. The main purpose is
to get the best out of foods to keep one active, fill up the decays, keep the
development process going and prevent diseases. For this reason we need a
balanced diet that is rich in necessary foods. A balanced and nutritious diet can
give us required energy in every steps of life and keep us healthy. That is why
food planning should be done according to age (child, adolescent, old),
physical activities, etc. One of the ways of planning foods is preparing a menu.
We should have a menu for our every meal. While planning a menu, choice of
foods, needs and ages of the family members and cooking methods should be
kept in mind.
Menu planning is needed not only in our daily meals but also in preparing
complementary feed for children, therapeutic diet, in ceremonies like wedding
or birthday parties, entertaining guests at home etc. Different food related
matters are taken into consideration while planning a menu. Menu planning
thus means preparing a chart of foods. A predefined written chart of foods to
be served is known as menu. Menu planning helps us to make our diets
balanced, attractive and nutritious.

Points to remember while planning a menu:

“ Age: People of different ages make up a family. The requirement of food is
different at every age. Milk is needed by kids. On the other hand the old
and the adult need vitamin enriched foods. Foods rich in calorie and protein
are needed more by pregnant and lactating mothers than the normal
mothers.

“+ Labour: The need of calorie is affected by the types of labour. So the rate
of physical activity of all the family members should be kept in mind while

~ coordinating foods rich in calorie e.g. people who go for hard work must
3
N

150 Home Science
have foods rich in carbohydrate and fat. Less carbohydrate and fat should
be taken by people who do less activity or do intellectual works or by older
people who do less physical activities.

«+ Income: To include healthy foods in a menu depends largely on the budget.
A whole month’s meals are managed by adjusting with the restricted income
of the family. It is logical to plan a menu of balanced diet including foods
from inexpensive sources. We cannot curtail the necessary nutrients of a
balanced diet to make it cheap. So there should be a coordination of
expensive foods and inexpensive but at the same time healthy items of food.

“+ Weather and seasons: There are abundance of seasonal fruits and
vegetables in our country. These are nutritious, tasty and easily available.
Including seasonal foods in menu brings a variation in taste and reduces the
price of foods.

«+ Gender: There is a marked difference between the requirements of foods of
boys and girls. Girls carry less volume, weight and muscles in their bodies
than boys. For this reason girls require not as much of calorie and other
nutrients as boys.

“¢ Occasions: a daily food list should be made according to the number of
family members, income of the family, choice of foods etc. Menu is an
important factor in any kind of occasions, no matter how small or big it is.
This is because it provides us with a chance to change the ordinary daily food
list. We can have different menus for different occasions such as wedding
ceremony, birthday party, milad, eid etc.

«+ Creating variations: The menu can be made an attractive one by including
foods of various colors, shapes, types and cooking methods. All the white
or same colored foods in a menu can make it dull. The same way all the soft
or dry foods must not be included in the same menu at the same time.

Foods of different colors: Tomato, carrot, banana, pea, milk, yoghurt, rice,
red pillow etc.

Foods of different shapes: Singara, sandwich, bread, cake, nimki, etc.
Foods of different types: Soup, kheer, custard, pudding, papad, chips, etc.

“+ Amount of one serving: The total amount of foods included in the menu
depends on how many people are going to have them. Every foods included
in the menu should be served to everyone at least at one serving e.g. one =
serving of cooked spinach = 1/3 cup. s

Preparing and Serving of Food 151
One serving of milk and milk products

Fresh milk — 1 cup

Yoghurt — % cup

Ice cream — 4 cup

Sweet juicy drop — 1

One serving of foods rich in protein

Boneless fish — 30 gm

Boneless meat — 30 gm

Pulses — 25 gm

Egg— il

One serving of fruits and vegetables

Cooked spinach — 1/3 cup

Cooked vegetables — % cup

Salad — % cup

Fruits (medium size) — 1

One serving of cereal foods

Rice — 1 cup

Wheat flour bread — 2

Bread — 2 pieces

Potato — 180 gm
Moreover the types of one serving, use of accurate recipe, availability of
necessary kitchen utensils, an efficient cook, use of left over foods must be
given consideration while planning a menu.

5

152 Home Science
Sample: One day menu for a family
Number of serving: 05
Inexpensive foods Expensive foods
Breakfast Wheat flour bread, fried Paratha, fried egg,
vegetables, banana, tea apple, coffee
Lunch Normal rice, pulses, Pearled rice, big fish
spinach, small fish, curry, salad
lemon, green chilly.
Dinner Rice, egg curry, pulses, Rice, chicken curry,
smashed potato potato chop, salad.
Lesson — 2: Importance of recipe
Menu is planned for preparing a balanced diet. A perfect cooking method
makes this diet tasty, attractive and satiated. Although cooking seems to be an
easy operation, fault can occur at any time. The same food can be delicious on
one occasion and not so tasty on other occasion. But if we prepare a food using
the same cooking method with the same amount of ingredients every time the
quality of food remains the same. This is the first cause of using recipe. Recipe
is a written descriptive instruction which lets us know about the right amount of
ingredients and the proper cooking method while preparing a dish. Thus it can
be said that recipe is an instruction studded with a list of necessary ingredients,
their needed amounts and specific way of cooking for a particular food.
Every cooked food has its own ingredients, amounts of ingredients and cooking
method e.g. pudding, potato chop, kebab, etc.
A recipe contains the following information related to cooking of foods -
e The name of the food e Used ingredients
e Amount of the ingredients e Type of cuts for meat or vegetables
e Successive steps of cooking e Required temperature in cooking
e Needed time e Serving number
e Ways of serving
Pd
S
I

Preparing and Serving of Food 153

Functions of recipe:

e Recipe prevents waste of ingredients since all of those are weighed before
cooking.

e A standard recipe contains serving numbers of foods. For this reason the
number of people can be assumed much before the food is prepared. This
also makes the serving process easy.

e Any new method of cooking becomes easy to use when a recipe is
followed. A recipe along with a menu does half of the job of an efficient
cook.

e Testing the quality and amount of food becomes easier for the cook if
recipe is followed properly.

Things to be remembered while using recipe:

e Recipe should be understood properly by the cook before following it.

e Given amounts of ingredients must be used.

e No ingredients should be omitted.

e The techniques and methods must be followed as stated in the recipe.

e Foods should be served as instructed (hot, cold, liquid, solid).

e The precise cooking method must be followed.

e Recipe becomes easy to understand when we have the primary knowledge
of amount and weight of food, needed cooking utensils, cooking method,
ingredients and food exchange list.

Task: Describe the importance of recipe in food preparation.

Lesson —3 : Preparing Foods :

After planning the menu comes the preparing of food. Some points should be

kept in mind before preparing food —

e We should select a food according to menu.

e Raw items must be collected before preparing the foods in the menu.

e The right recipe must be chosen for a specific food. We can take help
from experts for this cause.

e Raw items such as meat, fish, vegetables, must be cut and cleaned
properly.

154 Home Science

e Choosing the right cooking method is necessary.

e Some basic rules to be followed are cooking foods covered, using mild heat, etc.

e Preparations for serving are taken at the same time of cooking.

e Foods must be served hot just after cooking is completed.
We shall now discuss the preparation of pudding and vegetarian.
A sample recipe —

Sample — 1 : Pudding

500 gm
4 servings
Preparation:

e Caramel is made in cooking pot.

e Eggs, milk and sugar are nicely mixed in a separate pot.

e When the pot comes cool a mixture of milk and egg is poured in that pot.

e The pot is then covered with a lid and placed on a big sauce pan. 1/3 of

the pot should be under the boiled water of the pan.

e Then it is boiled for 1 hour at medium heat.

e Pudding is coagulated and then frozen.

e Pudding is separated from the pot by using a knife when it is frozen.

Pudding is then put on a serving dish.
Serving Number: The pudding weighs about 500 gm. lserving of pudding
means % cup or 125 gm. Thus 4 people can enjoy this pudding or the serving
number of this pudding is 4.
5S

Preparing and Serving of Food 155
Sample — 2: Vegetarian
Serving Number
Pumpkin 200 gm lkg
Brinjal 100 gm 10 serving
Pointed gourd 200 gm
Papaya 200 gm
Potato 300 gm
Smashed ginger 1 tea spoon
Cut pieces of garlic ¥Y% tea spoon
Turmeric powder ¥Y tea spoon
Chili powder 4 tea spoon
Coriander powder 1 tea spoon
Cumin powder ‘A tea spoon
Onion crush % cup
Salt 2 tea spoon
Sugar As desired
Green chili 4 tea spoon
Cassia leaf 2
Oil 100 gm
Panchforon As desired
Preparation:
e All the vegetables should be washed with water before cutting them.
e Vegetables must be cut in large pieces.
e Crushed onion, smashed condiments and powders are tanned in oil.
e All the vegetables except brinjal and pumpkin must be stirred with salt.
After 3-4 minutes of stirring 1 cup of hot water must be poured on that
and the pot should be covered with a lid.
e When water boils up brinjal and pumpkin are included and kept covered in
low heat.
e Vegetables get boiled after 10-15 minutes. Then green chili, sugar and
other spices are added in it.
a e Cooking is completed when water dries.
S
Q

156 Home Science

Serving Number: This vegetarian weighs about 1 kg. lserving of vegetarian

means % cup. The food is made for 10 persons. At least one serving is

available for per person that meets the least nutritional requirements of a

person.

Lesson — 4: Serving Foods :

Taking food becomes a course of satiation and enjoyment when served

properly with care. Food serving is considered as a technique by which we can

create a pleasant environment of having foods.

When a distinct food, prepared following a menu, is served in front of people

by a special way is known as food serving.

The purpose of taking food is accomplished through a perfect serving. Serving

must be striking and faultless at various occasions. Family traditions, social

rituals are related to food serving. Food serving is affected by nations, society

and surroundings.

Decorating Tables:

Usually foods are served on tables. This is known as table decoration. We

decorate tables to make our meals easy and joyous. When necessary crockery

and cutleries are set on tables in perfect order it increases our delight of having

foods.

Steps of decorating tables are as followed —

e Covering the table and placing mats.

e Using different decorative items like flowers, napkin holders etc.
Arrangement of chairs according to the number of people is also important.

e Dishes are set differently on tables following different occasions.

e The place of eating or the table should be well decorated, calm and
pleasing. Clean and clear environments are needed for this purpose.

Serving foods on different occasions:

Meals arranged on several occasions are termed as feast. Feasts are held on

national days, yearly banquets, wedding ceremonies, etc. Foods served at

hotels and restaurants are also known as feasts. Some important factors of =

arranging feasts are given below — S

Preparing and Serving of Food 157

e Chairs and tables are set according to ranks and status.

e Aset of units of every course is served for every single person.

e During a feast host holds on the opposite seat of the chief guest.

as eS eee
POO { TOF
—_7 "sO
Figure: Table arrangement in a feast.

e All the foods are not served at the same time during a feast. Feast starts
from the main course and ends at desserts (a fruit, sweets, drinks, etc.)

e Flowers arrangements and lighting may be done to make the place more
pleasant.

e Foods are served and serving dishes, glasses and plates are put away
using the right hand when serving starts from the right. When foods are
served from the left, left hand is used as the same manner.

Lesson — 5 : Buffet Service :
Buffet service is preferred when there is a large number of people, space is
limited and there is no invited chief guest. In this case ceremonies are
occasional e.g. birthday, akika, marriage anniversary etc.
Ways of buffet service:
e@ Same foods are served at different tables at places like lawns, verandas,
~ open gardens, hall rooms, etc.
iS e Necessary plates, glasses, cups and other utensils are placed on a table.

158 Home Science
e Foods are displayed on the both sides of the table at the same manner.
Guests can serve themselves with foods as they desire from any sides of
the table and enjoy their foods with chitchats.
—
=
—=s
=
OS
e
CO
Figure: Serving foods in buffet system.
Task: According to your views which of the food service goes best with our era
and why?
Lesson — 6 : Packet Service :
Ga CY y, ————F
VAN : 7 eee Yi
Figure: Samples of packet service
Foods served in packets are known as packet service of foods. Packet service is
in high demands these days due to shortage of time, lack of efficient labors,
etc. Moreover packet service helps us to avoid extra loads of cleaning. Packet
service is preferred in milad, seminar, iftar party, college functions etc. Foods
served in packets must be balanced, attractive, tasty and easy to carry. To get
the best of packet service some points should be remembered which are stated
below — ES

Preparing and Serving of Food 159
e Foods served in packets must be dry and light.
e Foods must be selected from the four basic groups while planning a
menu for packet service.
e Foods in packets become nutritious when plant and animal foods are aggregated.
e Pithha, seasonal fruits, etc. can be included to skip monotony.
e Foods must be solid and not liquid or semi liquid or else packet will get wet.
e A packet of school lunch must contain delicious and nutritious foods
and meet 1/3 -1/4 of daily requirements of calorie and protein.
e Asample menu of packet service:
- Samosa, laddu/sandesh, cheese, apple/banana.
- Dalpuri, kebab, sandesh, salad.
- Sandwich, salad (cucumber, carrot), any dry sweets.
- Vegetable pakoda, sweets, banana.
Exercises
Multiple Choices Questions
1. What is written in a standard recipe?
a) Name of the foods c) Serving number
b) Ingredients d) Cooking method
2. By following recipe —
i. We can bring variations in foods.
ii. All the ingredients are not included.
iii. We can maintain the serving numbers.
Which one of the following is correct?
a) iandii b) i and iii
5 c) ii and iii d) i, ii and iii

160 Home Science
Answer the question number 3 and 4 from the following chart:
Sample-1 : Pudding
Pee
i
| Sugar | tablespoon |
[| Vanillaessence | drops, |
3. What is the serving number?
a) 4 b) 6
c) 8 d) 10
4. If five persons are entertained with this pudding —
i. There may be wastage of money.
ii. There may be left over.
iii. A serving problem may arise.
Which one of the following is correct?
a) iandii b) iand ili
c) ii and iii d) i, ii and iii
Creative Questions
1. Mrs. Rabeya Begum invited so many people in her small flat on the
occasion of her daughter’s birthday. From cooking to serving foods on
table, she herself did all the works. Just before serving the foods she
discovered that one important dish was not prepared. She was embarrassed
when she could not make rooms for all the guests at meal at the same time.
a. What is recipe?
b. What is meant by serving of foods?
c. Describe the cause of skipping of one important dish?
d. Variation in serving could have saved her from the embarrassment — ~
analyze it. Ss

Preparing and Serving of Food 161
2. Mrs. Mala is a housewife who belongs to a middle class family. She lives
with her two school going children, husband and aged parents. Her children
like meat the most. She is forced to cook meat for them almost every day.
Her mom is feeling chest pains for some days. Doctor advised her to take
good care of her mom’s diet.
a. What is a menu?
b. What is the purpose of eating? Describe in your own words.
c. What is the reason behind the sickness of Mrs. Mala’s mom? Describe
in your own words.
d. A perfect planning of menu is of foremost importance for the wellness
of Mrs. Mala’s family members. - Give your opinions on this matter.

Part-D
Clothing and Textile fibre
4 Tas
2a
*. y
‘Oe 4": GA: oN
ye SCOEPL:
After studying this part we will be able—
e To explain the classification and characteristics of fibre ;
e To explain the process of fibre identification;
@ To explain how to apply properly the art elements and art principles in
selecting clothes;
e To explain the color cycle;
e@ To explain how to select the color of clothing according to the color
complexion & body structure through the color cycle;
® To explain the importance of art principles related to line, texture &
design in selecting clothing;
e To explain the classification and method of clothing printing;
e To encourage how to make clothing knowing the rules of drafting;
e Toshow how to make fatua & baby frock after preparing the drafting of them;
e To show how to make baby frocks with different designs;
e To describe different cleansing elements and incidental elements in
using for washing clothing ;
e To describe the methods of washing and preserving of different types of clothing;
e To select clothes according to personality.
=
s
a

Chapter Fourteen
Textile fibres
The place of clothing is just after food among the basic human needs. There
was no need of clothing for covering the shame of human being at the dawn
of civilization. But with the changing of civilization, human being started to
realize the necessity of clothing not only for protecting themselves from
shame, cold and hot but also for different needs. A great variety of textile has
been introduced due to the change of taste with the development of
civilization. Human beings have discovered and are still discovering
different kinds of fibres for their needs. Clothing is basically made from
thread and this thread is made from yarn or fibres. Fibres are changed into
thread through the special process. But it is necessary to know that all kinds
of fibres are not suitable of making clothing. This textile fibre may be natural
or artificial. In ancient times the clothing material were cotton, wool, silk and
linen fibres. But later on, many artificial fibres namely rayon, nylon, vinson,
soron etc. have been discovered. Generally, the characteristics of every
textile fibre are different. So if we want to use the specific textile fibre for
any definite purpose, we have to detect that fibre.
Lesson — 1 : Useful yarn for making textile :
Normally, textiles are made from thread. So thread is considered as the
smallest unit of textile. But this thread is comprised of a network of the fibres
or yarn. Any kind of yarn can be called fibre but in textile industry only the
textile fibre is called the yarn or fibre. In another way, it can be said that the
basic smallest unit of clothing is called textile fibre. The word ‘Textile’ has
been derived form the latin word ‘Texo’. The word ‘Texo’ means to weave. So
the fibre of clothing is called textile fibre.
Generally, there are a number of special characteristics of yarn for which any
fibre will be called textile fibre. Among those characteristics some are principal
and some are secondary. The main or principal qualities are length width ratio,
tenacity of fibre, flexibility, uniformity, cohesiveness etc. On the other hand,
the secondary and subordinate characteristics are resiliency, luster, elasticity,
absorbency, heat conductivity etc. The characteristics of textile fibre are given
below :
2
Rg

164 Home Science

Chief Qualities

1. Length - width ratio- The length of the yarn should be more than its
breadth . This feature is noticeable in most of the natural yarns. In fact, the
more will be the breadth of fibre the more the fibre will be flexible and
smooth.

2. Tenacity of the fibre-Textile fibre should have enough strength. If the fibre
does not have enough strength, it is not possible to change it into thread or
cloth. In fact, the strength of a fibre depends on the pull or tug it can
endure.

3. Flexibility — The 3rd principal characteristic of textile fibre is flexibility. As
we fold thread and cloth, so the fibre used in textile must be flexible. In
fact, it is possible to twist thread by textile fibre on account of its flexibility.

4. Cohesiveness- The small fibres are joined together because of this characteristic.
As a result, the thread produced from yarn is used in textile industry.

Secondary Qualities

1. Resiliency — The power for which the fibre will come back to its previous
position form being folding, twisting or shrinking is called resiliency. A
fibre should have this quality for the clothes from the prevention of
shrinking. The clothes which will have good elasticity they will have good
resiliency also.

2. Luster- Brightness, smoothness and splendid appearance of a fibre together
are called luster. Luster is necessary quality for textile fibre. Silk fibre is
regarded as queen of fibre because of its natural brightness . Now-a- days
brightness is added to different kinds of fibre through the process of
finishing..

3. Absorbency — The yarn that has the power of good absorption can retain
colour and finish easily. The cloth of this fibre can be washed easily and so
it is useful to wear. Those textiles which have the less absorption power
can be dry quickly after washing.

4. Elasticity- The textile fibre should have the power of elasticity. It means
that if it is pulled , it will be longer and when it will be free from pressure it
will come back to its previous position. S

Textile fibres 165

5. Uniformity- The best yarn for making thread is the one that can have the
same length and width, smoothness and can be easily twisted. It is not easy
to get natural fibre with uniformity like the artificial fibre. But the standard
of the yarn with this feature is good and the thread will be equal and
smooth.

6. Heat conductivity- The best yarn is the flax fibre which can withstand heat.
Being a good conductor of heat cotton fabric is very comfortable for much
using in summer. Protein fibre is not good conductor of heat. For this
reason silk and woolen fabrics are more suitable for winter season.

Task - Make two charts by mentioning the chief and secondary
characteristics of the textile fiber

Lesson — 2 : Classification of fibre

From many years ago textile fibre is classified in different ways. With the

progress of science the classification has been changed. At the early age the

classification was simple and easy. For example, animal, plants, mineral etc.

The classification of previous time has been obsolete as a result of inventing

natural fibre. Later on, it is seen that the classification is done keeping the fibre

of the same qualities in one group. As a result, people are able to get entire
knowledge about the characteristics, the rules of use and care of the fibres of
the same group.

According to the source, yarn is classified in to two groups —

(1) Natural fibre and (2) Artificial fibre.

(1) Natural fibres : Natural fibres may be further classified as follows:

(A) Vegetable fibres - Vegetable fibres are obtained form plants which are

made of cellulose. They are called cellulose fibre also as they are based on

cellulose. They are of different kinds —
e Seed fibres — The fibres around the seed are called seed fibres, e.g.-
Cotton, Kapok etc.
e Bast fibres —This fibre is obtained from the trunk of a tree, e.g —Jute,
Flax, Rami, Shan etc.
e Leaf fibres- They are called vascular fibre also. It is obtained from leaf,
= bulb and branches.
N

166 Home Science

e Nut husk fibres — It is obtained from nut husk.

(B) Animal fibres- It is obtained from animals or insects. Protin is the main
element of this fibre. So it is regarded as Protin fibre also. For example--

e Animal hair fibres — It is collected from the hair or fur of various types
of sheep such as Alpaca, Mohair, Angora etc.

e Animal secretion fibres — It is obtained from the cocoon of the silk
worm by removing sericin , a kind of gelatine which is used as silk
fibre.

(C) Mineral fibres- Mineral fibre is a kind of fibre which is accumulated in
the layers of hard rock under the soil. It is regarded as Asbestos textile fibre.
They are complex seliket of iron and like other metals such as sodium,
aluminum or magnesium. This type of fibre is preventive of acid, rust and
fibre.
(D) Natural rubber- Different types of fibre and thread are made of natural
rubber through the special process of contraction.
Classification of Natural fibre
Natural
“ee fibres Animal oe ne
Rubber
Seed fibers Bast fiber — fibers “ee fibers |
chon Flax, Jute Aical, Manila Fiber of Asbestos
Kapoc = Hamp SOE wasnt = Fuga
Rami Secration animal
Cocoon —- Wool
2. Artificial fibre — Those fibres are called artificial fibres which are not
grown in nature but human beings have produced them through the mixture of
different elements on chemical elements. The artificial fibres are produced in x
the factories step by step through the chemical process. The raw material of &

Textile fibres 167
these fibres may be natural or chemical processed. The fibres are man made.
So the length and width of the fibres can be determined during the production.
The artificial fibres are divided into six classes according to the source and
chemical structure. For example —
A) Cellulosic fibre — The cellulose obtained from pulp of trees and cotton
bitters is chemically processed to produce cellulose fibre. e.g Cupramonium
Rayon, Viscose Rayon etc.
B) Changed Cellulosic fibre- This fibre is produced form the cellulose
obtained from nature but mix with chemical material with the changing
structure of cellulose. In this case cellulose will not be in the pure condition.
e.g Acetate, Tri-Acetate etc.
C) Synthetic Fibre — It is produced from coal, water and air by a process
called polymerization. Its basic elements are carbon, hydrogen oxygen and
nitrogen, e.g-nylon, polyester, vinion, orion, soron.
D) Protin Fibre- The protin obtained from paddy, wheat etc. and milk is
chemically processed to produce protin fibre. But commercially it is not
profitable. e.g- aslon, casin etc.
E) Mineral Fibre- This fibre is produced through the process of different types
of mineral things individually or in mixture. e.g silka, limestone and glass fibre
made of other mineral elements together.
F) Metalic fibre — The fibre is called the Metalic fibre which is obtained from
different types of metals like aluminium, silver, gold etc. through the process
of purification. The artificial metallic fibre is produced following the various
process of purification.
G) Other artificial Fibres-Elginet, Teflon are also man made fibre. This fibre
obtained from the sea duck-weed is dissolved in water so the importance of this
type of fibre is comparatively less.
Though in ancient times people have to depend on the natural source and
supply for the textile fibre but at the beginning of the 19th century man is able
to invent artificial fibre. It is found that the invention of artificial fibre has been
gradually increased from 1900 century. After 1930 the scientists have been
successful in inventing more artificial fibres.

hs)

S Task -Present the classification of natural and artificial fiber through poster.

168 Home Science
Lesson — 3-4 : Uses of different types of fibre :

According to its origin and structure every fibre has it own characteristics. Due
to their characteristics each fibre is used differently. So we should have a clear
understanding of these characteristics.

Uses of Cotton Fibre

Cotton fabric is much used in many ways. The price of this fibre is not so high.
It can be bought easily. So the price of clothes, bedsheet, shari, lungi, napkin,
mosquito net, quilt, sofa-cover, decorative things for rooms etc. made of cotton
fibre is less costly. Moreover, its economic value is also high. As cotton fabric
can be taken care easily. Its demand is so high to the consumers for its clothing
qualities. It is not needed to take so much care in ironing the cotton clothes for
its power of heat absorbency. It can be boiled with hot water easily if it is
needed. Cotton textile is very comfortable, useable, hygienic and suitable for
all seasons. Very thin clothes can also be made of this cotton fibre. In fact, now
a days cotton textile is regarded as the king of fibre as it is so much
comfortable.

Strong sunlight affects cotton fibre and change it into yellow colour. So
excessive exposure to the ultra-violet ray of the sun damages the fabric. If kept
in a humid condition, mildew may form on cotton fabrics. Hot water does not
affect cotton fabric. So it can be dipped into boiling water mixed with soda.
Strong and thick acids affects cotton yarns. But mild acid does not affect it.
Cotton fabric is not much affected by bleaching but bleaching reduces its
longevity. The power to retain colour is better in cotton fabric. When dipped in
water its strength increases by 25%. So it is not damaged when washed
roughly.

Uses of Flax fibre — Flax is a very strong fibre. Fine thread and smooth linen is
made up of it which is very strong and cool. Linen fabric is heat conductive and
comfortable. It feels cool on touch. It can be selected for table cover as it is
attractive, sophisticated and it is hung beautifully. Soda, soap, bases do not affect
linen. All kinds of bleaching powder may be used. It is not damaged in sunlight.
It is very popular as clothes. It will not be dirty for structural reason. Linen fabric
is more durable than cotton, so it is very economical. As linen fabric has a high
luster, it has a great appeal.

Textile fibres 169
Uses of Silk — Silk is called the queen of fibre. This fibre is used for the
luxurious and fashionable dresses due to its softness, smoothness and
durability. It is lighter than cotton and linen clothes. Shirt, dresses for both
boys and girls, and decorative clothes are made from this fibre due to its
multifarious uses. Silk clothing is more comfortable than cotton clothing and
remains warmer. Silk clothing is lightweight and takes less space for storing. It
is very expensive. But if silk is mixed with rayon and nylon the price falls. It
may last for a long time if used with care.

Uses of wool fibre- Wool is a good conductor of heat. So when we wear
woolen clothes we feel warm. Wool may be used for different purposes as
warm clothes such as sweater, socks, coat, pant, jacket shawl, carpet and quilt
etc. We should be very careful in washing and ironing it. Wool clothing is very
costly. If it is used carefully, it will be long lasting.

Uses of Rayon- Rayon is comparatively long lasting and cheap and can be
bougth at a variety of prices. It can be made attractive by adding various
degrees of brightness. It is a popular fabric because it can be used in different
circumstances, activities at different times. The carpet, curtain etc. made of
this fibre bring newness for the room. Rayon textile is strong and bright.
Different types of sophisticated clothes are made from rayon through the
special process. It is easy to wash and take care of it. It tends to dry out quickly
because of its less ability to absorb water.

Uses of Nylon fibre- Nylon cloths are used for various purposes as it is strong
and light. Since nylon is elastic, long lasting and durable, under garments,
mosquito net, bed sheet, furniture cover, ribbon, lace, thread fishing net,
carpet, golf-bag etc. are made of nylon. Since it can be taken care of very easily
and washed and dried quickly, it is mostly used in rainy season. Nylon fibre
along with other fibres is needed for different types of clothes having various
qualities. For example-nylon-cotton, nylon-wool, nylon-rayon etc. It does not
get dust easily as dust retention power of nylon is less. It becomes soft when
heat is applied. So iron should be moderately warm in case of ironing.

Forma-22, Home Science, 9-10

170 Home Science

Lesson — 5-6 : Identification of fibre :

There are different types of natural, artificial and mixed fibres in the market. It

is difficult to identify properly the nature of textile fibre through any specific

test. It is to be determined through more than one test. It is called fibre
identification test through which the nature of fibre is identified. The tests
which are taken to identify the fibre are divided into three groups such as —

A. Physical test — Physical tests can be done at home. We can not depend

so much on these tests as they are non-technical . In most of the cases, we

can simply guess the nature of fibre but we can not identify properly the
nature of fibre through these tests.

The Physical tests are given below —

1. Touch Test — An experienced person can identify cloths made of different
types of fibres touching it with his hands. It becomes possible because of
his long times experience,e.g- if we rub the cotton clothes with hands, we
will feel cool and softness, linen clothes are seemed to be much more cool
and smooth than cotton clothes. But woolen clothes are hot and flexible and
silk cloth seem hot and smooth. It is difficult to detect the mixed fibre
cloths through this method.

2. Eye test-Eye observation is the easiest test among all the physical tests. We can
get idea about the nature of fibre by watching the length and brightness etc.

3. Folding Test — We have to fold a cloth twice and press it with fingers. If it is
linen fabric, the folding sign will be very clear on it and this sign will not
disappear easily. There will be folding sign on cotton cloths also but this
sign will not be so clear as on linen fabric. Silk and woolen cloths will not
have wrinkles in this way. So the difference can be identified among cotton,
linen and silk and woolen clothes through this test.

4. Test through opening twisted thread- We have to open twisted thread
getting some threads from a cloth. If the cloth is woolen, there will be seen
natural twinkle or weav on the woolen thread. Besides, we can detect the S

Textile fibres 171
source of thread by testing the torn thread after tearing it. If the front part
of a torn thread looks needlelike, it will be flax fibre. On the other hand, if
the front part looks thick of a paint brush, it will be cotton fibre.

5. Water test - It is very easy to detect flax and nylon fibre with this test as
linen has the high ability to absorb water. If a drop of water is put on a cloth
and it sucks water and spreads all around it, we will get the point that the
cloth is made of flax fibre. On the other hand, as the nylon fibre does not
have the ability to absorb water, it will not retain water.

6. Hot iron test -It is easy to detect artificial fibres through this test. If we
press a very hot iron on a cloth and if that clothe is acetate, nylon or dacron,
it will fully melt. But if the cloth is cotton, flax, silk, woolen or rayon there
will be red burn spot on that cloth.

7, Level test - A customer can get an idea about the cloth material looking at
the level pasted on the cloth with so many information.

8. Burn Test - Burn test is a very good primary test. For this test- we have
to open one or two twisted thread taking away from the cloth and burn
it with fire and then we have to observe the burning sample and ash.
We have to take the smell of the burning fibre also. Again we have to
test taking warp yarn. If the clothe is not made of weaving, a piece of
cloth is to be taken to use for the burn test.

: _
3 Use of fiber in the bum test © Use of cloth in the bum test Ash or left out in the burn test
nN

172 Home Science
The result sheet of fibre burn test
Fibre | Way of Re action Reaction Ashore left
burnin in the outside out
8 flame __| the flame
Cotton) Burn with | Burn quickly,) Burning Spreading | Light as feather , soft
and flame, will | yellow bright wil Oe out smell | gray colour residue
Flax | not shrink | flame ster takai like paper | remains
Is seen away from | burning
(lame
Wool,| A cluster Burn slowly | Normally Spread out | Small black globule is
Silk | like curling and make put out smell like | created which is hard
hate iz mild sound | itself hair or but easy to break.
created at the time feather
of burning. burn
Nylon | Will be Burn slowly| Put out Smell like | Hard, strong gray or
fibre |meltedin [through itself vegetables | copper coloured
the flame; [melting globule is found which
will shrink is not breakable.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Which one is the main or chief quality of textile fibre ?
a. Absorbency B. Flexibility
C. Contraction D. Lustre
2. Which characteristic of cloth depends on the width of fibre ?
A. Lustre B. Rough
C. Elasticity D. Flexibility
Read the following passage and answer the question No-3 and 4
Anid put off his school dress after being wet in rain. After two days when his
mother brings out the dress to wash she notices that there are some black spots
on the dress. So the dress has become unsuitable to wear. x
8

Textile fibres 173

3. Anid’s dress is made of which fibre ?
a. Silk b. Cotton
c. Wool d. Nylon

4. Which is the way to make the dress of Anid suitable to wear?
i. The use of bleaching
ii. Wash with rubbing
iii. Wash in thick acid

Which one is correct in the following -
a. iand ii b. iand iii
c. iiand iii d. i, ii and iii

Creative Questions

1. Nazma Begum likes to keep herself neat and tidy. For some days she
becomes tired in hot temperature and she suffers from breathing trouble.
Watching her condition, her colleagues said to her, "You are suffering from
your clothes" They also advised her, "You should wear comfortable dress."
a) What is " seed fibre "?
b) What do you mean by ‘filament fibre’ ?
c) Nazma Begum is using which type of clothe? Explain it.
d) Is the advice of her colleagues reasonable for Nazma begum in her

present condition? Explain it.
=
R

Chapter Fifteen
Art Elements and Art Principles of Textile
Dresses are needed to increase the beauty of human body. The main purpose of
wearing a dress is to make a person attractive by selecting the dress according
to taste in a befitting way by adjusting physical appearance and completion. As
dresses are the most important art of our everyday life, we must be careful in
making this art and in selecting and wearing. We have to put emphasis on
industry material and on proper application of this art principles. In fact, very
few people born perfectly. It is possible to make a person attractive concealing
the defects of different parts of a body through the proper selection of dresses
having the artistic aspects of it.
Lesson 1-3 : Art elements of Textile
Dress making has been one of the artistic works for a long time. Like other
industries some elements are used in creating this art. Though these elements
are used at different places in different ways, the purpose of using is same for
all the time i.e to increase the beauty or decorate the body for making it
attractive. The remarkable artistic elements which are used in textile industry
are as follows --- colour, dot, line, design and texture. The proper application
of these artistic elements has a great impact on making the beautiful and
attractive dresses.
Impact of colour on dresses- Everything around us has its own colour. The
source of this colour may be natural or artificial. It is necessary to have
some knowledge on the characteristics and impacts of different colours for
proper selection of colours depending on place, time and person. We should
have some ideas about the colour of colour cycle for using colour properly
on clothing. Basically, colour is of three types- (i) primary or main colours
(ii) secondary or mixed colours and (iii) marginal colours.
1. Primary or Main colour - Primary colours are red, yellow and blue. Basic
or primary colours are pure because these are not made mixing with other
colours but other colours are made up mixing with these main colours.
2. Secondary colour - By mixing two main or primary colours, the secondary
colours are made. e.g- yellow + blue=Green, red + blue = violet, red + yellow
= orange. to
4

Art elements and Art Principles of Textile 175
3. Marginal colour - If any secondary colour ,which is near to the basic
colour, is mixed with it, it is to be made marginal colour . e. g yellow + green =
yellowish green, Blue + green = bluish green, blue + violet = bluish violet,
red+ violet = reddish violet , red+ orange = reddish orange, orange + yellow =
yellowish orange.
yellow
yellowish orange, «Yellowish green
orange C) violet e@ Es ®
/\ reddish orange @ @ biuish green
“OO Q¢ —-@
m reddish voilet @ e@ ® bluish voilet
Primary Colour Secondary Colour Marginal Colour
Task - Make a colour cycle mentioning primary, secondary and marginal colors.
Every colour has its some own characteristics. Among the primary colours
red, yellow and all the colours made from their mixture are known as hot or
bright colour. On the other hand the colours made of blue and the mixture of
blue are known as cold or mild colours. Normally, hot or bright colours pains
our eyes, raise warm or hot feeling in mind, bring distance objects nears to our
vision, make the thing appear larger than what actually they are and attract
more the attention of others. On the other hand, cold or light colours bring
quiet feeling in mind, make an object farther than its actual existence, make the
object smaller than what actually they are and they fail to draw the attention of
others.
Task - Mention the characteristic, of different types of colour.
The role of colour in dresses
Colour has an important role in selecting dresses for different persons, If
proper colour is not selected, the colour of a person's dress diminishes one's
beauty. Again, selection of proper colour can make one attractive. In fact it
2 is the artifice of colour. As colour plays an important role, we should be
& careful in selecting the colour of dresses.

176 Home Science

1. To make a beautiful personality - Colours brings a wonderful change
in the appearance of a person. If appropriate colour is selected, it will
make a simple ordinary girl unusal. Proper selection of colour according to
age, personality and occasion increases a person's self confidence and the
beauty of a human body. On the other hand, if proper colour is not
selected, the colour of a person's dress can spoil one's personality. So, we
should be more careful in selecting the colour of dresses.

2. To give brightness to the body- Colour has a great impact on the
person's physical structure, appearance and complexion. So we should select
the colour of dresses in such a way that it will beautify the body.

e A girl of bright complexion can wear clothing of any colour.

e On the other hand, girls of dark complexion should use clothes of light
but bright colours to make them look brighter.

3. To change the physical structure - Its is possible to present a person
apparently as healthy or slim changing the colour of dresses. Hence, the colour
of clothing should be selected considering the physical structure.

e Girls , who are tall and medium can select dresses of all colours regarding
their age.

e The dress having two mixed colors will not be suitable for the thin or
short structured girl. In fact, light colured clothes will be suitable for
them, So they can select saree and blouse of light colour.

e Deep colour clothing should be selected for those whose physical
structure is thin. They can put on a saree and a blouse of contrast colour.
But when a short structured girl puts on a saree and blouse of the same
colour, she looks relatively taller. Girls, who are healthy, should put on
clothing of light colours so that they appear slim.

4. To create supremacy- If we want to give more importance on the beautiful
part of a body in selecting clothing, in that case we can select bright or deep
colour such as -

e It is possible to make the dress attractive through using design.

e Itis possible to make design of deep colour on a light colour saree.

ce}
e Itis possible to enhance the attraction of dress by using contrast colour &

Art elements and Art Principles of Textile 177
Again, if any person does not want to express himself, he can select dull on
light colour dress because in this case no part of body will get preference.
5. To keep uniformity in a dress- As colour is an inseparable part of design of
a dress, so to show the person's physical structure, appearance and complexion
beautifully, we have to maintain uniformity of colour on the dress. Different
colours can be used on a dress. In this case, to keep the uniformity of dress-
e The use of two colours should not be the same rather one should be
more than the other.
e When light colour dress is selected, deep colour should be used on some
small parts of it.
e Besides, the colour suitable for a person, should be used on his dress to
create dominance.
Task- Which colour of dress will be suitable for you regarding your body
structure - Explain.
Impact of lines on clothing- line is a strong art element to increase the beauty
of clothing. There is an assembling of various lines on clothing. Use of lines on
clothing can cause apparent changes in the physical structure of the person who
wears it. Such as it brings about a tall look, sometimes short look, sometimes
bulky look and sometimes slim look, The minor drawbacks of physical
feature can be hidden through the proper arrangement of lines and textile
texture.
Line is basically of two types- 1. straight line and 2. curved live, Again, the
line is divided into six parts depending on its movement for example- 1.
straight line, 2. horizontal line, 3. angular line, 4. curved line, 5. oblique line
6. broken line.
Every line has its some own features which affect much an physical structure,
height, face and neck. It is possible to express the personality beautifully
concealing physical defect through the thoughtful selection and proper
arrangement of these lines. ,
1) Straight line- it indicates honesty, courage, intensity and
objective endeavors. Generally, this line increase the length
of any thing apparently. So for bulky and short size girls, )
use of vertical long lines is appropriate, it brings about a tall Straight line

178 Home Science
look in the design of the clothing and the person with this

clothing looks tall.

2) Horizontal line- The feelings of rest and comfort come é
through those lines, The clothing of these lines is suitable y=4
for a tall and thin person,. The appeasement of thinness will ee
partly deuces. it clothing's about a wide look in the design of ——
clothing and the person wearing such clothes looks Hetioeil'tihe
apparently short.

3) Curved lines- Curved lines indicate softness, (
smoothness and promptness, These lines reduce the length

of the person who wears such type of clothes but it brings — )
thythm and creates gloominess when the curve is downward a
and upward carved lines indicate joy and delight. Saryed'ine
4) Oblique line- It indicates restrain. It is possible to is
bring tall and short look by various uses of these lines on .

clothes. If the oblique lines are upward , thin and near, the .

person with this clothing looks tall. On the other hand, if ;

they are downward wide and not near, the person will =“
look bulky and short. Obtique ine
5) Zigzag lime- This line plays dual role. PAN
Sometimes a person looks tall and sometimes SAA
looks short and bulky depending on the size and ae
direction of zigzag line. Zigzag line
Impact of dot on clothing- Dot is the building block of any

art. Dot can be big, small, fat or thin. There is line on

everything around us and thin line is created from dot. eon
When a Small dot gets motion, a line, size and texture can eaeel
be formed from that. Again, texture can be created through areca ee!

a new feeling with the combination of so many small dots Sees
and it is called stippling. It is possible to bring rhythm in a
clothing with the repetition of dots. §

Art elements and Art Principles of Textile 179
Impact of texture on the designs of clothing- The role of clothing is very
important to increase the beauty of human body. The dress, suppressing
personality and physical beauty, attracts the beauty of all, that dress should be
avoided in spite of its high cost. One should know oneself for the beautiful
expression of personality.

e Every body should select the dress according to his /her body or
features.We should not select tight dress as giving importance on the
structure of different parts and muscle of our body. Too much tight
dresses do not reveal one's good taste and fine sense of beauty. On the
other hand, Inconsistencies of ones body become prominent.

e In selecting dresses we have to consider the certain matters, such as
short, tall, bulky, slim etc. It is seen sometimes that girls, short and
bulky, wear saree of big prints. As a result, their height decreases and
they look very fat or bulky. Clothing of small prints is suitable for them.

e A number of inconsistencies of one's feature or body can be covered
through structural designs and ornamented designs of clothing.

e It is possible to cover the inconsistent of ones body by using yoke on
blouse, kameez creases, freals, lace fixing, needlw work, wide collar etc.
Fat people should wear loose dressed, The inconsistency of ones wide
waist can be covered through well palnned suitable waist lines.

e People who have short neck can appear to have still shorter necks if they
put on clothing having collared round cut necks. On the other hand, for
them clothing with wide out, V or U cut necks are suitable. If fat people
wear high collared clothing, they will look fatter. Again frocks or
blouses with high collar is suitable for thin and tall girls.

~ i .

WW dE 1 @)\@&
an :
t “ eo
\ oe
Oval shape face Square or round Shape face

co e The structure of face is of different kinds, such as - tall, round, square,
s oval shape. Oval shape face is the ideal one. Girls of oval sleep face can

180 Home Science
select indiscriminately all types of neck cut cloths, Girls of square or
round shape face can use V and U cut necks which are suitable for them.
Small cut necks are suitable for the tall face. If these types of girls wear
high collared clothing, it will cover the thinness of their neck.

e Some have lumpy flesh on neck and to hide it they use high necked
clothing. But the best way to hide it is to keep the neckline of the
clothing on the middle of this lump. It will help to hide this body defect.

e One should select ornamentations by keeping similarity with the
appearance or the body of a person.

Task- Mention which type of structural and ornamented designs of clothes
is suitable for which type of body structure.

Impact of texture on the designs of clothing: There are different types of
texture in fabrics. Woolen clothe is soft, silk clothe looks bright, satin clothe
looks glossy and cotton clothe is of strong nature. There are many types of
texture in cotton, silk, wool andi, organdi etc. Each dress is of different feature
due to its difference of texture for example-soft, medium, strong, heavy, glossy,
dull etc. A person can present himself/herself as tall or short, slim or fat
through the proper use of texture.

i) Jersy, Shiphons etc are of soft natured clothe. The dresses of this type of
cloth stick to the body, so the structure of a body is easily visible. We
feel comfort wearing soft dress.

ii) Medium strong natured clothes, such as denim cloth does not stick to
body, so the body structure is not easily visible.

iii) Strong natured cloth such as tafeta makes the people looking fat
apparently.

iv) Heavy cloth such as woolen texture makes the body fat apparently.

v) Dull textured clothes such as flannel, denims etc. retain light much so

anything with this clothe looks small. This type of clothes are useful for
the aged and fat people.
vi) Light reflects on glaze clothe, so people wearing this type of clothe
look bigger, such as satin, mercerized cotton etc. The texture of the
clothes having metal fibre work, glitters. This type of texture is suitable
for tall, thin and tender age.

The people of perfect body structure can wear the dress of all textures. We have

to select the texture of clothing according to season, body structure and age.

Task- Mention which type of cloth with what texture is needed for the %
family members and why. S

Art elements and Art Principles of Textile 181
Lesson — 4-5 : Artistic principles of Textile:
We should have the knowledge of basic principles of art to use the artistic
elements in making designs of clothing. So to use the textile element in a
proper way the principles which give us direction are called art principles. The
principles such as artistic balance, ratio, dominance, rhythm and similarity play
important role in making beautiful and attractive design. The Knowledge of the
principle of designs is to be applied in every aspect of life. It is not possible to
imagine the selection of design in clothing, making clothing, selection of
secondary elements, wardrobe planning etc. without art principles.
Balance on clothing- When things of the same weight are put on the two
directions having same distance and keeping the centre stable is called balance.
In fact, weight and strength of two sides remain same. In this case different
elements are arranged in such a way that no part will be heavier or stronger
than another. There are three types of balance (i) Formal or symmetric balance
(ii) Informal or asymmetric balance (iii) Radial balance.
Formal Balance Informal Balance

1. Formal balance : In this case, both the sides of any design appear same
either vertically or horizontally. This type of balance is most stable. Setting two
same pockets or same plits on the same height to the two direction we can
make formal or symmetric balance of clothing.
2. Informal balance: In this case though the things of the same weight are on
both the sides, they will not be to the same distance or same height; This type
of arrangement is very interesting but much more ability and thought is needed
in keeping asymmetric balance, In this arrangement -

e A big thing can be kept on one side and few small things on the other

x side.
N

182 Home Science

e The more attractive thing can be kept near the centre and less attractive

things are on the far away.
e In some cases bright color or attractive trimmings can be used to decrease
distance.
Task- How can you bring balance in a dress— Describe ?
Rhythm in clothing- Rhythm can be made by the repeating use of artistic
elements, such as color, line, dot, size, texture etc. If the rhythm in the design
of clothing is maintained eye will be attracted from a line or color to another
line or color. We can bring rhythm in clothing through four methods-
(i) Repetition - We can brin rhythm by A AAAA aN
using line, color or seem relevant elements AnxnAu. Aud aH ELS
repeatedly or by making the parallel lines of “~“““
sewing, button, needle work lace etc, It is “= =
seen that the use of lines or size for three or “AGA a
more than three lines makes a design. saci .
(ii) Radiation- Rhythm can be made by Sk ca: “ave
using lines to the different direction from S$ , «er
one centre. This kind of rhythm can be made Radiation .
through the neck line of clothing laces,
sequence, needle work etc.
Gi) Gradation- Rhythm oan be made by ollooQals th HH
changing the shade of color, changing line or ES ™M ff
sequence of size. If we make the change of offdooolldn ; my my
color or line along the length not along the Seanon
width, our eyes will be moved more.
(iv) Continuity- Rhythm can be brought by using \ > =
the moving lines of such simple line, corrugate ,
line zigzag line etc. In this case, horizontal or \
angular lines can be used to break the sequence, iI \\
for example- Use of pocket of horizontal lines in ; —
the fabric of vertical lines with creases. Se
=
§

Art elements and Art Principles of Textile 183
Preference on fabric- The part or fabric , q ,
which attracts the attention is centre 7 yee
point of preference. The centre point of ™@ iE wet
preference is related to physical structure - i
Because it is seen that the preference is a m
brought to that part of body which is ( : eo
more attractive. To create preference oe
deep or opposite colored belt, lace etc * —_— —
can be selected. Preference on fabric
Similarity on fabrics : The relation __ .
among different parts and things of a ~ va” ie S&S
clothing is called similarity. It is possible “S ee”
to keep similarity on fabrics through the 9. Mm Ep
proper use of color, line, size, texture ova” A
etc. To maintain the similarity -

Similarity on fabrics

e The same figure or line is to be used, for example - square pocket can be

added with square neck.

e@ The colour of salwar will have the similarity with kameege and dupatta .

e Design of clothing should be chosen by keeping similarity with the

personality and occasion.

@ The accessories should have the similarity with the texture of textile.
But excess similarity brings monotonous feeling many times. So we have to
bring varieties reasonably.

Task - How will you maintain similarity in the selection of your dress for
the class party of your school?

If the artistic principles is properly used in fabrics, it will beautify the
personality of a person and will increase his confidence. So all of us should
have some knowledge regarding the application of artistic principles in
clothing.

2

R

184 Home Science
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. What is meant by curved line ?
a) Flexibility b) Honesty
c) Courage d) Rest
2. Ifa fat girl wears a dress of satin texture, how does she look like ?
a) Tall b) Bulky
c) Sick d) Thin
Read the following passage and answer No. 3 and 4
Lisa sets a black coloured yoke with needle work on the lower part of white
coloured kameez. So her kameez looks very beautiful.
3. Which artistic principles has Lisa applied in her clothing ?
a) Balance b) Preference
c) Ratio d) Rhythm
4. On the dress of Lisa -
i) Eyesight moves
ii) Given importance on the body structure
iii) Considered the varieties of colour
Which one of the following is correct ?
a) iand ii b) i and iii
c) iiand iii d) i, ii & iii
8

Art elements and Art Principles of Textile 185

Creative Questions-

1. Banna, a short girl of round shape, goes to market one day to buy clothing.
She prefers two kameezes, one is of a designed kameezes of parallel lines
and another one is of high neck kameez with big prints. But after thinking
all, she buys a designed kameez of U-neck with vertical lines.

A. Which is the root of any art ?

B. What is meant by balance in clothing ?

C. Why Banna does not buy the designed kameez with parallel lines ? Explain

D. Do you think that Banna is right in selecting her dress ? Give reasons in
support of your answer.

2. Saba and Sana are two sisters. Both of them are of bright complexion but
they are quite opposite in physical structure and size. One day both of them
go to a marriage ceremony wearing blue sarees. Though all the people in
the party praise the slim girl Saba but nobody shows attention to Sana.

A Colour is of how many types ?

B. Why is care needed in selecting the colour of dress ? Explain it.
C. Saba is praised so much. Explain the reason.

D. The dress Sana wearing goes against her personality. Explain it.

Chapter Sixteen
Printing and colouring in clothing
Printing and colouring is an important factor in clothing industry. When a
clothe is made in a factory, it is called gray fabric. In fact, this type of dress
will go straightly to the market rarely. It will go for marketing after printing
and colouring through different methods. By this, the power of attraction and
disposable utility of clothing increase. To express taste, different colour are
reflected on the upper part of clothing, This process is called clothing
printing. Through this method it will make the clothing very attractive by
drawing design of different colours. Printing of clothing can be done through
different methods, such as block, batic, screen, stencil and roller printing etc.
On the other hand, by dipping in a colour solution the entire cloth can be
dyed. The method of dyeing can be applied before making the clothe i.e. it
can be applied in fibre or thread also. Again at many times if in the tie-dye
method we tie a cloth tactfully and dip in to dye solution, a beautiful design
will stand out on the clothing.
‘ c 5 ? Pe. YW O-- da. ool
‘a th Mm | “it. ie “ase
4 hi > 4, ee ee.
‘ a4 fe | olf Y Asan Ve
| ft i © ox Laas si
Block Tie-dye Batic

Lesson 1 : Variation in printing clothing
Printing is an important chapter in clothing industry. It is one of the best
methods to make the clothing attractive. There are different methods in printing
clothing. A printer chooses a definite methods regarding his/her necessity,
ability, and surroundings. The basic difference between dyeing clothing and
printing clothing is that in the first one, the entire cloth to be dyeing equally in
the same color and thickness of solution. On the other hand, in the printing

4
&

Printing and colouring in clothing 187
method, it is possible to make the clothing stood out by occurring the splendor
of one as more than one colour on specific spots of the clothing. Then it will be
dried by heat or steam and penetrated into the specific spot of the clothing and
rest of the colour will be washed away.
Infact colours are the main ingredient of printing and colouring in clothing. To
make the cloth attractive by using the colour. Block, tie-dye, batic play important
role in this rigard.
Lesson -2-3 : Block Printing
In the true sense, the principles or ingredients which had been adopted first in
the history of textile printing was block. Still now, we print our wearing textile
bed sheet, table cloth etc. through block printing along with the other printing
methods. It is very much popular in our cottage industry.
Te. ae Block making - The thickness used in the block
Se =), printing should be 2"-4" or 5.08-10.16 cm. Otherwise
. 4 = they will not be sustainable. Though the shape of a
= -— block depends on the design, the length of it should not
p more than 12"-16" or 30.48-40.64 cm. In selecting
<> ~Wood for making block, importance can be given on
Bhedkmaling babla, gub, rain tree etc. Potato, lady's finger etc. also
can be used for immediate work in block printing.
The part of a design which will stand out on textile, that t y
part will be kept high on the block and rest of the part will j y > Bae
be cut away deeply. As a result, when printing will be | Vie)! a
given on textile dipping the block in a colour tray, at the - We sf
time, only the designed part will stand out on textile. The ] a
design of more than one colour can be printed on the same Prepared Block
textile. In this case, the work of the 2nd block will be _
started after completing the work of the specific block. a
Preparing of printing table and colour tray- It is a) ase ~*~
convenient to use a strong table made of either stone, © = a
cement, iron, steel or of good wood. First of all, we have uuu
<2 to spread blanket of several steps on the table and then —=———~
% brand-new cloth will be set up on the table with pin in Color tray

188 Home Selence
such a way that the cloth will spread on the table very tightly and there will be
no wrinkle on the cloth at the time of printing. A mbber cloth will be set up
under a colour tray for printing colour and then a piece of foam measuring
3-4cm will be spread on the rubber cloth. Next a piece of woolen cloth or
gunny will be spread on the foam and colour will be spread on the foam with
the help of a brush. At the time of printing work, the block will be put on the
woolen cloth or gunny for 2/3 times and then the printing will be set on the
original textile. We have to wash block after completing the work.
Prussian - Different kinds of colour for block printing are available in the
market, If this colour is properly spread on the block and then press on the
cloth, it will be printing. But if we know the process of prussian, we can print
the textile making the dye according to our own choice, Making of prussian
paste and printing method are mentioned here -

Ingredients of paste Percentage 7 = 1

Prussian dye 6% ; nscale F-/i . 4

Boiling hot water 20% anes yy

Urea sar 3% —— — (4

Edible soda 3% am ee ~>

Melted gum 62% ——— :

Resist salt 1% ss

Glycerin 2% Block printing
Preparation of paste: To make paste one tola fine gum is to be mixed with 14
litre water before 24 hours of making paste. Then in a clean container of hot
water dye urea sat, Edible soda, washing soda,resist sault are to be mixed and
finally they are to be mixed with the prepared gum together (No need to use
urea sar in rainy season).
Printing method - After preparing paste it will be filtered with filtration and
mixed with glycerin. Then textile is to be printed with the mixture. It is better to
work with this paste as early as possible. Because the quality of it is spoiled after
4 hours. After printing the textile is to be dried in shade and in the sun for some
days. It is to be steamed, washed and bleached after doing block print in prussian
dye. Water is to be boiled in a big pot for steaming. Now the textile is to be
wrapped with gunny and strainer is to be set on that pot and put the textile on it
and then cover it up for steaming.

%

5

Printing and colouring in clothing 189
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Which one is the first used principles in the history of block printing ?
A. Screen B. Stencil
C. Block D. Roller
2. Which materials are needed for block printing ?
A. Brush, Pencil B. Colour, Needle, Thread
C. Colour, Printing-table D. Colour-tray, Art-paper
Read the following stimulant and answer question 3 and 4:
Sumona selected 'Babla' wood which was 1 thick for block printing for her Eid
dress. She made the following mixture of clours. Then she started to print her
dress as she desired. But the standard of the print was not up to her expectation.
Prussian colour - 6%
Boiled hot water - 10%
Melted gum - 62%
Edible soda - 3%
3. Where is the fault of the mixture ?
A. In the quantity of prussian colour 8B. In the quantity of boiled water
C. In the quality of melted gum D. In the quantity of edible soda.
4. What is the reason behind the failure of the expected standard of block ?
i. There is fault in the mixture of colours
ii. Fault in the selection of wood
iii. Fault in the making of the block.
Which one of the following is correct ?
A, i. & ii. B. i. & iii.
C. igi D. I, ii & iii.
Creative Questions
1. Toru brought some clothes to her shop for selling without any late after
doing block print. But her clothes were not sold rather they were in the
shop uselessly.
A. What is called the cloth made in a factory.
B. What is the difference between colouring and printing of the clothes ?
C. Why did Toru fail to sell her clothes? — Explain.
20 D. Toru should be more careful for the success in business— give reasons
= for your answer.

Chapter Seventeen
Drafting

First of all , a sample of a dress is drawn on a plain paper while making a dress.
This is called main drawing or main draft. Next, based on the main drawing
the final drawing which is drawn on brown paper according to the size of
figure in a systematic way before cutting the piece of cloth is called pattern
drafting. In making a pattern draft successfully some extra measurements are
added to the main measurement for comfort and sewing.
There are many advantages of drafting such as --- a) in case of necessity , the
design of a dress can be changed easily , b) it is possible to cut many dresses of
the same size at the same time, c) it is possible to hinder wastage of fabric, d) it
hinders the risk of faulty cutting , e) it takes less time in cutting the dress, f) it
is possible to make with the cut pieces not only the dresses of small children
but also the different types of necessary things of a house such as -napkin,
handkerchief, table mat etc. g) It is easy to make dresses of varieties of design
based on the main drafting.

(DAY ig

6s" z

lial! .

| — 7 ——} | |
Lesson 1-3 Children Dress - Drafting of Fatua.
Fatua is very comfortable as an indoor or outdoor dress for the summer
season. For making a fatua of a child of 3 years, we have to plan for a main
design first and then make a drafting on a paper. The things which are to be
collected for drafting are as follows:-
Brown paper, pencil, scale, rubber, yard -tape, pin etc. For making a fatua ,
convenient for a child of 3 years, One must know how to take body
measurements to ensure a good fit. The main measurements of different parts
of body and the method of making drafting are given below :-

2
8

Drafting 191
Re i A__E D
Required measurement - = er
Length-17 or 43.18 cm H
Bust -22” or 55.88 c.m ‘i ct
Shoulder -9" or 22.46 c.m é
Sleeve length 3.5” or 8.89 c.m |
End of sleeve 4” or 10.16 c.m K L
Drafting of the front & backside of a fatua.

The drafting of the front & back side of a fatua is to be done at the same time .
First of all, a line of A-----( 11.43 + 1.27) =12.7 c.m is to be drawn taking half of
the measurement of shoulder or adding 1.27 cm with the measurement of poot.
Then a line of AB is to be drawn taking the 1/4 part measurement ( 13.97cm) of
chest +5.08 cm loose + 1.27 cm sewing =20.32 cm. Rectangle A,B,C,D will be
created on the BI line.
From A dot E dot is to be identified to distance 1/12 part of chest = 4.57 cm to
fix up the width of neck. From A dot 2.54 cm down J dot is to be identified and
then dot E & J will be added in a round way for the depth of back neck. Now, for
making the shape of front neck, form A dot under the chest of 1/8 part= 6.98 c.m,
H dot is to be identified and then dot E & H is to be added in a round way. Shape
of the neck can be more deep according to our choice. Then From D dot E & F
is to be added. For the Shape of armpit the middle point G of CF line is to be
identified and then if we add G & I dot in a curved way, the shape of back
armpit will be made. The front armit will be 1.27 cm more deep than the back
armpit. 1.27 cm for hem stitch and 1.27 cm for sewing are to be added under the
entire length. Now, A B line from A dot is to enlarged up to under 45.72 cm and
AK line is to be drawn. Then IBKL rectiangle is to be drawn.

Drafting of hand - A-D = length of Sleeve 8.87 he I 5

cm + edge -2.54 cm + sewing 1.27 cm = 12.7 cm. F

A-B = width of arm = 1/4 of chest = 13.97 c.m.

B-E =1/12 + 1.27 cm of chest =5.84 cm

I- D= edge 2.54 c.m Ne

LJ cuff 1/2 + 1.27 m= 11.43 cm. ” Lao c

8 A-F =1.27 cm Drafting of the arm of fatua
N

192 Home Science
Now, EF dot is to be added in a triangle way, The middle point of this line is G.
From E to F we have to make a shape setting a dot outside 1.27 cm of G dot.
Now to make a shape of the front part of arm, taking the middle dot H of the
line of G and E, at the middle of 0.635 cm of H a dot is to be identified and
then we have to make a shape like the picture with EGF.
Preaparing of Fatua- If we want to make a fatua according to the drafting,
first of all, we have to fix the quantity of cloth according to the plan, then it is
to be sewed cutting according to the definite method. To make a fatua for a
child of 3years old. 1 yard cloth, thread for sewing, needle, button, scissors,
sewing machine etc. are to be kept near hand.
Cutting cloth- Cloth is to be folded following the proper method and then
putting the drafting paper on it well set it with pin. Next, cloth is to be cut
according to the design. After cutting, the back part is to be separated, then
cutting the shape of front armpit and neck, we'll cut from the middle point of
neck to the 7.62 cm under of it.
Again, the side long cloth is to be folded and setting of the drafting of arm we
have to cut together now the front part of drafting of arm is to be shaped. Then
the cloth of the front part of two arms is to be set together and again setting
drafting the shape of the front arm is to be cut.
Now the neck piping and button border are to be made with cut piece. In this
case contrasting colour cloth also are be used.
oD
Method of preparing piping 3

Drafting 193
Sewing- First of all, setting the front and back

part together, the sewing of shoulder of the two =

sides is to be done. Next, arcanging the border ‘oe

for button, the neck piping is to be set np Then "Sau

sewing the two sides, length is to be fixed up fae

and folding the edge of length tucking is to be

done. Sewing the two arms separately, they are "

to be connected with the body. Now, testing the °

fitting hem sewing is to be given at the end of fra

length . Then loop and button are to be set in

front of chest. At last, cutting the excess thread Ls

and ironing the sewing of fatua is to be ended. Prepared Fatua
Lesson 4 Drafting of Baby Frock

Baby Frock is a suitable dress for children. This dress may be of different
types. For example- A line shape frock, yoke frock, tunic etc. Here for making
a frock of a baby of 3 years. We have to take the measurement of some parts
of the body, the main measurement of those parts and drafting method of it are
given below :-

Required measurement | Broom paper, pencil, scale, shape cut, rubber,
Length -45.72cm_ | yard, pin etc are to be collected. The drafting go
Chest -55.88 cm _ | the back and front side of a baby frock is to be
Poot -11.43 cm __| done at the same time.

First of all, adding 1.27 cm with the poot A —E__D
measurement AB line is to be drawn. Then adding a — (

2.54 cm with % part of the chest AB line is to be 5, ws

drawn. From B dot 6.35 cm for keeping loose and Cc

1.27 cm for sewing are to be added with % part of

the chest and I dot is to be fixed up at the distance

of 21.59 cm (13.97 cm + 6.35 cm + 1.27 cm). Now

rectangle ABCD is to be created on the B I line L
adding B & I. Next 1.27 cm for hem stitch and N K

194 Home Science
1.27 cm for sewing are to be added under the entire length (45.72 + 1.27 +
1.27) and from A dot A B line is to be extended down up to 48.26 cm AN dap
line is to drawn. Now rectangle IBNO is to be drawn. For enclosure IJ is to be
added crossing K dot from O dot to about 4 cm away and a long the OL line a
shape is to be made with the shape cut like the picture beautifully. From A dot
E dot is to be identified from the distance of 1/12 part of chest 4.6 cm to fix up
the width of neck. From A dot 1.27 cm down J dot is to be identified and then
dot E C J will be added in a round way for the depth of back neck. Now for
making the shape of front neck, from A dot under the chest of 1/8 part, H dot is
to be identified and then dot E & H is to be added in a round way. Shape of the
neck can be more deep according to our choice. Then from D dot 1.27 cm
down F dot is to be identified and dot E & F is to be added. For the shape of
armpit the middle point of CF is to be identified and then if we add G & I dot
in a curved way, the shape of back armpit will be made. The front armpit will
be 1.27 cm more deep than the back armpit.
of the body of a child of 3 years old.

Cutting cloth and sewing - To cut a baby frock according to the above
drafting, taking a cloth of 91.44 cm width and 50.8 cm length we'll fold it and
put the drafting paper on that and set it with pin. Next, the cloth is to be cut
according to the design. Now neck, arm piping and button border are to be
made from the side and piece. The back side of this type of baby frock can
remain full or half open.
In the case of sewing, first of all, setting the front and back part together. The
sewing of shoulder of the two sides is to be done. Next setting the piping of
neck and armpit, button border is to be sewed. At many times, the arrangement
of button can be on the two shoulders also. Then sewing the two sides, length
is to be fixed up and folding the edge of length tucking is to be done. Testing
the fitting hem sewing is to be given down and required button is to be set. At
last, frock sewing is to be completed after cutting the extra thread and
completing ironing.

=

8

Drafting 195
| tones
a Pe oe
- were,
~ nuns
iN 4 mi anaes
: | reine
ae ' -
Different types of A line shape baby frock
Task- Make a baby frock acording to the drafting.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Question
1. Which one is the suitable dress for summer season ?
a. Shirt b. Fatua
c. Panjabi d. Safari
2, What is the benefit of drafting ?
a. Cloth will not shrink b. Fitting of the body is to be good.
c. Searing will be strong d. Design is to be good.
Read the following stimulant and answer question on 3 & 4:
Julekha decides to give a baby frock to her friends daughter at her birthday.
She sews the cloth after cutting it. When she goes to iron the clothes, she
3. Which part of the clothe Julekha should sew first to keep the sewing in right form ?
a. To set the neck piping b. To join the lower part
c. To sew the lower part ad. To sew the front and back shoulder together.
oS
s
N

196 Home Science
4. What should Julekha do for making the frock in a right way/properly-

i. To cut the front and back part of the frock together.

ii. To follow the right steps of sewing

iii. Not to buy inadequate cloth at the time of buying
Which one of the followings is right ?

a. iii b. i& iii

c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii.
Creative Question
1. After training Rojina buys a cloth for making a fatua for her baby of a 3 years
old. She cuts the cloth after taking the measurement of 1/3 part of shoulder and
1/2 part of chest.
After making the dress when she goes to put on the dress to her baby, she
notices that the dress is not getting into her body. If she wants to alter the dress.
in no way it is possible to do that.

a. Which type of paper are to be selected in drawing the sample of a dress ?

b. What is meant by ' patarn drafting' ?

c. How could Rojina make a dress suitable for the baby ? Explain it.

d. Do you think that Rojina had a fault in making the dress ? Evaluate it.

ES
Rg

Chapter Eighteen
Clothing Care & Tidiness In Clothing
Clothing and textiles tend to reflect the sense of beauty, taste and personality of
a person. It is not likely that to buy clothe according to ones own will rather it
becomes indispensable to take care of clothing for keeping it workable, useful
and sustainable. New clothing also turns old and tattered for continuous use.
These types of old and tattered clothing also can be renewed for using by the
proper repairing of them. At many times, the fabric can loose its beauty
because of stains on it. It is important that stains should be removed promptly
from clothing through different methods.
It is necessary to take care of clothing properly for keeping the durability,
beauty and usefulness. If we can take care of clothing following the proper
procedures, the clothing will remain useable for a long time, remain beautiful
and at the same time we will be able to save money. Clean and tidy dress keeps
up mental as well as physical health.
Lesson 1- Washing Clothes
The care which garments require to keep looking their best is a major
consideration in terms of time, money and energy. The most usual method in
clothing care is washing. The main purpose of washing clothes are-
1) To wash the dirty clothes with soap or detergent to make them clean again.
2) To bring back the clothes to their original form using special elements.
Soap : Soap is the best cleansing material. Most of | Borax: The detergent
the clothes of home are washed with it. Many kinds | named borax is not
of soap are available in the market. The soap that | available in our country. At
contains too much caustic soda is not good for | present borax is produced
washing and cleaning clothes. To clean clothes, | from sodium carbohydrate
soap should have certain characteristics, such as-the | toric acid. Liquid borax
soap will not be the yellow or deep in colour ; the contains. ‘base so it is
soap will be hard so that if we press our finger on it, ffectivel aed ma
it will not create a hole; the surface of a soap should ome’ J .
be smooth; if we observe a powdery substance on sirenginen and: boghten
: powdery :
the body of the soap, we should be aware that it clothes, very often, this
contains too much base and is very harmful to our | MAterial is used for
clothing; soap holds dirt bringing out of the cloth; | femoving stain from
so if we wash it with water, soap with dirt will be clothes.
washed away and the cloth will be clean.
2
R

Washing soda : It is called sodium bicarbonate. It is easy | Starch: Starch is obtained in great quantity
to clean heavily imbedded dirt of greasy cloth with washing | from rice, potatoes and corn. By using
soda. Soda is used for heavily imbedded dirt and greasy | starch, clothes get back their natural
cotton and lynen clothes to boil, to make germfree and as | strength and brightness. Clothes do not get
well as to remove bad smell from them. But it is not wise to | dirty easily when starch is used.
use soda for all types of clothes. Silk and woolen clothes
will be spoiled for too much base of soda.
Soap powders: Nowadays, it is seen the extensive use | Gum Arabic: Gum Arabic is used to
of soap powders in our country. It is easy to wash clothes | strengthen and brighten silk clothes.
by taking required quantity of water with soap powder in . :
a pot. Soap powder is found by different names in the | Indigo: Clothes become yellowish after
market. But soap powder of different brand contains too | washing with soap. In order to get rid of
much base. So we should use these by determining the | their yellowish presence indigo is used to
identity of the fibres in the fabric. get a light blue white appearance.
Bran Water : Husk or bran water is also used as a cleansing | Ultramarine, Prussian and indigo blue
material. Colourful and printed clothes such as chintz and | are available in the market. Indigo, in
cretonne are washed with bran water. Bran is also known as both the forms liquid and powder, is
husk. If we take bran in a piece of rag and dip into water, we'll : . qu Powder,
get bran water when the water tums into brown colour.Then it | @Vailable in the market.
will be fit for using. Husk is also used for dry cleaning.
Ammonia : It is one kind of bitter gas.Normally the | Germ smoothing material: The dresses of
: z : 5 FI synthetic fiber become strengthened after
pungent gas mixed in water is evailable in the market. suing for aome deve: If clith amucthing
Hard water that is used for cleaning white silk and material is used, it will keep the clothes soft
woolen clothes is made softer by using ammonia. | and smooth. But too much use of it decreases
Coloured clothes are not washed in this type of soft | the water retain power.
water as it may cause the clothes to get discolored. | Germ destroying material: After recovering
Sometimes this may be used to clean stains on clothes. from any contagious diseases, the used
clothes are washed away with the germ
destroying material to remove germ, such
as-clorin, bleaching.
Rita : Since the ancient times, the fruit named Rita nut has been | Vinegar : Vinegar is used in the
used as a cleansing material for silk and woolen clothing. This is | cleansing material to get rid of the
the fruit of a kind of tree and is used for washing expensive and | excessive blueness of clothes. Vinegar
fine clothes. Rita nut contains a material named saponin. It is the | is also used to bring back the colour in
saponin which remove the dirt from clothes. It increases | discoloured clothes.
brightness, smoothness and retains colour.
Synthetic detergents : Detergents is a non-base rae ; It subenes"enailicanaaglhes “ae
: : 7 in turning raw/temporary colour into
cleansing material. Silk, woolen clothes etc, can be
ily cl d with d t. Gbloured clothes 4 t permanent colour. Salt may be used
foc Takia cleteent: Coloured crothes 00-201 | iiie washing coloured clothes. This
. will not affect the colour. It is also used
to clean stains on clothes.
Task: Make a list of cleansing materials and incidental materials used at home.
el
i)
S
aq

Clothing Care & tidiness In Clothing 199
Lesson-2 : Preparation of washing and cleaning clothiers
"Washing clothing” is a remarkable side of cleanliness of a family. Because the
used clothe is to be washed everyday. Again, sometimes washing process continues
weekly or seasonally. Washing clothe is a toilsome work. This work can be divided
into several parts to complete it well, such as Selection of dirty clothes -
We should select dirty clothes, bed-sheet, daily used clothes, small clothes into
different groups based on dirt for the convenient of cleaning.
Again, the same cleansing material and washing method are not applicable for
the clothes of different fibre such as cotton, lynen, silk, nylon, tetron etc. At the
time of sorting, the clothes which belong to the same nature and washing
method should be kept together. So before washing the clothes we should
select and separate the clothes according to their fibre, colour size and dirt.
Repairing clothes- before washing the clothes, if any clothes are torn these
should be mended soon by darning or patching. Otherwise, they can be more
torn at the time of washing. The dress becomes unfit for wearing if this tear
gets bigger. Besides, buttons and other fasteners should be checked before
washing to make sure they are secure and undamaged. As soon as there is any
sign of loosening or breakage, they should be renewed. If there is any
decorative buttons or clips they should be removed before washing so that it
may not damage.
Pattern of repairing:
A) Darning: If a dress is torn by thrusting against with something pointed,
that place is mended by passing thread in and out and in two directions,
this knitting is called darning. For this, the needle and yarn are to be
sleeted according to the yarn of clothes. The colour of yarn and fabric is to

R Sear ae See OY ee)

sa dda ta align So Tah ea eS

“yoy boa Sr ehh a

a | | | | ao el tialneseenbrerereiei =

| mu Cec gh To Tee =?

| 00,0,0,0.5,0,00, Seana
Ae | So Sy
z —
a Ist step of darning 2nd step of daming 3rd step of damming

200 Home Science
be the same. At the time of darning, the line should be drawn around the
torn part. If it is sewed with the running stitch along the line, the yarn of
clothe will not unfasten. For darning warp yarn and filling yarn are to be
used gradually. In this case, it is convenient to use a frame.
B) Patching : If a dress or clothe is torn anywhere it is to be mended by
sewing a small piece of cloth put on over a hole or a damaged or worn place, it
is called patching. It is needed to patch if any part of clothing is perforated,
burnt or worm-eaten. Patching is two types, such as-
(@) Normal Patching - Patching can be of round or square. The colour and
texture of the piece of cloth used for patching is to be the same of clothing.
That piece of cloth is to be bigger than the torn part of the clothe. The cut piece
is to be washed and ironed before patching. The cut piece which will be used
for patching is to be set on the torn place and confined there with hem stitch
around folding the edge of the cut piece. Now, the clothe is to be turned and cut
the torn place in a diagonal direction. Then folding the edge of the torn place it
is to be set up with the cut piece by the hem stitch. Lastly, it will be set up on
both the sides by ironing.
(ii) Designed Patching - If the cut piece of the same colour of the clothing is
not available for normal patching or if it is seemed that it will look odd or the
used clothing is so new that we don't want to spoil the beauty of it, we have to
use it for many days, in this case it may be repaired by designed patching. First
of all taking a cut piece of different colour and of different design is to be set
up on the torn place and stick to it with button hole stitch. The torn part of the
back side is to be sewed like the normal patching. It will not be comprehended
if some more designs are set up keeping similarity on the entire clothing. It
looks like appliqué design. Big sticker can be used as patching on the parts of
boys and the dresses of children.

re

‘ '

Vt td
= Laos
jE <
Normal Patching Designed Patching &

Clothing Care & tidiness In Clothing 201
Removing Stains- It is important that stains to be removed promptly from
clothing. Stains that are allowed to set are often impossible to remove. Before
attempting to remove a stain, the identity of the fibre or fibres in the fabric
must be determined, since different types of fibre call for different treatment. It
is also necessary to identify the stain.

Selection of cleansing material - The care which garments require to keep looking
their best is a major consideration in terms of time, money and energy. Some
garments require more care than others. Each fabric has its special needs. So
depending on the cloth, design and dirt of the clothes to be washed, we should select
suitable cleaning elements. The temperature of water is also an important factor.
According to the material of clothes, we must either use hot, lukewarm or normal
water. To increase the brightness of clothes we can use indigo, starch, gum etc.
For example-it is possible to clean cotton and linen fabrics with normal soap and
cool water. But silk and woolen fabrics are to be washed with detergent powder
and luke warm water. Cloth is cleaned well if it is kept for half an hour after
smearing with soap.

Soak in water - If too much dirty clothes ( mosquito-net, screen, table-cloth etc.)
are soaked in water for half an hour dirt from clothe will loose or get detached.
Then if it is washed with soap water, it will be clean well and soap will be less
consumed.

Washing clothes - Before washing, too much dirty part of clothing should be
pretreated keeping for sometime with soap. The different places like shirt,
collars, sleeves, cuffs, the backside of pant, edges of pyjamas and petty coats
etc. attract too much dirt. If it is necessary, soft brash can be used. Then the
entire clothe is to be washed gradually taking little water. But silk clothes will
get damaged if it washed roughly. Silk clothes should be rinsed by hand.
Washing - After removing dirt from clothing it is to be washed again and again
in the water of a big bucket on bowl to remove dirt and soap from it. The
process of changing water again and again to remove dirt and soap is called
washing.

To apply indigo and starch - Generally, it is needed to use starch for cotton
and linen cloths. How much thick will be the starch ? It will depend on the
nature of fabrics. It is needed slight starch for coarse clothe. Indigo is applied
in white clothes . By using starch, clothes get back their natural strength and
brightness. Clothes do not get dirty easily when starch is used. Indigo must be

202 Home Science
taken in a small piece of cloth and mixed in water for white clothes which
became yellowish after washing . In order to get rid of their yellowish presence
indigo is used to get a light blue white appearance.
To Dry clothes - If the clothe is not dried properly after washing, the dazzling
and scratching appearance will not come. White clothe will become more white
if it is dried in the sun. Coloured and silk clothing must be always dried in the
shade. The heavy strong part of clothing is to be dried keeping it up.
Ironing - There will be shrinking almost on all the clothes after washing. We iron the
clothe to make it smooth and tidy. Before ironing, little water is to be spread on the
starch cotton clothe for making it soft. The temperature of ironing is controlled
according to the nature of cloths. For example silk and artificial fibre clothes is
ironed at the lowest heat, woolen at the 300°F heat, cotton at the 400°F-450°F heat,
linen at the 475°F-- 500°F heat.

Airing - After ironing there is moisture in the clothing. It is not right to keep

in a box or almireah with this condition. So, after ironing it should be kept in

the open air to remove moisture. When the cloth will dry, it is to be stored in
the proper place.

Lesson-3: Process of washing silk clothes- Silk clothe can not stand against

excess heat, base and rubbing. The silk clothes affected by sweating and dirt,

should be washed soon. Because sweating acid makes the silk weak.

The noticeable aspects in washing this type of clothing are as follows-

e At the time of washing, silk and coloured silk clothes should be separated
because the colour of coloured silk clothes may fade when kept in water for
a long time and spoil the white silk clothes. So it is better to wash the white
ones and the coloured ones separately.

e We should always use lukewarm water and mild soap while washing silk
clothes. If we use soap that contains excessive base then the silk clothes
will lose its brightness. We can use rita good soap or soap powder or
detergent.

e@ We must soak the silk clothes in lukewarm water, mix any of the
above-mentioned detergents. We will stir them a few times and then wash them.

e@ We have to wash the silk clothes taking a big bowl or bucket of water. We
have to stir it for several times. In case of washing coloured silk, during the
final stage we should mix a table spoon of salt and vinegar in one gallon of 8

g

Clothing Care & tidiness In Clothing 203
cold water. It will retain the brightness of coloured silk clothes. Silk clothes
should be rinsed by hand.

e Ifthe silk clothes are washed for many times, we may use arrowroot starch
to maintain its firmness.

e Silk clothes must be dried always in the shade. Sun heat spoils the colour
and brightness of silk clothes.

e Ironing should be done when the silk clothes are still moist. No need to spray
water on silk clothes because there will be stain of water drops. It is better to
retain the brightness of the silk clothe if it is ironed turning it back with mild
heat. After ironing it should be kept in the open air to dry away wetness then
it is to be stored in proper places.

Process of washing woolen goods -

Woolen clothes are obtained from animal fibres. Water , heat, base and friction

make woolen fibre weak . So, for washing woolen clothes it is better to use

lukewarm water and soap powder that contains fewer bases.

Process of washing-

e Before washing woolen clothes, according to need we should repair and
remove the stains first. White and coloured clothes should be separated
because they should be washed separately. Then the dirt should be dusted off
brushing lightly. Man-made woolen fabrics are very flexible by nature. So we
must be very careful when washing woolen clothes. We should draw the
design of the woolen clothes on a piece of paper, before washing. After
washing if we hang it, it will lose its original shape. So it is better to keep it on
surface until it is half dried. This helps to retain its original shape and desin.

aS i ‘
Drawing the design before washing bears clothes. “

e The woolen clothes should be carefully rinsed. Lukewarm water should be
used in washing woolen clothes. It is suitable to use soap powder of that
contains less base, such as jet powder. Rita can be also used in washing

80 woolen clothes. Woolen clothes should not be kept in water for too long. If
& it is kept in water for a long time, it will become weak.

204 Home Science

e The water should be changed a number of time. At the final stage, vinegar
should be added to the water. This helps the coloured woolen clothes to
retain their colour. At the final stage of washing of woolen clothe a few
drops of citric acid or lemon juice should be mixed in water. It helps the
white woolen clothes to retain their brightness.

e We should never wring the woolen clothes to take out water. A thick towel
should be used to suck out the water. It should not be twisted by hands
because it will affect woolen clothes.

e Woolen clothe should be dried in the mild sun ray or in the shed that contains
light and air. Machine made wet woolen clothe should be dried on mat,
spreading on plain land. At same time, the clothes should be turned upside
down to make it dried quickly.

e Avery hot iron should not be used. We should iron the woolen clothes when
they are still moist. At the time of ironing soft wet cloth should be placed on
the woolen clothes so that the fibre of clothes may not be affected and it will
retain the brightness.After ironing it should be kept in the open air for some
time to remove water vapour well. Then it should be kept in a proper place.

Lesson- 4: Dry cleaning
Dry cleaning means the washing of clothes by some special chemical cleaning
elements without water. There are some silk and woolen clothes which can
shrink or colour may also fade if they are washed with water. For this reason,
dry cleaning system is used for washing silk and woolen clothes. Dry cleaning
system helps silk and woolen clothes to retain their original shape, form and
brightness.

Used ingredients : Many kinds of chemical solvent are used for dry washing.

These chemicals are fully waterless. Even if these contain a small amount of

water, this water is sucked off by cotton or other absorbent material. Because if

this type of chemical compound contains water the clothes can not be cleaned.

The ingredients should have the following characteristics :

e Certain chemical compounds have a dirty smell, so these should be avoided.

e@ There are certain chemicals that easily evaporate into the air, so they are
expensive to use for dry cleaning. Certain chemicals do not evaporate so easily,
so the clothes take long time to dry. So the chemicals that evaporate in a
moderate way are best for dry cleaning. It is also seen that one or two,
compounds may be good for day cleaning. S

Clothing Care & tidiness In Clothing 205

e Many types of cleaning liquids are available in the market for dry cleaning.
Among these, petroleum, ether, turpentine benzale, benzene and petrol are
notable. Petrol is the best product for dry cleaning. Because it is less
expensive and readily available.

Rules of washing : The different steps of dry washing are as follows :

e First of all the dirt should be dust off.

e The cleansing liquid should be made waterless.

e This waterless liquid should be kept in 3 or 4 buckets. We can mix benzene
soap or lisapol in the first bucket. The clothes should then be dipped in this
solution, wringed lightly and taken off.

e After this, the excess liquid should be taken off from the clothes etc. by
using both of our hands and then the clothes are dipped in the second, third
and fourth buckets. The fourth bucket should contain some vinegar.

e After washing in this system, the clothes should be dried in the shade. While
it is drying, the clothes should be pulled to bring it back to its original from
and shape. This will prevent the clothes from shrinking.

e When it is nearly dried we can iron it by putting a wet piece of cloth on it.
The following steps should be followed with caution at the time of dry
cleaning. As a example- There should be enough movement of air at the
place of dry cleaning.

e There should not be any type of fire at the place or near the place of dry
cleaning.

e The chemical liquids should not fall on the floor. In this system silk or
woolen clothes may be dry washed at home.

Washing method of nylon, polyester clothes of artificial fibre :

The clothes of this type of fibre will not be spoiled easily if they are kept in

water. The clothes with much dirt will be cleaned easily if they are kept in

lukewarm soap water. It is better to use soap powder of good quality. At the
time of washing they should not twisted by hands. They should be washed
slowly. Clean water is to use more than once to remove dirt and soap. Then
they should be dried in the shade hanging on the string. It can be used without
ironing because the clothes of this fibre do not shrink for washing.

S Task: Describe the preparation of washing clothes.

206 Home Science
Lesson - 5: Preservation
Preservation means to keep something safe from harm or danger following the
proper rule. Here, preservation means to keep the used clothes safe after
washing and ironing for a short time or a long time. We use different types of
clothing. Among this informal, formal dress. Party dress and seasonable dress
are included. Besides this, there are bed sheed, bedcover, table cloth, cushion
cover napkin, tray cloth etc. in almost all the houses. These are to be cared and
preserved properly to retain their brightness, beauty and durability. Steel or
wooden almirah, big steel box, suitcase etc. are used as the preservation unit.

Noticeable objects in preserving clothing :

e Itis convenient to preserve costly clothing and normal clothing separately.

e It is easy to get at the time of need if big clothing and small clothing are
preserved separately.

e Naptholin is to be kept in the folding of clothing.

e Taking in a small bundle, black cumin, dry tea leaves are to the kept in the
folding of quilt-cover, bed sheet etc.

e If they are dried in the sun at times, the moisture of clothing will be remove.

Woolen cloths are not used in other times except in winter season. Woolen

clothes are used for 2-3 months in a year. These are preserved for rest of the

time of the year. The price of woolen clothings is comparatively high. If they
are properly preserved, they can be used for a long time.

The Process of preservation are as follows -

e Moth destroys wool. They affect more the dirt woolen clothings. To save
from moth woolen clothings should be cleaned and dried properly before
storing. Woolen clothings should be kept in clean mothproof and fume free
places.

e Then after ironing they should be kept in the open air to remove moisture.
Next, they are to be kept separately.

e Naptholin should be given in the folding of clothings. Besides this, leaves of
margosa tree, dried tea leaves, black cumin are to be kept in the foldings of
woolen clothings taking in small bundles.

e Itis better to spray insecticide in almirah or box before preserving. S

Clothing Care & tidiness In Clothing 207

e The preserved clothings are to be kept in the sun light to remove moisture
from them at sometimes.

e It is better to hang the woolen coat, pant, jacket etc. on hangers.

e The woolen clothings are costly. So, to keep them fit for using, they are to
be stored with care.

The noticeable aspects of preservation are as follow--

e They should be cleaned, dried and ironed properly before storing.

e We should remove water vapour from ironed woolen clothings properly. So
after ironing they should be kept in the open air.

e Moth is the worst enemy of woolen clothings. Mildew also has a bad affect
on them so the preserving places must be moisture free.

e At times, they are to be dried in the light sun ray.

Lesson - 6: Personal hygiene and Tidiness in clothing

It is a natural and eternal desire of human beings to present themselves in an

attractive way before others. So, they decorate themselves by dressing up their

body in their own various ways .Body means one's physical structure and health

and dressing up means tidiness in clothing. One should select suitable garments and

accessories keeping harmony with ones personality. When a person possesses a

good physical health and dresses up appropriately, only then his or her physical

beauty is brightened up. Sound mind is in sound body. It is the sound mind that

creates an urge to dress up oneself in an artistic way.

The works that we have to do in keeping tidiness are as follows :

e It is necessary for tidiness to take care of clothing regularly such as
-washing, ironing and repairing accordingly.

e Itis the important part of tidiness to choose dresses in terms of time and place.

e Tidiness and natural beauty of personal hygiene i,e to take care of hair,
nails, eyes, teeth etc. are to be maintained.

s% © To maintain straightness , playfulness in physical structure and to keep
g normal posture in speaking.

208 Home Science

e We have to wear suitable dresses considering certain factors such as function,
occasion, place, weather, age ,occupation and physical features of a person
etc. All types of designs and all types of dresses are not suitable for all.

e Costly dresses are not necessary for being tidy. Without wearing ultra
-modern dresses it is possible to be tidy wearing usual and harmonious
dresses.

e Selection of dresses should be according to the custom of culture , such as a
Bengali girl looks beautiful in a sari.

e The person wearing a dress can be more attractive if it is possible to create
harmony in combining the principles and ingredient for creating art on dresses It
is important in tidiness to bring harmony of colour , line and texture of clothing
with the different parts of a dress, such as- the use of a suitable blouse with a sari
and a suitable duppatta with salwar and kameez which reflect the personality of
moderate taste.

e It is one of the prerequisite conditions of tidiness to maintain the consistency
in the arrangement of shoe, handbag, ornaments and make up etc. with
dresses. For example-skates are not suitable with sarees. In the same way,
high heel is inconsistent with school uniform. The use of lipstick, kohe,
ornaments etc. is adverse to tidiness for the school girls. It means that
harmony should be established for tidiness between clothing and accessories.

Physical hygiene
The pre-requisite condition of an attractive personality of a person is good physical
health. Sound mind is in a sound body. Physical hygiene and care are necessary for
building up of good physical health. The human body consists of different organs.
The different organs are : hands, legs, teeth, eyes, nails, ears, nose, neck, hair, skin
etc. Cleanliness and care of these organs are called personal hygiene. The objective
of personal hygiene is to keep the physical health sound. If a person takes prosper
care of his different organs such teeth, skin, hair etc., his entire physical features will
be attractive. As a result his strong personality will be reflected removing mental
indolence. There will be no hesitation to express oneself in front of all in an attractive
way.

The most important aspects in maintaining personal hygiene are as follows : S

Clothing Care & tidiness In Clothing 209
A) To maintain the cleanliness of different organs :

Care of hands : When we talk about personal hygiene, the first thing that
comes to mind is our hands .Smooth and well shaped hands express beauty and
soundness . The aspects , important to care in maintaining the cleanliness are as
follows:

e We should wash our hands with soap after doing any work.

e@ We should use cream or lotion to keep smoothness of hands.

e@ While chopping vegetables, our hands get stained and also during
cooking our hands get stained with turmeric and other spices. Hands
will become stain free if we rub hands with a piece of lemon.

e@ We have to cut our nails and keep them small. Because if dirt goes into
nails, it will get into stomach and make us sick.

Care of legs: The followings are the noticeable aspects in taking care of legs :

e Everyday we should wash our legs with lukewarm water and soap. We
have to clean our legs rubbing with soap. After washing we should dry
our feet with a towel and lotion, glycerin and petroleum jelly to keep
them smooth.

e At times, the legs are to be dipped into lukewarm water with salt for
30---35 minutes to remove dirt and tiredness.

Care of teeth : The followings are the noticeable aspects in taking care of teeth:

e@ We have to use standard paste and tooth powder along with toothbrush to
clean our teeth regularly.

e After eating we should clean our teeth.

e Ash, coal etc. should not be used for cleaning teeth.

e Itis said that teeth are valuable treasure. They enhance the beauty of our face.

e Bright teeth free from bad smell are the indicator of beauty and good health.

Care of eyes : Among all the organs in a human body, the eyes are the most
delicate, complicated and sensitive organs. Transparent and glittering eyes bears
the testimony of good health. The following aspects are to be noticed in keeping
the eyes safe :

210 Home Science

e Everyday in the morning , we must wash our eyes with cold water.

e Strong and very bright light, less or dim light or both can damage our
eyes. So, according to the nature of work, we should ensure sufficient
light depending on the nature of work .

e Blue and green light help the eyes to overcome stress and bring soothing
feeling.

e We must eat foods that contain vitamin A to keep our eyes healthy.

e If tears come out of our eyes or if they scratched or become swollen,
we should immediately consult an eye specialist.

Care of hairs - Hair is a symbol of beauty for the Bengali women. Clean,
shiny, smooth, thick dark, long and well-arranged hair reflects ones personality.
Beautiful smooth hair is a sign of beautiful mild mannered personality. The
methods that maintain the beauty and health of hair are as follows :

e We must take care of our hair regularly. For this, we should wash our
hair with mild soap, natural ingredients such as water of soaked mushur
dal (lentil), limejuice, yolk of egg and grind methi etc. In order to get rid
of dandruff and dead skin, we can wash our hair with limejuce, grind
methi, water boiled with neem leaves, yolk of egg ete.

e To increase the smoothness of hair, we can use limejuice, liquor tea, sour
curd etc.

e Nutritious foods with vitamin A should be eaten to have shiny hair and to
avoid hair loss.

Care of ears, nose and throat - To keep one's body healthy, it is necessary to
take care of the ears, the nose and the throat. Like the ears, the nose and the
throat are placed very close to each other.
We should clean our ears and nose with cotton buds regularly. We can also use
mustard oil to soften the dirt and clean it easily. To keep our voice sweet we
should always control our voice. It is good for throat to use hot water and salt to
gargle our throat. We should remember that speaking in a -sweet voice our
personality becomes attractive.
%
8

Clothing Care & tidiness In Clothing 211
Care of skin: Clean and tidy skin is bright and disease free. Whatever may be
the colour of skin, if it is soft, smooth and clean, it will express attractive
personality. The things which are necessary for the healthy skin are as follows ;
e The habit of taking bath regularly increases the tidiness of skin.
e We should never use very hot or very cold water while bathing.
e Mild soap should be used for bathing. Every day we should take bath
rubbing our body with baseless soft soap.
e We should use olive oil, glycerin and cream to keep our skin smooth and
soft.
B ) Cleanliness in clothing
Only the tidiness of different organs can not bring the entire tidiness of a body.
For this, it is also necessary to clean the clothes. The tidiness of dresses is closely
related to the soundness of a body. Because, clothes are attached to a person's
body and maintain the tidiness of a body. Untidy dress hinders the tidiness of a
body. So to ensure the personal hygiene cleanliness of clothing is must.
Lesson- 7: Reflection of personality through clothing :
Clothing is an inseparable part of personal identity. Wearing dress is a man's
basic human right. Psychological analysis of the word "Personality" is the
similarity, rhythm and unity of a person's body structure, type of his conduct,
eagerness, posture, ability and tendency to maintain consistency with the social
condition. It means personality is a living harmony of body and mind.
A person expresses his inner feeling through his dress. There is a close
relationship between personality and dress.Clothing is a medium of expressing
a person's personality such as :
e Wearing of new clothe changing old one makes a mind cheerful.
Brightness also reflects on his or her face.
2
4

212 Home Science

e If the clothing is consistent with the environment there will be no
hesitation to express oneself in front of all in an attractive way. The
artistic appearance is expressed in his or her personality

e If the clothing is inconsistent with the environment there will be
hesitation to express oneself. It hinders to express ones personality.
There will be a tendency to hide himself or herself

e Colour, line, design and texture that are used in dresses have impacts on the
person's physical structure, appearance, complexion and as a whole, on his
or her personality. Girls, who are healthy and bulky, look relatively fatter if
they wear dresses of heavy ornamented design, large print, and thick
texture. Dresses with less design, small print and thin texture are suitable
for healthy and short structured girls. Loose dresses with full sleeve, large
print, dark colour and small cut neck are suitable for thin structured girls.
Use of lines in clothing also can cause apparent changes in the physical
structure of the person who wears it. For example, for bulky and short size
girls, use of vertical long lines is appropriate in clothing. Use of horizontal
lines in clothing makes the person bulky and short.

e A number of inconsistencies of ones feature or body, thinness and
thickness, can be covered through structural designs and ornamented
designs of clothing. For fat and tall structured person, light coloured
clothes, such as blue, green, bluish green are suitable. Because
apparently light colour make them appear slim and smaller. On the other
hand, for thin and short structured girls, bright colours, such as red,
yellow, orange etc. are suitable. Because apparently light colours make
them appear larger than what actually they are. A girl of bright
complexion can wear clothing of any colour. Girls of dark complexion
should use clothes of light but bright colours such as -orange, yellow,
pink etc. Bright colour is called a colour of cheerfulness. If on different
cheerful occasions dresses of bright colour are used, they impact on
personality. Again on mournful occasion if dresses of light colour and
simple design are used, harmonious personality will be reflected.

3
8

Clothing Care & tidiness In Clothing 213

e Ifa man wears dresses keeping consistency with social customs and
culture, he will look a man of more personality. Peevish, impolite dress
is adverse to good personality.

e To establish a mutual harmony between dress and personality, we have
to be careful that other accessories of dressing such as shoes, handbags,
handkerchief, jewellery and cosmetics are in uniform.

e Cleanliness and tidiness is the prerequisite condition of tidiness in the entire
dressing through clothing. Untidy hair, big dart nails hinders to reflect
decency. There are men of introvert, extrovert and of both the personalities.
The varities of personality affect the taste. But whatever may be the
personality the dress of fine taste befitting brighten the personality. The
dress of bad taste, strange and unsuitable fades the personality.

Task- How is the personality reflected through the clothings ? make it clear.
Lesson-8: Use of unnecessary cloth
Many types of work are done at home and create unused things. Torn and old
clothe is one of them. These unnecessary clothes are to be used in different
ways. For example-
If the colours of old clothes, saree, bedsheet, screen etc fades or partly torn, they
are kept away. The village girls make embroidered katha beautifully with old
clothes. Different types of scenery of creepers and herbs are blossomed on the
katha of old clothes. In this way embroidered katha is made. Now a days these
types of kathas are used not only as the winter covering but also on the bedsheet,
sofa cover, wall decoration, floor cover etc.
Paposh for wiping out legs can be made with the old share, the steps are as
follows-

e At first, a knot is to given at one edge of the saree

e Now, the saree is to divided into three parts lengthwise.

20 e Then the saree is to be hung anywhere lengthwise and make into braid
g strongly with the saree.

214 Home Science
e Now, turning the braid MN
gradually, one is to be EU
" < < TRAN
tightened with anotherwith SAVATBENUN
VON YAY
needle and thread. NAAN SSS.
; ; NONIERAENTEN SEROTEC TEESE
@ This paposh is to be round or NAS
RISERS TA
oval shape. NR)
PLL
Paposh made of old clothes.
Cut piece
After sewing clothes at home different types of cut pieces come out as
unnecessary parts. Gathering the big cut pieces we can cut them following the
same measurement and size. Then we can join all the cloths one by one with
the machine and giving border around the whole cloth with the edge of a saree
or with any other cloth to make a bed cover, table cloth etc.
Task- Show a paposh making with the unnecessary cloth at home.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Question:
1. Which one is available best cleansing material ?
a. Detergent b. Rita
c. Gam arabic d. Soap
2. What is called to bring out soap and dirt washing into water repeatedly ?
a. Stiffen b. Airing
c. Rinse d. Dry wash
20
3
rw

Clothing Care & tidiness In Clothing 215

Read the following stimulant and answer question no 3 and 4:

Mrs Reba stores the warm clothes after the winter season. In the next winter

season when she goes to use the warm clothes she notices that many clothes

are damaged with insect attacks.

3. What should Mrs Reba do at first before preserving the warm clothes ?

a. To keep neptholin in the folding of clothes.

b. To put neem leaf in the clothes.

c. To dry the clothes washing properly.

d. To spray insecticide in the almirah before storing.

4. The cause of the damage of the clothes
i. Not to spray insecticide on the clothes
ii. At times, they are not dried in the light sun and air.

iii. Black cumin, tea leaf, neem leaf are not used

Which one is correct ?

a. i&ii b. i& iii
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii

Creative Question :

1. Rupa is the elder daughter of her family.She has to clean the dresses of her
family along with the other works at home. A few days ago, she notices
after washing the colour of her orange silk saree fades away and spoils the
white blouse. The saree also becomes shrink. But her nylon , polyster
clothes are not spoiled.

a. What is used to maintain the firmness of the silk clothes ?

b. Why is darning done on the clothes ?

c. Explain the reason why nylon and polyster clothes are not spoiled ?

d. It was reasonable to wash the coloured silk saree in a proper way. Give
% your opinion regarding this matter .
S
N

216 Home Science
2. Dressing up with a white salwar- Kaniz Tanaha goes to attend on an
occasion of marriage festival. She was looking gloomy after going to the
occasion. Looking at her dull appearance her aunt said to her 'Garments and
accessories that are in harmony with the occasion make a man attractive’.
a. What is the prerequisite condition of an attractive personality ?
b. Why is the tidiness of clothing necessary ?
c. Why was Tanaha looking gloomy ?
d. Evaluate properly the comment of Tanaha's aunt for her.
The End
ey
Ss

Academic Year
9-10 Home Science
apa epee ote tr
aire aete arely tafe wes
Aidt 6 Fe Fetters ebat woot afer 6 afcatces GT UPA QBeTaT OTSA
Sop Frag (Bret BR, 28 VOT SA) CHT SPT
AEA =
i}
Tenens

