Information And
Communication Technology
i? _ Fz % ru ; :
SN
¢ vs 2 NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a textbook for classes nine and ten from the academic year 2015
Information and Communication Technology
Classes Nine-Ten
Written and Edited by
Dr. Muhammed Zafar Iqbal
Dr. Suraiya Parveen
Mustafa Jabbar
Munir Hasan
Lutfur Rahman
Md. Munabbir Hossain
Translated by
Sharif Atiquzzaman
NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka
[All rights reserved by the publisher]
First Publication : September, 2014
Reprint : August, 2016
Reprint : August, 2017
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh
For free distribution by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Printed by :

Preface
The aim of secondary education is to make the learners fit for entry into higher
education by flourishing their latent talents and prospects with a view to building the
nation with the spirit of the Language Movement and the Liberation War. To make the
learners skilled and competent citizens of the country based on the economic, social,
cultural and environmental settings is also an important issue of secondary education.
The textbooks of secondary level have been written and compiled according to the
revised curriculum 2012 in accordance with the aims and objectives of National
Education Policy-2010.Contents and presentations of the textbooks have been selected
according to the moral and humanistic values of Bengali tradition and culture and the
spirit of Liberation War 1971 ensuring equal dignity for all irrespective of caste and
creed of different religions and sex.
The present government is committed to ensure the successful implementation of
Vision 2021. Honorable Prime Minister, Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina expressed her firm determination to make the country free
from illiteracy and instructed the concerned authority to give free textbooks to every
student of the country. National Curriculum and Textbook Board started to distribute
textbooks free of cost since 2010 according to her instruction.
The government has been working hard to make the life of the people of Bangladesh
easy, comfortable and cheerful by implementing the Digital Bangladesh using
information and communication technology based education. So Information and
Communication Technology subject has been made compulsory from class VI to XII
in the National Education Policy. To give the purpose forward the curriculum and
textbook have been developed. We hope this textbook will impart information and
communication technology literacy to the students and develop in them a keen
interest that will play an effective role in making Digital Bangladesh.
I thank sincerely all for their intellectual labor who were involved in the process of
revision, writing, editing, art and design of the textbook.
Prof. Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh.

Table of Contents

Title of the Chapters

. Information and Communication Technology and 1-17

First Our Bangladesh .
Computer and the Security of the User 18-47
The Internet in My Education 48-55
Foot My Writings and Accounts 56-67
i Multimedia and Graphics 68-113
sit | The Use of Database 114-132

First Chapter
Information and Communication Technology and
Our Bangladesh
== BO oem
a iat ee a Sean — f en
~ Mor) dee
= i ey
== | 1 a A Gh seecess
After completing this chapter, we will be able to :
> Explain the significance of ICT;
>» Enxplain the contributions of the people related with ICT;
> Explain the importance of e-leaming in Bangladesh;
> Explain the necessity of e-governance in Bangladesh;
> Explain the importance of e-service in Bangladesh;
> Explain the importance of e-commerce in Bangladesh;
>» Analyse the prospect of ICT in job-sectors in Bangladesh;
> Explain the role of ICT in social networking;
> Explain the positive aspects of ICT in entertainment;
> Explain the future image of ICT oriented Bangladesh; and
> Design a poster on ICT oriented Bangladesh.
Forma-1, \CT, 9-10

2 Information and Communication Technology
The 21st Century and Information and Communication Technology
The concept of wealth prevailed in the last century has radically changed. The
whole world rightly acknowledges that the wealth of the 21st century is
knowledge. It means that neither agriculture, mineral resources and energy, nor
industry and business are the sources of wealth as human beings are the only
resources able to search for knowledge. This concept has reshaped the people's
way of thinking throughout the world. They have been taking preparation to
face the challenges of the 21st century.
We have already started realising that the world of the 21st century is making
its firm standing on a knowledge-based economy. In this century, two more
important factors - globalisation and internationalisation have come into being,
and ICT is the main driving force behind their acceleration. Now the
geographical border of a country transcending own extends to all parts of the
world as an effect of globalisation. We can refer to Bangladesh as an example
of making the point clear. Millions of bangladeshis now live all over the world.
The place where they live in is as if a small Bangladesh. So, in one sense, the
border of Bangladesh has extended beyond the line. Moreover, they, in spite of
being the natives of Bangladesh, are living as the citizens of different
countries. 'Internationalism' is the unwritten law of the present world.
Once people had to depend on the blessings of nature for survival. However,
inventing machines and tools, they have lessened this dependence. With the
help of machines and technology, they have controlled the world economy
after the Industrial Revolution in the 18th and 19th Century. The nations, who
participated in the industrial revolution, once ruled the world. A similar shift of
power has been observed, as the knowledge-based economy has started
dominating the world in the 21st Century. F gue" co i
We can realise that we should take @MamMni OL. cole ibs.» waattall
adequate preparation for taking part in [iiiiiaciiin) “eaiiiicam
this revolution. The specific skills for . ee ¥ Gh ros
survival are the ability to cooperate and [jg ‘afl 4 Oe
communication with each other, ~ fos ae
awareness about the obligations of ‘tt; ae
citizenry, acumen in solving problems, ‘| = »
critical thinking, creativity and skill in -¥! . ' ©
ICT Competition S

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 3
ICT. In fact, skill in ICT has emerged as the most important technological skill.
Everyone should have the basic computer literacy to survive in 21st century.
Only then, one may have access to its amazing world. Unless students acquire
the ICT skills, they may not generate new knowledge by collecting, analysing,
and evaluating information. In fact, without the skill, they can never face the
challenge in the 21st Century and position themselves in the knowledge based.
society.
Great ICT Personalities
Many scientists, visionaries and engineers have
contributed significantly to the development of a *
Information and Communication Technology. Cable :
connection and wireless system, acceleration of S
computers! counting power and the development of Jami
microelectronics have ensured rapid growth of ICT. *3
Charles Babbage (1791-1871), an English engineer ' Ge ;
and mathematician, first introduced computer and
developed the device. He is regarded as the father of
modern computer. He invented Difference Engine
In 1991, in the Science Museum of London, an |I «
engine was made according to the design of |
Babbage, and it worked properly as expected and Chatles Babbage
later, he designed a calculating machine called Analytical Engine.
isan — Ada Lovelace (1815-1852), the daughter of poet
* : " Lord Byron first thought about how the process of
*% _ | calculation could be made more effective . She
‘ | | became interested in science and mathematics since
( om her childhood encouraged by her mother. When she
f “skank a met Charles Babbage in 1833, she brought before
a spate wi him the concept of ‘programming' to use in his
“sf Me j= analytical engine. That is why Ada Lovelace is
F yar Y// honoured as the pioneer of programming concept.
(} oh Babbage delivered a lecture about his engine in
oo 4 4% a | _ | 1842 at Turin University. Then Ada with the help of
s Ada Lovelace Babbage explained the ways how the engine could

4 Information and Communication Technology
work. She marked it in numerical order, while describing its mode of working.
Tn 1953, when the note was published again one hundred years after the death
of Ada, the scientist realised that it was Ada who put forward the idea about
Algorithm of programming.
Important progress was done in physics during that cai
period along with the inventions of Babbage and ; a 7
Ada. Scientist James Clerk Maxwell (1831-1879), ye Beige
combining the electric energy and magnetic force, Wek
put forth the theory of Electromagnetic Force | ca 2p Pm
which opened a possibility of sending wireless | “9 4) Tal
messages from one place to another. PB v
r Bengali scientist | 7 Fo
; x Jagadish Chandra
~ Bose (1858-1937) James Clerk Maxwell
= became successful for the first time in sending
"|| wireless messages from one place to another. In
1895, he successfully did it by using microwave.
But, Italian scientist
of. f | Guglielmo Marconi
eee, | (1874-1937) bw
P succeeded first in Le
Jagadish Chandra Bose doing the same work am ;
by radiowave. That is =
why he is acknowledged as the inventor of radio. ,
= 4 P| In the 20th Century, (a
( after the development
>.) of electronics, IBM
j SPR Company first built
Pe mainframe computer Guglielmo Marcon!
A ' after the development
» of electronics. In 1971, making of cost-saving
if a computer. In 1971, with the invention of the
| /, i microprocessor, it became easier to make
& :
flaymond Samuel Tom{inson affordable computers. In the 60s and 70s, using the 5

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 5
Internet Protocol, Arpanet was invented the Internet protocol. The interrelation
among the computers through network started developing since then, and the
invention of the Internet is the outcome. In 1971, American programmer
Raymond Samuel Tomlinson introduced first electronic mail communiction
through ARPANET. He is the pioneer of inventing e-mail system.
After the invention of microprocessor,
making of personal computer by using this
D sda device started in the USA. Steve Jobs
(1955-2011) and his two friends Steve
Wozniak and Ronald Wayne started a
company named Apple Computer on April
1, 1976. This company is one of the biggest
organisations in the world. The
development of personal computer has
Steve Jobs been carried out by this company.
: IBM company put the responsibility of
aT ps, If you Born Poor developing the operating system for
# =.) isnotYour Mistake, | / personal computers on ‘Microsoft’ of
y Myocwicac | | William Henry Bill Gates (born on October
a 26, 1955). They succesfully developed MS
DOS and Windows operating system. At
nua, | | Present, most of the computers of the world
William Henry Bil Gates are run by the operating system software of
Microsoft company of Bill Gates.
In 1989, during the development of the Internet, a [py ry a ’
British computer scientist proposed and later on a |
successfully invented information anagement by |jf —- |
using Hypertext Transfer Protocol (http) and |e
successfully invented it. Sir Timothy John ‘Tim’ ||_ oe
Berners Lee is known as the pioneer of World || | FW Ba ,
Wide Weave (WWW). The Internet connection I ft
spread out throughout the world for its ¢ SS 2
development, A strong economic field has been |
~ created on the Internet and different types of hattinne "
S$ application software have been developed. li ities

6 Information and Communication Technology
: The learner of Harvard University Mark
; Zuckerberg (Born on may 14, 1984) and his four
= x friends are the pioneers of creating social
| networking system facebook in the Internet. At
first, it was confined to the university students, but
f according to the statistics of May 2014, at least 119
' : crore people of the world have been using
facebook. Many people in our Bangladesh use
facebook for social networking.
Mark Zuckerberg
E-learning and Bangladesh
For years, knowledge has been acquired across the world in traditional
methods. The innovation and development of ICT have brought about changes
for the first time in the traditional methods. And we have become familiar with
the terms like e-learning and Distance Learning. E-learning is the short version
of electronic learning which basically means a teaching process by using
CD-ROM, the Internet, personal network and TV channels, however, we
should keep in mind that e-learning is not the alternative or substitute of
conventional way of learning. For example, it is hard to demonstrate in class
different scientific and natural phenomena, such as, solar eclipse, moon
eclipse, and so on. A teacher may demonstrate these phenomena with images,
videos, and graphs with the help of multi-media. The class can be interactive
too.
Bangladesh has a huge population, and that is why the class size is usually big.
The schools of our country lack skilled teachers, teaching learning materials,
science laboratories, etc. The students do not have wide scope of doing
scientific experiments. E-learning can play a vital role to solve these problems.
A lesson conducted by a skilled teacher may be recorded and distributed to
hundreds of schools. Different learning materials for teaching a specific subject
can be given to students. Teachers themselves may make their lessons more
effective to teach their subjects and these lessons may be reused in other
classes.
Teaching and learning materials are made for e-learning all over the world.
Renowned universities of the world have introduced some online courses and,
Ss
XQ

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 7
anybody can take any of these courses. Experimentation is going on to develop
the field, and a learner can take the course either by submitting his homework
or sitting for examination online, and can get the requisite credit.
Bangladesh is not lagging behind in e-learning. The ICT specialists of the
country have opened some web portals offering courses in Bangla, and learners
from any part of the world can take the courses. The ICT oriented, specifically
for imparting training in computer programming have earned popularity at
home and abroad.
Though e-learning can play a vital role in over-coming the limitations of
teaching in Bangladesh. However, e-learning is not a substitute of the
conventional teaching method of a classroom in which teachers and students
have face-to-face interactions, exchange of opinions, and question and answer
sessions. views and the students can ask questions. Moreover, students can
interact and help
themselves in learning something. Moreover, teachers and students can assist
each other in the learning process and optimise their learning by peer-bonding.
Possibilities of interactions are minimal in e-learning. As e-learning requires
little human participation, it may become mechanical. Therefore, in order to
make e-learning successful, students need to be very pro-active. E-learning has
a wide scope in Bangladesh as we can solve limitations in classroom teaching
may be minimised by adopting e-learning. However, implementation of
e-learning practices in classroom will require fast internet connectivity,
necessary infra-structure, and e-learning materials.

Group Activity

Discuss in group and present how e-learning can play a vital role in the
development of education.

E-Governance and Bangladesh
Transparency and accountability are needed for a good governance. A modern,
transparent, and accountable governance can be can be ensured by introducing
digital system. It will ensure good governance This will stop the harassment of

~ citizens and pave the way of good governance. The application of electronic or
S digital method in the government administration is called e-governance.

8 Information and Communication Technology
Once, it was very difficult for the examinees and their guardians to collect the
result of the public examination. It was more difficult for the people living in
the remote villages. Even two decades ago they could not collect their results a
week after the publication of the result even, now they can get it either through
the internet or the SMS option of the mobile phone. So, the trouble of
collecting the result instantly has come to an end.
Another example of e-governance is the facility of submitting applications to
the higher educational institutions. with the help of the mobile phone.
Previously if a candidate of Jessore wanted to apply to Shahjalal University of
Science and Technology, he had to complete a series of formalities candidates
or their representatives had to travel to Sylhet in order to collect and submit
university admission application forms. Now candidates may submit their
application through mobile phones. They need not to travel from one city to
another.
District offices of the Deputy Commissioners have E-service Centres in order
to ensure easy, affordable, and hassle-free services. Now a service Delivery of
services that took 2-3 weeks in the past now takes only 2-5 days. On top of it,
digitalisation of the information has reduced the time in decision making by
80% - 90%. Government departments have become transparent and
accountable in providing their services and increased their efficiency in issuing
copies of deeds and settlement records.
The manual process of paying gas, electricity and water bills is
time-consuming and troublesome. Sometimes the busy hours of a day are spent
to pay the utility bills. Now the bills can be paid either through online or cell
phones. The target of the Government is to ensure better life standard and
hassle-free life for its citizens. E-governance has made some services
accessible 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and 365 days a year. Some of
these services, for example, are ATM services, mobile banking, information
services, etc. As a result, citizens may avail the service at their convenience.
In addition, with the introduction of e-services, inter-departmental
communication and net-working within the Government has increased.
Government employees have also become skilled. As a result, providing faster
service has become easier.

20

Ss

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 9
Bangladesh has introduced e-governance for a few years. E-service is yet to be
introduced to all sectors of the governance. With its successful implementation
in every sector, Bangladesh will certainly lead to good governance.

E-Service and Bangladesh -

Many government and non-government _ NT

service providing organisations provide || ° sameeren wm me ey

the citizens with temporary and full time } . ee cnesieinmatiinet
services. This might be travelling from ||/#* === [es= wwe [se sa
one place to another or issuing duplicate ||" cc05 ec
records of a land. Before the |" aa
introduction of digital system, the | ===" ===" Se
service seekers had to meet the service |... imate os

provider, but now they can have the || —sess=s = =5

service through the internet or mobile |) seo ——————EEEE

phone staying at his own home, for |/}—~=™= [rar fae — [roar

example, services at home, such as ———$— — 4

purchasing tickets through the internet LX— ———— !

or mobile phone. People, a few days ago, had to go physically to Kamlapur
train station, and stand in the queue before the counters for tickets. This system
is still in practice, but now anyone can collect tickets and pay the fares online.

Providing service through electronic system is called e-service. E-service

ensures availability of services at low cost in the shortest possible time without

much hassle. E-service has already been introduced to several ministries,
departments and directorates of the Government of Bangladesh.

The digital edition of textbooks, e-settlement records, e-permit, e-ticket,

telemedicine, e-tin registration and income tax calculation, etc. are the

examples of e-services.

A. E-permit: It is one of the primary e-services of the country. The sugar cane
farmers of fifteen sugar-mills of the country get e-permit through the
message option of the cell phone. E-permit is the official permission of the
sugar mills authority for the farmers to supply sugar canes in a fixed time.
The harassment of the farmers has come to an end as they receive the
information of supplying sugar canes through sms. The production of the
sugar mills has also been increased for timely supply of sugar canes.

Forma-2, ICT, 9-10

10 Information and Communication Technology

B. Electronic Money Transfer System (MTS): Money can be sent at a low
cost from one place to another quickly and safely through the electronic
money transfer system of Bangladesh Postal Department. It is possible to
transfer BDT 50000 in one minute. This service is available in all
post-offices in Bangladesh.

C. E-settlement Records : The duplicate of land settlement records can be
collected through this service. Previously employees of land settlement
department would supply the information to the applicants from big record
books after filling up the prescribed forms. The applicants had to be present
physically in the office and the employees of the concerned department
would prepare it manually. Because of the e-service, applicants at home
and abroad can receive the settlement records, paying the required fees.

D. E-healthcare: Physicians in government health centres give advice on
mobile phones. That is why, government hospitals have been provided with
mobile phones. Any citizen of the country can get the advice of any
physician. Besides, in some hospitals, telemedicine service has been
introduced. Because of the telemedical services, patient in upazila may
avail the service and advice of medical specialists in district hospitals on
mobile phones.

E. E-tiketing and Mobile Ticketing of Railway: Tickets of some intercity
trains can be collected either through mobile phone or online. As a result,
travellers can purchase the ticket at their convenience without going to the
ticket counters of the railway station. They can reach the station just before
the departure of the train and collect the printed ticket from a particular
counter.

K-commerce and Bangladesh

There is no substitute for trade and business for the progress and creation of

jobs in a country. A change has been brought about in the business sector of

Bangladesh by the electronic money transfer and exchange process for the

innovation of digital technology, the internet and electonic exchanging process

besides paper currency. Running business through electronic medium is known
as e-commerce.

There are some terms and conditions in business. Firstly, the sellers must have

commodity secondly, the buyers will pay the price of the product. This

transaction requires direct communication of the seller and buyer. However, in ~

the era of internet, nowadays sellers may create a website and display the S

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 11
images of his products. The buyers, after choosing his commodity, pay the
price and get it. The buyers have the facilities to pay the price through debit
and credit cards. They can pay through mobile banking even. Thirdly, on
receipt of the payment, the sellers either deliver the products themselves or by
the courier. Another payment method is through courier service after receiving
the price.
The bill payment can also be done in the Cash on Delivery (COD) method,
which is different from mobile banking and debit or credit card payment. The
purchaser choose the product from the website of the seller and orders for
supply. The seller after getting the order sends it to the buyer who pays the bill
after receiving it.
E-commerce has been gradually extending in Bangladesh since 2011-12. Now
everything including books, garments, food, luxurious goods, etc. is being sold
or bought through e-commerce. Two types of establisments are noticed in
e-commerce like conventional business. One kind of establishment only sells
their own products and another kind sells the products of different companies.
You have already watched advertisements of some websites on the internet,
television and in the newspaper.
ICT in the Job Sector of Bangladesh
Nowadays, the multifarious use and impact of ICT in the job sector is noticed
in Bangladesh like other countries. The impact and capacity of ICT are
gradually increasing. Two types of impact of ICT are noticed. First, the
introduction of ICT in the prevailing working sectors has enhanced the skills of
the employees and extended the market. Second , ICT itself has created new
job-opportunities.
The use of ICT in the prevailing existing job sector and old business sectors, on
the one hand, has enhanced the efficiency, transparency and accountability of
the professional groups on the other hand, it has increased the standard of
service. Skill in ICT is now regarded as the elementary qualification for any
job. TEmployees of banks, insurance, multinational companies, government
sectors need to be skilled in word processing, presentation software, internet
browsing, email management, analytical software, etc. In addition they have to
develop expertise in a specific software product, such as banking software. On
top of it, ICT has created a large job market of making hardware, software,
developing websites, maintenance, etc. Now it is a big market for the skilled

workers who can work at home or abroad and set their own ICT firms.

S

x)

12 Information and Communication Technology
A major part of the task can be accomplished at home. Many people earn
foreign currency for the country through outsourcing.
Social Networking and ICT
Social mobility and development require communication amongst individual
human beings. So, social communication means interaction among people
through virtual communiction and networking. In other words, that what
people create and exchange to communicate and express them by using the
internet and ICT is called social networking. Now this communication has
become easier, cost-effective and usully safe. By using the internet, e-mail,
mobile phone and messaging system, blogging and platforms of social
networking, the ICT based social networking has been made easy. Platforms
have been set up on the internet known as social networking. Two most
popular social networking websites are facebook and twitter.

e www.facebook.com: Facebook is a website of social networking system.
Mark Zuckerberg along with some of his friends launched this site. Anyone
can be the member of facebook without any subscription. The users can add
friends, send messages, update their personal information and give status
share with others. Besides, audios and videos can be sent through it. Any
organisation can open their home page on facebook, and at the same time,
like minded people can form a facebook group . According to
www.stastica.com report of march 2015, the bumber of facebook users in
the world is 1415 million.

¢ www.twitter.com: Twitter is a social network too, but it has a basic
difference with facebook. The users have to express themselves and
exchange opinions within 140 characters. That is why it can be called a
website of microblogging. The message of 140 words is called the 'Tweet'.
The tweets of Twitters are displayed their profile page. The members of the
twitter can follow other members to read the tweets. Those who follow a
member are called followers.

Entertainment and ICT

With the development of ICT, a new era in the entertainment world has started.

It has occurred in two ways. First, how people consume entertainment. Second

a qualitative change is noticed in the different mediums of entertainment.

Let us see first how individual media consumption habit has transformed in

response to the changes in ICT. Once, people had to go outside for 3

N

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 13
entertainment. If they wanted to enjoy a film, they had to go to the cinema hall
to enjoy a film; to the playground to watch a football match; to a concert to
listen to music. Nowadays, there is no need to go outside for entertainment.
Radio was invented first, and then the television. The computer came
eventually. Internet is the latest addition to the computer. We have discovered
that people can enjoy all kinds of entertainments within four walls of their
home. When computer first came into being, it was only used for computation
and calculation. Only the big organisations and the government could afford
computers. However, with the development of technology, computers have
become easily available and people have started using them for their personal
purposes. Since computers have become more sophisticated processors, huge
storage, and considerable memory, they can be used not only for writing or
calculation, but also for entertainment. Perhaps, people use computer most for
their entertainment. Composing a song, making a movie, and taking a
photograph — all can be done on computers. Because of the development of
ICT, changes have come to the mediums and forms of entertainment. Since
songs can be digitised and converted into MP3 format, they can be played on
computers. Similarly, we can watch videos and movies on computers. A huge
volume of data can be stored on CD or DVD. Watching movie on DVD player
without going to the cinema hall is a very common practice nowadays. Internet
with faster speed has become easily available for ‘fibre optic network’. As a
result, people do not have to depend on audio CD or DVD either for listening
to music or watching films. On top of it, programmes in different radio and
television channels can be directly accessed through the Internet. Sometimes
recorded programmes are also available on the Internet. Hence, viewers can
access these programmes according to their convenience.
New forms of entertainment have appeared with the development of ICT.
Computer game is one of them. Big industries of computer games are
established all over the world and the experts of these industries are innovating
computer games of various sorts. The extensive popularity of computer games
demonstrates its immense success as a new medium of entertainment. One of
the reasons for their success is that computer games entertain people across age
with different preferences. These games can be played with others, the
computer itself, or even with gamers in a remote place via network. In fact, it
should be noted here that excessive and compulsive use of computer or video
games may become so strong that it can easily turn into addiction. That is why
people around the world are warned about the negative consequences of
5 compulsive computer or video gaming. Development in ICT played a vital role

14 Information and Communication Technology
in the emergence of new forms of entertainment. Once, making animation or
cartoon films was very difficult. It has become easier for ICT and high-end/
super computers. Not only that, innovations done by creative designers have
brought about changes to graphic works. Digital actors and actresses have been
created on computers for graphic movies that are no longer dependent on real
actors and actresses. Use of high-end/ super computers in creating imaginary
dinosaurs and aliens for popular commercially successful films is very
common nowadays.
In one word, ICT has not only created new forms of entertainment, but also
made them accessible to the mass. Most importantly, ICT has revolutionised
the entertainment industry and its ultimate future in the entertainment industry
is beyond one’s imagination.
Digital Bangladesh
The present government has undertaken a plan to establish Digital Bangladesh’
for the first time. Bangladesh conquered its independence through enormous
bloodshed in the liberation war of 1971. We will be celebrating the golden
jubilee in 2021, and that is why we are determined to take out motherland to
the highest pick of success. ‘Digital Bangladesh’ is the means to materialise the
vision. The Government and general citizens have taken initiative to
materialise the dream.
First we should know what we mean by ‘analogue’ and ‘digital’. An analogue
signal is a kind of continuous and infinitely variable representation of data or
information. As an example, we may discuss about the measurement and
record of daily temperature. Temperature varies throughout the day and the
temperature inside the home can also be much different than that outside.
Representation of any small amount of change in the temperature through a
signal may be called an analogue signal. However, an analogue signal may not
always give information in precise accuracy and reliability.
A digital signal converts the information into numbers (digits) and displays and
stores the information in numbers. Hence, it is called digital signals. Since the
digital signal indicates the values of the quantity in a digital format, that is, in
numerical forms, it gives more accurate information than the analogue signal.
It is generally quicker and easier to read than the analogue one. For example, a
watch, with a high-precision movement of an hour hand, a minute hand and a
second hand, gives an analogue signal as a measure of time passing. By
contrast, a watch, with an electronic display of time in numbers, gives a digital Ss
N

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 15
signal. the phrase ‘Digital Bangladesh’ is not used to indicate Bangladesh as a
‘Computer Oriented Country’. Its implication is more extensive. Digital
Bangladesh refers to a modern Bangladesh, developed with the help of ICT.
The objectives of Digital Bangladesh are to ensure better education and health
and more job opportunities and eradication of poverty. SIn order to fulfil these
objectives, it is important to bring changes to our old conventional mind-set
and be positive and inventive. The fundamental aim underlying Digital
Bangladesh is to ensure democracy, human rights, transparency, accountability,
and justice with the maximum utility of technology.The main thrust of the
objectives is to improve the standard of living of citizens’ from all social
classes. In order to fulfil the objective of Digital Bangladesh, the Government
has focused on four specific factors: human resource development,
participatory citizenship, civil services reformation, and inclusion of
technology in everyday life.
Bangladesh has started developing information and communication technology
late in comparison with other countries. That is why Bangladesh is
significantly lagging behind. Even though the significance of ICT was not
realised, nowadays ICT is getting importance properly. We are getting high
speed internet conection as we are connected to the submarine cable.
There is a positive side of the extension of technology. If a nation lags behind
at a moment in any particular technology, it does not mean it will stumble all
the time. It leapfrogs other countries. Bangladesh is trying her level best to be
equal with other countries by using all her might.
The infrastructure for information technology has started to be constructed in
the country by the intent of the present government. Setting up fibre optic
connection throughout the country, an initiative is taken to provide the internet
service to remote area. The number of telephone users was negligible in the
country just before one and half decade, but now every adult person uses a
phone. Information service centres have been opened at the union level, the
post offices of the remote areas are transformed into e-centres that provides the
service of mobile money trnasaction. The district information cell and the
national information cell with the union information centres are important
additions to the infrastructure of the country. The tasks like registration of
admission test, getting the result of public examination, and purchasing train
tickets are being done regularly on the mobile phone. ICT course is included in
the curriculum of school and college. This textbook is an example of that.
= Computer science is being taught in the colleges and universities. The younger
g

16 Information and Communication Technology
generation of the country is joining the software companies along with setting
their own firms, and a large number of young people are strengthening the
economy of the country through outsourcing.
No one should come to a conclusion just listening to the successful story of
ICT that we have reached the zenith of our target. We have to walk a long way
to achieve the goal. As most of the people of our country live in the villages,
the first step to 'Digital Bangladesh’ is bringing these village people to the
network of ICT services. So, we have to build up large infrastructures. A
skilled manpower is required to avail of the opportunity of ICT to the utmost
level. So, we should develop expertise in this sector. The standard of education
of colleges and universities should be enhanced and a good number of students
should be skilled in ICT. Transparency should be ensured through
e-governance. The new generation should be encouraged to use their
innovative power, and a co-ordination between universities and information
and communication technology is must that we can make a real ‘Digital
Bangladesh’.
Activity
Design a poster about what to do for building up ‘Digital Bangladesh’.
Exercise

1. In which year was London Science Museum successful in making the

engine capable of calculating mechanically?

A. 1833 B. 1842

C. 1953 D. 1991
2. Which scientist made it possible to do office from home?

A. Charles Babbage B. Ada Lovelace

C. James Clerk Maxwell D. Jagodish Chandra Bose
3. Who is the inventor of facebook?

A. Steve Jobs B. Bill Gates

C. Mark Zuckerberg D. Tim Berners Lee oo

S
AQ

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 17
4. Because of the use of ICT in government jobs_
i. government services can be easily accessed within the shortest
possible time;
ii. The standard of government service can be enhanced;
iii. Government service can be availed even in holidays;
Which one is correct?
a. i&ii b. iG iii
c. i & iii d. i, ii & iii
Read the section below, and answer questions 5 & 6:
Summon fell sick while on a pleasure trip at St. Martin. When he contacted a
doctor in Dhaka, he advised him to get himself admitted soon to a hospital. The
doctor of the nearby hospital arranged his necessary treatment after consulting
with a medical specialist in Dhaka.
5. The technology in which the local doctor can get advice of a specialist
doctor is_
i. Tele-medicine
ii. E-healthcare
iti. E-commerce
Which one is correct?
a. i&ii b. iG iii
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
6. Which technology played a vital role for the treatment of Sumon?
A. ICT B. Television
C. Robot D. Computer
7. Milon of Jadurcahr, Roumari of Kurigram intends to obtain higher
education staying at home. How can ICT help him?
8. What possibilities have been created by ICT for solving unemployment in
Bangladesh? Discuss.

Second Chapter
Computer and the Security of the User
Please Login geile 3} wae uenarss = eas m
Username: [username _] | a ; Aa
password: eoceee j ee U ae
' = oom ance prishine , : - FURL
ae Logit ae 4 ‘ WRTERNET cero?
X ovens Saas =a ==
2 = vis la Ge A WARNING! 42 infections found!!!
ee .
as AN\S x
aa\siz) ;
Ath AN) A - 2
av \S\ebm
After completing this chapter, we will be able to:
> Explain the importance of computer maintenance;
> Differentiate between software uninstallation and software deletion;
> Explain the importance of using password and anti-virus for the security
of computer, data and software;
> Explain the difference between general and social sites ;
> Analyse the consequence of the excessive use of the internet;
> Explain the negative aspects of playing games excessively;
>» Describe the event of software piracy;
> Explain the importance of copyright law;
> Explain the necessity of security with reference to the free flow of
information in the internet;
> Expain the importance of troubleshooting in computer;
> Install and uninstall software following the right process;
> Prepare unique password; and
> Troubleshoot the usual problems of the computer.
=
§

Computer Network 19
Importance of Software in the Maitenance of Computer
Story 1: Raina was very intent on having a laptop from his father after getting
admission to the college. As her attainment in the first term examination was
good, her father bought her a branded laptop with core i5 processor. Raina was
impressed with the quality and speed of the laptop. She installed many pieces
of software within few days. However, she noticed a gradual decline in its
performance. After one year, she observed that the laptop was running too slow
and it was irksome working on the computer. After somedays, she made a
capricious demand to her father for purchasing another one for her.
Story 2: Ankon has recently taken internet connection for the computer. Now
he frequently browses the Web and has benefitted greatly from the sites with
the information related to his study. Besides education, he uses the internet for
sending emails, listening to music, and watching movie. Recently he has found
the computer often restarting without any prior notification. In addition, the
internet browser opens different sited without any command. One day, he
inserted a memory stick into the USB connection port on his computer. He was
shocked to find out that his files turned into ‘shortcuts’. He couldn’t even
locate the original files.
What do you understand from the above events? Is it similar to your
experience? You have already known many things about Information and
Communication Technology this time, and you have understood that the
processor and software are the main components in ICT. A new computer, be it
a desktop, laptop or tablet, usually runs fast, but after somedays, it gradually
slows down. As it gets old, so it becomes slow. Sometimes, you have to wait
for long after giving a command. Situation at times becomes so worse
sometimes you become so annoyed that you want to buy a new one.
What is the way to get rid of this situation? Here lies the importance of
computer maintenance. You have Ilearnt a little about computer maintenance in
the junior Class. Most of the people do not like the task of maintaining ICT or
technological devices. However, it is an important task. If you want to keep
your ICT device operative, you have to maintain it. You need not to be an
« expert for that job. We are talking of software-oriented maintenance of ICT
S devices.

20 Information and Communication Technology
If the Windows Operating System of Microsoft Company is used in your ICT
device (almost in all the computers of the world, Windows Operating System is
used), you have to check its status and update of the operating system all the
time. If the device is connected to the internet, the updates are done
automatically. Other operating systems provide a similar kind of facilities same
facilities too. In spite of that, you have to use registry clean up software to keep
the machine fast. If you do not use this software, your machine will not work
properly and it will be a matter of annoyance for you.
Besides, everytime while using the computer, some temporary files are created.
If these files are not erased for a long time, they occupy a lot of space in the
hard disk and slow down the speed of the computer. That is why we should
erase the temporary files with a software. It will make some space free and
speed up the computer.
Nowadays, the use of ICT device can not be imagined without the internet
connection. Many cookies and temporary internet files are saved in the cash
memory of the internet browser when you surf the net. It slows down the
computer. If it is not possible to clean up the cash memory everyday, it must be
done in every few days! intervals. A piece of software can help you to get the
job done.
Using ICT device without anti-virus, anti-spyware and anti-malware is very
risky. It's an important maintenance activity that protect the users' device
from the attack of virus, malware and spyware, and they can safely use their
devices. Now many anti-virus, anti-malware, and anti-spyware software can be
downloaded free of cost from the internet and used to protect the computer.
Even these pieces of software can be updated from the internet. The use of ICT
device without updated anti-virus is very risky.
The computer users can run disk clean up and disk defragmentor to keep the
usual speed of the computer. These programmes are attached with the
operating system. These two pieces of software clean up the space of hardware
and arrange the files in such an order so that the speed of the computer is kept
up.

3

8

Computer Network 21

Installation and Uninstallation of Software

We know that the ICT devices are operated with software. These pieces of

software have to be installed in the computer or in other devices. When we

purchase any ICT device, the seller asks us about the software that we require.

The seller after installing the required pieces of software along with operating

software gives it to us. In this way, we can use ICT devices, for example,

computer, tablet, smartphone, etc., as we require.

The process of installing operating system software is complex, and expertise

is essential for this job. We will have discussions on it in your next Class. In

addition to the operating system software, we need different types of software.

These pieces of software should be installed on the basis of our needs.

Installation of any software requires special attention to the issues given below:

> Whether the hardware of your device supports the pieces of software to be
installed;

> Whether there is anything important in 'read me' file, if any, read it;

> Whether all other works are stopped during installation or not; if not, the
installation process often gets hampered;

> Whether the anti-virus software is turned off, and

>» Whether the administrator of operating system has the permission or not;
(All the devices have the permission except some particular devices. We
will discuss in details in the next class.)

Installation of software, except the operating system one, depends almost on

the operating system itself. However, the process of installation is almost the

same. We need the soft or the digital copy of the piece of software to install it.

Tt can be collected from CD, DVD, Pendrive, or the Internet. In most of the

cases, a programme called 'Auto Run' is attached with the software. When you

insert CD and DVD or connect a prndrive to the USB port, the 'Auto run’

programme becomes activated and the piece of software seeks permision for

the set up. Follow the next steps after giving the permission and the piece of

software will be installed in your computer. Restarting the device, you will be

able to use the programme.

S ___ The steps of installing a piece of software is shown below:
N

22 Information and Communication Technology
Double-click the set up file of the piece of software. The following figare-1 is a
set up file. Double clicking on it will start the installation.
C)a & vic-media-player_213_32bit.exe
Progemmame vt-medieplayer_21)_ Kbtene 2
Pubhaner Unknown
i fm
eee | 2) Sa
‘Shungt eben test ootmcaors aes | ~~
Lceree Agreement *
=. Welcome to the VLC media player Pamne once te earns terme betore entaling WC made slopw 2.34 F.%
in wn 2.1.3 Setup Wizard
|) Pree Page Deer te ane te vest af te agent,
\ ‘Siaetnet oh wate ves Grenph Gehan AO uae mic bas ;
The recommended et you Cone af otter appicatone:
oe ad Siti ewe ba a bbe
ome of Pes kee Ce srert t Targrg 06 ref shoe
Cann econ ni
Te hcoraes for moet softmare ane desired te take sway your 2
Tm, You we te ones of orm
Qoose Components * Qheeer natal Locamen *
Croce ntact featees of VLC mete paver 213 rou mart to iretad, r.% Crecen the Setar owiehe eat WAC med paper 213. r~4
COD he COmpOTERTE yO) mare te Metal and rete fe COMpOENT yu Gor! mart De Setup od Weta VLC media ploper I. 139m the fihowng fokter. Te metal mo diterant tater,
ren Ck Meet to corre ck Breese ard meet eretrer tute Cet deatad te start Pe retatecon
Satect fe tepe of ewtat Teel - m7]
OF, scent he cote Mode Move pepe) (al
rooms | | [cei
cored [beste Perce 3
Emecte a <— =
Bbacoat an U =o (eee)
ous waret 1.96 Speen requred: 17 PE
ee ealethe O
: : g

Computer Network 23

J vic ress piye213509 | —=saem) The steps can be followed for

Coripastinn the VLG adlo player software installation:
2.1.3 Selup Wizard |

| a ViCmedis player 2.1.3has been instaled on your coenputer | Activity

ia Following the steps, install a piece

WT} mun WC mada payer 2.1.3 || of software suggested by your

teacher.
|

Vint the VideoLAN VLC media player Weblte
Installation of Software
Now you have learnt how to install software. Suppose that you do not need to
use a software anymore. What will you do then? Most of the users keep the
software in the hard disk. It occupies a space and creates problem to run the
ICT device smoothly. So, it's wise to uninstall unnecessary software.
How will we uninstall a software? Operating System Software helps us to get
the job done. The nature of all kinds of Operating System Software is almost
same. However, it is easier to uninstall software from the device run by the
android operating system, especially in the touch-screen smartphone. Select the
application from the settings and touch the particular software. A menu will be
viewed on the screen. Touch the space where uninstall is written and the piece
of software will be uninstalled.
The following steps should be followed to uninstall a software from a
computer or an ICT device run by Microsoft Windows Operating System used
by most of the people of the world.
Click start button and go to the Control Panel. Then double-click the ‘Add or
Remove’ or point to uninstall a programme.

SS
&

24 Information and Communication Technology
— med Adon your correnter's 1008 F
a Cn gc se
[XJ Macrosctt Ortoce PewerPewe 2067 ina 1 mi — . 7
ScULe F

i aires ©) te that you want to remove, and

Fame <<< uninstallation will start instantly. If
gas a the bulk of the file is large, it may
Seornaiees Sais take longer time. Usually the
‘Sen comme gomputer needs to be restarted after
the uninstallation of software. Be
Activity careful before uninstalling any
Following the steps, uninstall a software, or else, uninstallation of a
plece of software suggested by programme may make it impossible
to run the computer without its
teinstallation. Therefore, you must

be careful of that.

Deletion of Software
We know that deleting means erasing something. In fact, by uninstalling a
piece of software, we delete it from our ICT device. What will we do with
‘delete’ command then? A software once installed in the ICT device cannot be
uninstalled completely, unless it is deleted by following recommended process,
rather it creates problems. Some parts of the uninstalled programmes are
dumped in the Registry file of the operating system, however it is possible to
delete any programme following the steps. The process is shown below, but we
should also be careful in doing the job.

The steps to be followed to delete:

At first, uninstall the piece of software as per the previous rule, and follow the

next steps: =

y

Computer Network 25
ml Type the name of a program, folder, document, or Internet
— = resource, and Windows will open it for you.
| ee
Open: regedit Pa
1. Presaing e.. activate Run command. Write ‘regedit’, and presa enter.
2. Enter the ‘file’ menu.
@ Feontry Ector if @ Pegsty Editor ij
Lil] este view: Fevonites Hee: FR i: Wie = Favs tei os
= Import... 3 |
LASSES ROOT
» ee USER & fete
& at CHINE toad Hive.
py HREV_USERS Uniead Hive.
|) HEY CURRENT_C
Connect Network Registry...
Disconnect Network Regutry., |
4. The drive that contains the operating software, that is 'C’, should be selected.
AD Bap Rogitiny Fils ; = beet
Seve ae Corourr - @eo2?vn-
| Posey | wy phe wROx (DD DATA 4
a Dewees 7 A Shavage (7) Ps
~~ DvO Rye
_ femouter Diwe th)
a
Save anno Feeretynen Fr Comat <2) Gere
Boot age

5. Save the file. It is very important. Lf any error is committed, the system may
be repaired.
& Export Registry File mcd *
Seve; ie Computer - @or vm
Bigs Mord Disk Drives (3) sia
0 SO
z= PRIMARY OS = VBOX (D0 DATA ()
Desktop «
pod’ Devices with Remowatite Storage (1) “
ity
Network
Fie name FSCS]
Sevesstwe: | Regetration Flea Creg) = Genes _|
Export range
6. Enter ‘Edit’ then.
7. Point to ‘Find’.
a Registry Editor ——————e
fl 4 = C : | Prvrnissions.
bij Hi ROOT ae :
. HKeEY_ OL E |
, J) HKEY_USERS | deat
|) HKEY_CURRENT_CONFI | Find. Culet
| Fined Ne A
8. Find out the name of the software to be deleted, for example, 'Audials’.
9, Click ‘Find Next’,
Fine Find
Find what: [AUOIALS frdwe AUS —“‘CSCSCS
Lack at So | Loot at Carcet
=©@ =x. @ v7
F dete Y Des
R

Computer Network 27
10. Select in this way.
off Regstry Edtor | <2)
| File Edit View Favorites Help

i * | Name Type Data Name Type 1

= Modify Binary Data...

ya TT Dee av
11, Pressing the right button of the mouse, click ‘Delete’ option.
12, Finally press ‘F3’ of keyboard and delete | Group Activity

all the files having that name from the : :

: : . Comparing uninstallation
Registry. In this way, the entire process of ane dsiotion. oresent it
deleting will be completed. re

Security of your Computer : Computer Virus and Antivirus
= We have already learnt many things about the
computer virus. In spite of that, we should learn
more keeping in mind the security of our computer.
Pp It harms the computer As the virus infects the
: a human body, the computer virus infects the
ae i computer. The full form of 'VIRUS' is 'Vital
‘ Information and Resources Under Siege’ which
indicates taking control of important information or
damaging something. It was named by Professor Fred Cohen, renowned
researcher of University of New Haven. Virus is a kind of software that attacks
data and information, and it has the power to increase its number. When a virus
enters the computer, it gradually increases in number and attacks the data
stored there, and finally makes the computer unusable after infecting the entire
device. For example, booting virus attacks booting sector of hard disk. Stone,
Vienna, CIH, Folder, Trojan horse, etc. are some most familiar viruses.
90
R

28 Information and Communication Technology
If the ICT device is somehow infected with virus, it gradually increases in
number. If a virus infected file enters a virus free computer or ICT device
through CD, pendrive or any other device. The virus occupied the memory. It
stays there even after the computer is turned off. Installation of a virus-infected
programme or software also infects the ICT device in the same way. In this
way, a virus free computer or ICT device is infected with virus. The same thing
happens when a virus infected programme or a software is run.
In this way, the virus occupying the memory, attacks other files and
programmes. Some viruses instantly infect all the existing files and
programmes, and some viruses infect only new programmes and files. Thus,
the virus deletes files and corrupts programmes, and causes a serious damage
to the machine. In this way, a virus free computer is gradually infected with
virus, and it may spread to other computers through the CDs used in the
infected machine, hard disk and the Internet.
The symptoms given below indicate that the computer and ICT devices are
infected by a virus.
* Opening a file and progamme takes longer than the usual time;
*« The memory has little space, leading to a slow performance of the
computer;
* Showing unexpected messages incompatible with the works while running
the computer;
* Installation of a programme takes longer than the usual time;
¢ The running files take more space ;
¢ The machine shuts down during booting or working time;
* The names of the folders are replaced with cryptic names;
A virus can cause the following damages:
¢ Itcan erase any saved data or file;
¢ It can corrupt data;
¢ Abrupt and unexpected messages can be viewed while working in
computer;
¢ The display of computer monitor can be corrupted;
CO
¢ The entire system can be slowed down; ES

Computer Network 29
What can we do to get rid of this situation? Here comes the question of
antivirus. Anti-virus can relieve us from this problem. Antivirus is the
preventive of computer virus. If the system is infected with virus, it should be
wiped out. Antivirus utility is forced to prevent virus infection. At first, these
utilities find similarities with the samples of viruses in infected computers. The
antivirus software by using its experience repairs the original programme. An
effective antivirus can wipe out hundreds of viruses. When a new virus comes
into being, update the antivirus to enhance its power and effectiveness. As a
result, it can destroy new virus. Now, there are a lot of antiviruses that can
identify, prevent, and wipe out virus. Nowadays, antivirus software remains
attached with every Operating System Software. Besides, the existing
antiviruses destroy the viruses before the attack or warn the users. Therefore,
the anti-virus software developed nowadays is more effective than the one used
in the past. So, we should keep the antivirus updated.

Now, we can download antivirus software free of cost from the Internet to get

rid of virus-attack, and after installing it, we can ensure the security of the

devices. The names of some trustworthy antivirus are given below:
* AVG antivirus software (Downloading Website: www.avg.com)
¢ Avira antivirus software (Downloading Website:www.avira.com)
* Avast antivirus software (Downloading Website:www.avast.com)

We can follow the steps mentioned below to prevent our ICT device from virus

attack:

1. CDs, pendrives, memory cards etc. used in other computers should be
cleaned and made virus-free before using in your own computer;

2. Software used in other computers should be virus free before using in your
own computer;

3. Any file copied from other computers needs to be cleaned by anti-virus
software before you use it in your computer;

4. Be careful when you install a piece of software in your compute from the
internet. If the downloaded software contain any virus, that may infect your
virusfree computer;

= 5. Do not install any software used in other computer or device;
N

30 Information and Communication Technology
6. Always keep updated antivirus software in your computer so that prior
warning message can be received when a virus starts attacking the
computer. As a result, the computer may be disinfected right away
following the recommended process;
7. Data or files of everyday should be saved in different disk or pendrive as a
back up, but the disk or pendrive must be virus free;
8. Be careful in exchanging emails. Don't open any email of a doubtful source.
If you open it, make it virus free before opening;
9. Be very careful and check virus before using game files;
Password
Why do we lock the door when all the family members go on an outing? We do
it for the security of the house. Think a bit about the lock. Anybody can not
open the lock by using any key because different locks have keys. A lock can
not be opened with a different key. Thus, we ensure safety of our home and
other valuable things with lock and key. Now, we see a kind of lock with digits.
The lock is opened by matching the digits. The digits work as the key. But, in
an age of digital technology, we have to think over the security of many other
things. Perhaps you have understood what we are talking of. You have rightly
guessed. We are talking of the security of our data and information. In an age
of ICT, we have to use lock for the security of our important data, information
and the security of software. The name of this lock is password.
Perhaps you have already learnt to create password and use it. ICT is being
used everywhere now. Our country is not an exception. As its use has been
extended, the question of security becomes important. All of our personal
information such as bank account, income tax, job, etc. have come under the
digital system. Besides, our ICT devices such as computer, laptop, tablet or
smartphone are being operated with software. When we use the Internet, we
can communicate with the computer or ICT devices of the remote parts of the
world. Similarly, anyone can communicate and share information with us from
anywhere. In this way, our personal information can be transformed to others
or our ICT device may become susceptible to hacking or computer security
vulnerabilities. We can ensure security to prevent this situation. There is no
alternative to secure our information and protect the software of our device. If
it is protected with password, nobody can steal our information or damage our = $

Computer Network 31
device. But, we should remember one thing that if anybody can steal our
password, he can steal our information too. Even, he can destroy it. It is like
opening the lock by using duplicate key. Therefore, we should be skilled in
creating password. We should not create any password that can easily be
guessed by others or we ourselves may forget.

As most of the users create passwords like 123456 or 654321 or abcdef, it

becomes easy to steal this type of password. Considering the significance of

data or information, it is important to create a unique password.

The security along with secrecy of Password ensures the security of data and

information saved in a server, computer or ICT device.

If your password is not unique:

1. Virus may attack easily;

2. The hackers may take the opportunity of hacking the computer; so your
money deposited to your account may be transferred elsewhere and your
important information may be stolen by others;

3. Information saved in the ICT device may be destroyed for your weak
password;

How can you create a unique password? It's a creative work. Your creativity

can ensure the security and secrecy of your data and software. If some

processes are followed, we can easily do the job.

We should be careful of the following factors while creating a unique

password:

* Your name, names of your family members or any personal information
should not directly be used though it helps us to remember the password;

¢ Combination of digits, signs and capital and small letters will strengthen the
password. It becomes difficult for others to guess anything about it;

* Password should be long;

* You should not write the password or part of it either in the computer or
diary in order or remember it;

¢ Use a symbol of your own choice to remember the password; It can be your

favourite poem, short story, writer, scientific invention, or any historicl
s event.

32 Information and Communication Technology
If creativity is added to this, the password may be unique. Our password could
be as follows:

* MoriTeChaHina_AmiSunDarVhubanE (Rabindranath Tagore)

* AmAr AchE wateR (Humayun Ahmed)

* 2BornoT2B tHatisThe? (To be or not to be, ea
that is the question- From Shakespeare) Sisaty

* 4Score&7yrsAGO (Four score and seven create Rasswardtard
years ago- From the Gettysburg Address) P ,

Changing password is an important task because a regular change of the

password ensures the confidentiality of the information stored on the device

and safety and security of the ICT device itself. However, password should be
something that can be remembered.

Stay Secured in the Web

The use of information and communication technology in our daily life is

gradually increasing. The use of the Internet and online is increasing along

with mobile phone and computer. When a computer or mobile device (phone,
pad, tab, etc.) stays connected to online, it falls in security risks. The risk
factors can be reduced being alert and taking special measures.

An Internet user surfs the website for many reasons. The process of

maintaining the security on the web is discussed below:

A. General site: Many users take the general and cost-free services of yahoo,
hotmail, and gmail. The possibility of hacking in every site can not be
ignored. If our account is hacked, many of our necessary mail will be lost.
Again, the act of cheating or work like this can be operated by using the
account, but the liability will be on the account holder.

The precautions given below should be followed:

* An easy password should not be used. Many users use their own names and
the easy orders of the keyboard (such as qwerty or asdfg or 123456789) as
the password of their email account. It is very unwise as everyone knows
that for email, the account is the user's or account holder's name. That is
why anybody can hack your account just giving it a few try. So a
complicated order or combination for a password such as letters, digits, and %
signs (!@#, etc.) should be used. &

Computer Network 33

* Password should be changed on a regular basis;

* Use 2-steps verification where there is a scope. For example, the security of
your gmail account can be strengthened by your mobile phone. The 2-step
verifiaction option of gmail can be used:
> Point to the account setting from the profile;
> Get 2-step verification. Click the edit option;
>» Type the number of your mobile phone and click the 'send' button.
>» Asecurity code will be sent from gmail to your mobile phone. Click

Verify’ option typing the verification code;
> Turn on 2-step verification;

Now, if anybody seeks unauthorized access to your account, he requires the

mobile code, but even after knowing the code, he will fail to access the account

as the code can be used just once. So, your account will be secured. Similar
security measures can be adopted in yahoo! mail in the same way.

* Ifyou send any email from a cyber cafe or the computer constantly used by
numerous people, log out the account after using it.

Besides, if you follow some additional security measures, you will remain safe.
In some websites, different kinds of programmes are kept installed. If cookie is
activated on the web browser, the information stored in the computers and
browsers of the users of these pieces of software will be sent to other
destination. So, it is necessary to be alert while using the website. Some
websites seek different personal information from the users. You should not
provide them with the information if there is no particular cause.

B. Social Site: Nowadays, many users keep their personal information on
social networking site. They share photographs too. So if the password of
facebook account is stolen, the security of personal information can be
interrupted, and the female should be more careful. The security measures
suggested for the email site should be adopted for these sites too. The
following precautions should be taken for using the social networking sites:
¢ Have information before developing friendship with someone. Don't be

a friend of anybody who does not deserve it;
¢ If you make virtual friendship with people abroad, be absolutely sure

34 Information and Communication Technology
about their identity. Check their profile and friend list to identify
common friends and acquaintances;

¢ Don't share any personal photograph on facebook;

¢ Log off everytime after using facebook or email;

¢ Sign out after browsing the Internet in school or cyber cafe;

~ Be cautious about using the laptop or computer of your friend or
acquaintance;

¢ Don't click on any facebook application sent by a stranger if you are not
absolutely sure of about its reliability;

C. Age Compatible Site: There are some websites only for the adults. These
sites are not suitable for you. This kind of website may put the safety and
security of your ICT device at risk and hinder the normal operation of your
ICT device. In order to protect the device, you must restrain yourself from
clicking on any suspicious photos, links, or advertisements on the website.
You should give an effort in developing your knowledge and skills in ICT
as well as your moral character.

Internet Addiction Disorder (IAD)

== . y

The word ‘addiction’ has negative ‘ ~

connotations and it is usually used with ¢

teference to drug. It destroys life because it A a" f

is tough to come out of the web of drugs. Ay pe

Perhaps you are confused thinking that how /'% a . i=

an alarming and negative word ‘Addiction’ a ~

associated with ICT and mentioned in an \ §y Ce

ICT textbook. Someof you who have \ ; ‘gS |

computers may have cross the limit while No :

playing computer games. A few of you ’

didn’t leave the computer even though you

should have for an important task. The users who have the internet access have

facebook accounts too. Posting status on the facebook, you eagerly wait for a

long time to see when somebody gives ‘Like’ to your status. You have gotten

pleasure when the number of your facebook friends has increased. Perhaps you

may have spent more time on facebook than the ususal. You might have done

better in the examination if you had spent less time on this social network. You S

Safe and Ethical Use of Information and Communication Technology 35

could have read some good books or played a bit more in the playground or

spent more time with your bother, sister and parents.

Perhaps you, who have been damaging your lives by wasting your time on

facebook or by playing computer games more than the usual time, understand

the cause of adding a negative word ‘Addiction’ with the positive words

‘Computer’ and the ‘Internet’, 'Addiction’ means when someone, in spite of

knowing it a freakish act, can not avoid the temptation of doing it, What is true

for drug is true for the computer and the internet too. As drug is harmful for

life, so are the computer and the intemet if they are used beyond the limit.

Addiction to Computer Games

Addiction to computer games begins from the

boyhood, and it usually happens owing to the j

ignorance of the parents. Computer is a tool and

different types of works can be done with it. As *

many positive words are said of this technology, am

parents think that what is done by computer is +

positive. Therefore, when they see their kids ea

sitting before the computer for a long time, they ~~

do not think of being alert. Computer game is a

kind of entertainment, and it has a different dimension. If you play computer

games merely as entertainment being within the limit, that can be a part of

good entertainment. However it does not happen most of the time. People

across the age, kinds to adults, may be addicted to computer game. A Korean

man died while playing computer game for 50 hours at a stretch. A Chinese

couple sold their child to pay for their computer games. These examples

remind us that addiction to computer game is not unusual matter. If caution is

not taken, a man can easily be addicted to computer game.

As addiction to computer game is new, extensive research works have not been

done on it. In future, they will provide us absolute direction. Research has

identified the presence of a stimulating chemical in a gamer’s brain, addicted to

computer games. The shape of a brain is altered in those who use computer 10

hours at a stretch 6 days a week.

Therefore, we should keep in mind that computer game could be a good
s entertainment, but it is very easy to be addicted to it, and the effect of it is
R certainly damaging.

36 Information and Communication Technology
Addiction to Social Networking Site

Man is a social being. They continued a social relation all the time. However,
the nature of social communication nowadays is distinctly different from the
one in past. It means a different social networking based on the internet. There
are some social networking sites such as facebook, twitter, instagram, googlet,
etc. through which people can keep communication with their circle. Once,
these sites were only for the young people, but now people of all age groups
use it. They use it not for communicating with others, but also for establishing
ideologies and legitimising their opinions. If it was within the periphery of
objectives, it would not have created any problem, but it is a matter of regret
that addiction to social networking site becomes a problem for the whole
world.

The psychiatrists have started carrying on research, aand the findings show that
the success of the sites depends on how skillfully they can attract the users. The
main factor is how often users visit the site and how long they remain on the
site. The more the site is visited, the more the site is successful and
consequently, the more the site will earn money. Therefore, if the users are not
careful about that there is every possibility to develop addicition to these sites.
Another interesting factor was identified by the psychiatrists. Individuals have
an inherent desire to impress and admire their own self. In psychology, this is
defined as ‘narcissism’. The social networking sites instigate this inherent
desire of human beings. A competitive attitude develops within everyone to
make themselves popular. The users upload minute information of themselves,
and when people watch and like it, they become happy. The entire system
works like a drug, and users waste their time for hours. In fact, a major waste
of time world-wide is caused by the immense popularity of social sites.

The Way out of Addiction

We have allready learned in the previous chapter that a man can be addicted to
computer games and social networking sites as he can be addicted to drugs.
Therefore, both drug and computer game or social networking site addicts
display a similar kind of signs and symptoms. It is wise to be careful than to try
to get rid of being an addict. There is an apprehension that the users who do not
know anything about the addiction may develop a tendency to it. Since you
have read about it in the textbook, you may remain more careful about it. S

Safe and Ethical Use of Information and Communication Technology 37
People may become too preoccupied with it, as they do with other sources of
entertainment. However, playing computer games does not increase our
knowledge on technology. You will just have the enjoyment by playing
computer games, not any technological knowledge. You should be careful
about playing computer games so that it may not affect important works of
your daily life.
We hope that you will not be addicted to ;
computer games. Similiarly you will prevent [ie ‘ ae ee
the people around you from being computer [qm aauRORa Fe
game-addicts. Those who become Nee ae fil xe! oe
game-addicts show some particular , ees + a ,
symptoms. They always think about a F | aay Nes: cs
particular game, and when they start playing ~ B= Jp ae
the game, they become excited, and they can § # + : NO
not do their daily jobs smoothly. They become ee =. 4 ‘? whens
inattentive to their studies. When they are Fr. |p ha
forced to keep themselves aloof from playing /
games, they feel discomfort. The point of worry is that the addiction may come
back even after they become free from this bad habit. The people, who
somehow have developed addiction to computer games and want to get rid of
it, have to acknowledge to themselves that they have developed an addiction.
They have to make a list of the important events of their life. They should
convince themselves about the place of computer game on the list. They have
to make a list of the problems of their life too, and they should find out the
problem caused by playing computer games. They should divide and allocate
their time to cover all the important aspects of life — study, homework,
playground, extra curricular activities, spending time with the family, and
voluntary social works. If they get spare time after doing all these works, they
will play computer games then. They should gradually keep themselves busy
with creative works rather than play computer games.
The users who have been addicted to social networking sites should proceed in
the same way to get rid of the addiction . They should try to convince them that
wasting a long time on these websites is a kind of addiction. When you have an
intention of watching something on social networking sites, you should ask
S yourself whether you have really any purpose of watching it. If not, you have

38 Information and Communication Technology
to control yourself. You should note down the duration of time you spend every
time on the sites. After summing up the time you spend on it in a day, week,
and month, you should come to a conclusion about the volume of work you
could have done during this time.
You have to reduce the number of unknown friends from your social
networking site to reduce your addiction. You have to convince yourself that
after completing the important jobs, you can surf the sites. You have to
develop the habit of deactivating social networking sites when you have exams
or other important events. You will gradually reduce the addiction in this way,
and finaly get rid of it completely.
You should remember that every moment of your life is valuable, and it is
unwise to spend these moments for any addiction.
Piracy
The objective of copyright law is to provide the writers, artists, and other with
the exclusive right to their creative work. Usually it is expensive and difficult
to reprint any book by violating the copyright law, but now it is easy to make
‘copy' or ‘facsimile’ using computer technology. It is not required to be an
expert for doing the job. Therefore additional measure is taken to protect the
copyright of computer software, graphics, and animation. When the legal right
is violated, he is deprived of his copyright. It is usually called ‘Piracy’ or
‘Software Piracy'.
The concerned entrepreneurs, writers or programmers can preserve the right to
their intellectual property within the purview of copyright law. That is why it is
illegal either to copy or create something new editing the software without the
concent of the copyright holders. Therefore, the copy or the new creation has
no legal protection. Even though it is easy to pirate computer software, the
malpractice is not very frequent in the world. The renowned software
companies have formed an agency named ‘Business Software Alliance' (BSA)
to preserve their copyright and to monitor piracy worldwide. The statement
given by the agency in 2011 shows that 7 out of 10 computer users are free
from piracy. As software piracy is an easy job, it is difficult to get the right
statistics. Software piracy is strictly prohibited in Bangladesh.

S

4

Safe and Ethical Use of Information and Communication Technology 39
The Urgency of Copyright Law
The copyright law ensures the right or ownership of the creators of his works
for a certain time. If the creation has any commercial value, the creator should
get it . As poets, litterateur, movie producers, software writers, web designers
all require money and web designers earn their living from creative work, they
invest labour, intellect, and money in it. They invest money for their labour and
merit of creative works. Therefore they should have the right to get their
money back either by selling the products or through exchange. The legal right
within the purview of copyright law has given them the advantages. Artists or
programmers get disappointed if they fail to gain any financial benefits for
their creative or intellectual properties. The implementation of copyright law
will save the creative workers from being deprived.
Right to Information and Security
The law of 'Right to Information’ is enacted and implemented in different
countries of the world to ensure the free flow of information and people's right
to have information. 'Freedom of thought, conscience, speech' right to obtain
information has been assented as the fundamental right of the citizen's in the
constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh. As all powers in the
Republic belong to the people, a law called 'Right to Information Act-2009" has
been enacted to ensure the right of having information. Every citizen has the
right to get information from any authority whenever it is sought under the act,
and the concerned authority is compelled to provide the information if asked. If
people's right to information is ensured through this act, the transperancy and
accountability of the government, autonomous, statutory organizations, and
NGOs funded by the government and foreign organisations will be increased,
and corruption will be reduced, and good governance will be established. The
right to information has been ensured under the Act and directives have been
given to the organisations to preserve information.
The Act has ensured access to important information of the state. The
accessibility of government-held information is an important part of
government transparency and accountability to its citizens and good
governance. However, seeking and receiving information that may jeopardise
the security of the state is not permissible in the Act. For example, the Act
iS does not allow access to questions before the public examinations because the
N

40 Information and Communication Technology
exam processes will become controversial. The secrecy of question papers is
secured through ‘Right to Information Act’. If technical, technological, or
scientific information is leaked out, the organisations stand to lose financially.
In this connection, keeping the information secret is not the violation of the
tule. The most important factor is that any information that may pose a threat
to the security, unity and sovereignty of the state is not obligatory to reveal
under this act.

Under section 7 of the Act, the authority is not obliged to provide certain

information, such as:

(i) Any information that poses threat to the the security, integrity, and
sovereignty of Bangladesh; if disclosed;

(ii) Any information in relation to the foreign policy, disclosure of which may
jeopardise the relationship with foreign countries, international
organisations, local bodies, and organisations;

(iii) Any confidential information received from the foreign governments;

(iv) Any confidential sensitive business information, the disclosure of which
may violate the intellectual property right of the third-party and any
information in relation to Copy Right and Intellectual Property Right;

a. any advance information of tax, revenues, VAT, excise duty, budget, or
tax rate changes;

b. any advance information on changes in currency exchange rate or tax
Tate;

c. any advance information in relation to administration and management
of banks and other commercial organisations;

(v) information, for the disclosure of which may hinder implementation of
law or increase the rate of crime;

(vi) Any information, the disclosure of which may hamper the safety and
security of population and may impede a due judicial process;

(vii) Any information, the disclosure of which may disturb the privacy of
individual personal life;
(viii) Any information, the disclosure of which may endanger individual life
and physical safety
eo
(ix) Any classified information given to law enforcement agencies; s

Safe and Ethical Use of Information and Communication Technology 41
But, it has been laid down in section - 8(9) of the act, that, any information
should not be refused by the authority only for the reason that, it is related with
the information the disclosure of which is not compulsory rather the
information should be separated reasonably and delivered to the applicant.
General Troubleshooting
This experience is very unusual that electronic devices have not gone out of
order or not created troubles during using. Some problems are very usual, and
some are unusual and complicated. Usual problems can be fixed by the usres,
but they have to take the help of experienced people for complicated problems.
Computer or ICT devices are not exceptions. Those who use electronic devices
have noticed that an operating manual is given with every device. The manual
contains a section on the last two or three pages, entitled, ‘trouble shooting’.
Troubleshooting is the process of finding out the source of troubles. Usually
some questions are given with solutions. The users, according to the nature of
problems, solve it following the solutions.
In fact, trouble-shooting is a systematic process of identifying the source of
problem in the ICT devices in order to solve it. In the manual, usually some
possible problems and solutions in relation to the ICT device are mentioned.
The users, following the basic trouble-shooting steps given in the manual, can
usually resolve the problem in most of the cases. Usually the word
‘Troubleshooting’ is used for hardware related problems. Some
troubleshootings are discussed below:

= Name . Pe ,

™ a x me = 2 -

42 Information and Communication Technology
1. | Computer isnot |1. Check the main power cable whether the
. connection is loose or not.
starting up. 2. Check whether there is power on the main power-board.
3. If there is no power on the main power-board,
change the main power supply unit.
4. Take the device to the local service centre and
consult an expert.service centre.
2 Nothing is 1. Turn off the system and unplug the power cable
viewed on the from tha main system.
monitor 2. Remove the RAM from the slots.
though the 3. Clean up the connectors of the RAM rubbing with
system Is: an eraser.
running.
9 4, Clean up the slot of the RAM with a hard brush.
5. Turn on the computer without installing the RAM,
and notice whether you get any beep sound.
6. If you get any beep sound, turn off the computer,
and again turn on after installing the RAM.
7. If you get any beep sound, you have to understand
that the RAM is faulty.
8. Install a new RAM if there is no display yet.
9. Install the RAM, and check again. Faulty RAM is the
reason for at least half of the display problems.
3. The system 1. Open the Casing.
becomes very |2. Remove the CPU or processor fan from the
heated, and motherboard, but don't remove the processor.
abruptly shuts |3. Perhaps the heat sink is filled with dust that creates
down. obstruction on the free flow of air. As a result, CPU
can not be cool.
4. Clean up Heat sink and the fan, and install again.
Now, after closing the cabinet, turn on the computer
again.
5. If the problem is not solved, take the computer to a
service centre, and talk to an experienced
mechanic. x
N

Safe and Ethical Use of Information and Communication Technology 43
The computer |1. Check the mother board carefully and find out if
shuts shown on there is any leaking or faulty capacitor has got
its own at every loosened. Tighten the capacitor and the problem will
few minutes, be resolved.
but it is not 2. Notice very carefully as the computer is running
heated. ‘

whether any IC or any other component producing
extra heat. Be cautious. Let not the board be shorted.
If it happens, go to the nearest service centre.
5; The device 1. Check whether there is any virus in the hard disk by
hangs while running an upgraded anti-virus.

Konan the 2. Taking the back up of important data from the disk,
Windows. format 'C' drive, and install Windows fresh. It
should be done with an expert.

Display hangs |1. 1st Step: Turning off the power button and
when the opening the caching, remove carefully the
power button is data-cables and power-cables connected to hard
turned on. disk, CD-ROM, and DVD, and after reconnecting
the cables, restart the computer. If the problem

persists?

2. 2nd Step: Check RAM, processor, power supply
connection separately whether they are faulty or
loosely connected. If the problem persists?

3. 3rd Step: Check the motherboard using the
processor, RAM Hard disk and other related
equipments from an active computer. If it is not
active, change the motherboard. Get the job done
by an expert hand or taking the computer to a
service centre.

Note: Sometimes this problem persists when the
keyboard and the mouseport of the motherboard
are loosely connected. Set the connection

S properly.

44 Information and Communication Technology
[Sinos.| Problems | __GeneralSolutions
7, | Thecomputer |1. If the cooling fan set over the CPU does not move
repeatedly acts or cool the system properly, this promlem occurs.
frozen, and In that case, switch off the power, and opening the
reboot cooling fan, check it out. If the fan is faulty, replace
automatically. it. Besides, check the fan behind the CPU while the
computer is running.

2. Theproblem persists if the computer has any virus.
Clean up every drive of the hard disk by running
an upgraded anti-virus. Besides, it happens due to
the installation of new hardware or programme. In
that case, uninstall the programme and run the
computer.

Getting electric | 1. If you get electric shock touching the metal part of

shock when the computer, it is certain that the computer has

eines not earthed. Calling a skilled electrician, get the

the computer. computer properly earthed.

The date ofthe |1. If the CMOS (Complementary metal-oxide

rightly viewed semiconductor) battery of the motherboard loses

all thé time or if power, this problem occurs. In that case, set a new

ane cane of CMOS battery on the motherboard.

changed, it is

not properly

saved.

Showing 1. Switching off the power, open the caching, and
\ check the data cable connected motherboard and

message ‘Boot hard disk drive, and check the connecting point of

Disk failure’ or the power cable from power supply unit to hard

‘Hard disk not disk and properly connect it.

found. 2. Set the jumper properly following the jumper

setting diagram on the back of the hard disk.

3. Entering the BIOS, check whether the hard disk is
detected from the options of the BIOS either
manually or automatically. If the problem is not
resolved, connect your hard disk to a sound
computer and check whether it works or not. If the
problem persists, buy a new hard disk and install
the programmes you require. Get the job done by %
an expert hand. ES

Safe and Ethical Use of Information and Communication Technology 45
SI nos. General Solutions

11, | Showing 1, Usually these messages are shown when you install
messages like excess programmes, and work keeping a lot of
‘Out of programmes open.
memory’ or 2. If the computer does not have sufficient memory
‘Not enough for installing excess programmes, this problem
Memory’, occurs. Additinal RAM can be installed in the

motherboard to resolve the problems.

12. | The keyboard is 1. Shut down the computer, and check whether the
not working. keyboard is properly connected to the port.

2. If it is not properly connected or the connection is
found loose, refix it and turn on the computer
again.

3. Clean up the virus running anti-virus software.

4. If the problem is not fixed yet, install a new
keyboard.

13. | The mouse is 1. Check the connecting-cable of the mouse to the
not detecting computer, and check again refixing it.
anything. 2. Change the port to see whether it works.

3. Connecting a new mouse to the port, check it
again.

4, Entering the BIOS check whether the mouse is
disabled. If so, enable it, and come out of the BIOS.

5. If the problem persists, connect a new mouse to
the computer. The problem will be resolved.

14. | No power is 1. Be surewhether the power button is turned on.
viewed onthe |>° Check the AC power cord connected properly to
monitor. the power outlet behind the monitor.

4
8

46 Information and Communication Technology
15. | The power of 1. Check the video cable whether it is properly
the monitor is connected to the computer or not. If the other
viewed on, but point of the video cable is not permanently
there is no connected to the monitor, fix it firm.
displayonthe | > Adjust Brightness and Contrast.
monitor.
The printer is 1. Check the power cable connected to the printer.
not giving any | 2. Check whether the button of the printer is turned on.
printing output. | 3. Check if the data cable of the printer connected
properly to the computer.
4. Opening the cover of the printer, find out whether
any paper is jammed inside the machine.
5. Check whether the cartridge contains any ink.
Remove the cartridge, and fix again after shaking
it well.
6. If red or yellow blinking light is shown, press the
reset button of the printer.
7. If the problem is not resolved, install the driver
sofware supplied with the printer.
8. Consultan experienced hardware expert.
Group Activity
Discuss what other problems a computer may have besides the ones
listed above. Identify some solutions to these problems.
Exercise
1. What happened when the number of temporary files increases?
A. Computer runs slow. B. Computer runs fast.
C. Antivirus does not work. D. Internet-access is denied.
2. Which programme runs fast while installing a piece of Software from CD,
DVD or Pendrive?
A. Set up B. Autorun ge
C. Read me D. Restart BS

Safe and Ethical Use of Information and Communication Technology 47
3. Which one is the resource of the modern world?
A. Information B. Data
C. Computer D. The Internet
4. Installation of software requires attention on whether_
i. It supports the hardware or not.
ii. The antivirus software is closed or not.
iii. It has the permission of administrator or not.
Which one is correct?
a. iii b. i& iii
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
Read the section below, and answer the question numbers 5 & 6:
Mr. Ekram has been noticing for some days that his computer restarts after
being shut down at irregular intervals. He remembers that it happens after
copying a song from the Pendrive of his friend a few days ago.
5. The error responsible for the computer might be ?
A. Operating system software _B. Virus Software
C. Utility Software D. Antivirus Software
6. For this reason, the computer of Mr. Ekram_
i. May show an unexpected message.
ii. May show a sudden increase in the file size.
iii. May show that it has insufficient memory.
Which one is correct?
a. iii b. i& iii
c. ii & iii d. i, ti & iii
7. One of your friends play computer games frequently. What negative impact
may this have on him? Discuss.
8. 'It is very important to know about the troubleshooting of computer’?
% Explain the statement with supporting argument.
&

Third Chapter
The Internet in My Education
_— SSS Se = = |
After completing this chapter, we will be able to:

> Explain the concept of digital content,

> Enplain the significance of the Internct in education;

} Identify the fields of using the Internet in academic curriculum;

> Explain the importance of ICT in career development; and

> Maks a presentation on a topic you have studied with the help of

Internet.
5

Use of Spreadsheet 49
Digital Content

If any content is preserved, expressed or exchanged as digital data, that is
digital content, however it can be preserved either in digital or in analogue
system. Digital contents can be exchanged either as files of the computer or of
the digital system. Written information, images, sounds or videos everything
could be digital contents,

Types of Digital Content

Any information, image, sound or everything expressed through digital media
are digital contents though it can be divided into four major categories:

¢ Text or written content;

« Image;

¢ Sound or audio and

* Video and animation.

Text or written content: The written content is still voluminous in digital
media. It includes all kinds of written information, such as essays, blogposts,
list of commodities and citizen's charter, prices of commodities, e-paper,
reports, etc.

Image: All kinds of pictures, photographs, sketches, computer images such as
illustrations, cartoons, info-graphics, animated pictures are the contents of this
sort.

Sound or audio: All the contents of sound or audio are included in this
content. Any kind of audio file along with the broadcast on the Internet and
webinar are audio content.

Video and animation: Any kind of video and animation is its content. The
volume of video content is increasing day by day, as nowadays mobile phones
also have the ability to record video. Similarly, the volume of video content in
the Internet is gradually increasing for the video sharing site like youtube.
Besides, direct airplay of some events is very frequent on the Internet. It is
called 'Video Streaming' which is also regarded as a video content.

E-book

E-book or electronic book is the electronic format of the printed book. As it is
published through electronic medium, sound, animation, etc. can easily be
added to it. This books can only be read either by using computer or e-book
reader. Kindle of Amazon.com is the most popular of all e-book readers.

50 Information and Communication Technology

Benefits of Using E-book

1. Information may be accessed instantly by downloading e-books.

2. E-books do not require any library or specific space for storage. They can
easily be saved and stored on a computer or in a reading device.

3. E-books are easily transferrable.

4. It is easy to find out information in e-books.

5. As e-books can be purchased through Internet, they do not incur any
shipping or packaging costs.

6. E-books are easy to distribute and sell.

7. E-books can be printed out according to individual demand, and hence, they
are financially more viable.

Nowadays, different kinds of e-books are found. Different publication requires
different e-book format. Usually e-books are divided into the following five
categories:

¢ Exact copy of a printed version: These books are like the printed version of
a book. It is published in the pdf (portable document format) format. The
complete text or parts are available on the internet.

¢ E-books that are only readable on the internet: These books are usually
published in the HTML. This is called the website of books.

« E-books like printed version with some additional facilities: In these books,
the readers have the facilities to comment, to know word meaning. Most of
the books are published in (EPUB) format. These books are possible to
read by using special device, for example, ibooks compatible fields and
ibook reader, but field and ibook reader have their own format.

¢ Smart e-book: Audio, video, animation, etc. are included in these books
besides the written part. These books are called smart-e-books. Its content
is enriched with interactive multimedia features. For example, there are
quizzes, spaces to answer the quizzes, and options to check the answers.
3D images are added to these e-books. However, some e-books are
formatted in such a way that they can be accessed with a specific electronic
device and hardware. For example, ibooks created by Apple computers can
only be read with ipad or mac computer.

¢ Apps of e-book: The e-book itself is published as an apps on the computer
or on the mobile phone. E-book, like the printed version, is published under.
the Copyright Act. s

Use of Spreadsheet 51
The Internet in Education
We discussed ‘e-learning’ in a previous chapter where we showed how
education and training can be imparted by using radio, television, CD-ROM,
personal network, the internet. In this chapter, we will have discussions
especially on the role of Internet in education.
Now you are very much familiar with the word ‘Internet’. Many people are
using the internet. This technology has brought about a significant change to
the world, and some infrastructural facilities and financial solvency are
required to use it. Either a desktop or a laptop computer is necessary to use the
internet. It is expensive and cannot be afforded by the majority of the
population. Nowadays mobile phone technology has been upgraded and
‘Smartphone’, which can provide the internet facilities, is within the reach of
most people. However, the smart phone is not always an effective tool for
educational purposes. The screen of the mobile phone is so small that its use is
confined within the limit of viewing and exchanging information. A recent
invention, tablet — an electronic device typically smaller than a laptop, but
larger than a smartphone, can be used in education easily. Many companies are
designing applications suitable for tablet to use in education.
We can not avail of the internet facilities just having the desktop, laptop, tablet
or smartphone suitable for the internet-use. An internet connection is required
for that, but it is not equally available in all the places of the country. The
speed is not the same even. Sometimes a slow-speed internet makes its use
meaningless. On top of it, fast and high speed internet service cannot be
afforded by the general people of our country. Therfore, the students should
get the internet connection at low cost to use it in education.
Our students’ access to laptop or tablet and high speed internet will not ensure
the use of ICT for their education. The main question is what what they will
use in the internet. Is there any content suitable for them? In fact, there is not
much content available on the Internet in the Bangla language. Initiatives have
been taken by the Government, organisations, and individuals for developing
content in Bangla. We expect to get it very soon in the internet.
Many educational contents are now available on the internet. If any student can
not understand anything while studying, he/she is sure to get any solution by
giving a search on the internet. If any student wants to learn anything, he/she
3 will find it on the internet. The technologists of our country have successfully
g

52 Information and Communication Technology
made effective search engines.
There are useful websites for mathematics on the Internet in which the answers
of any mathematical problem can be solved. There are websites for watching
practical of scientific experimentations. Expertise groups are formed with
enthusiastic people, and when problems are placed before them, they solve it.
There are also some useful sites available on the Internet for teaching Bangla.
A vast world of knowledge on the Internet is still unexplored. When we start
exploring it, we will discover a completely new world.
The Internet and My Academic Subjects
Perhaps you hear that a teacher is like the flame of a light, and in darkness,
they kindle the light of knowledge that illumines everywhere and the students
see the ways in the light and learn what they want to. In other words, the best
teachers in the world can not teach anything, but they can only help the
learners and they themselves learn everything.
Similarly, access to and good content on the Internet will not always ensure
great learning experiences and sound education for students. Internet only
provides them with the opportunity to open a new world of knowledge. It
depends on the students themselves how much they learn from it. You must
have come across students who waste time on the Internet, either by playing
computer games and being engaged in social communication sites. By contrast,
some students learn computer programming availing of the opportunity.
You have certainly noticed that all of Activity
your textbooks are available on the ;
internet. In the beginning of the year, Bw ees ve Bind : people be

f ._ | benefited by using digital content?
you get the textbooks, but if any book is : re
either lost or damaged for some reasons, nie Sey Nee Le woe

: ing help from the Internet.

you can download it from the internet.
You will be pleased to know that some enthusiastic educationalists of our
country have started making oral versions of the textbooks in soft copies, so
that the blind students can be benefitted from these oral versions.
NCTB publishes all the textbooks and sends it to you free of cost. Besides,
many supporting books are also written (we are not talking of the guide books
that actually do not contribute to learning). Those who write these textbooks
upload them on the Internet. Students can download these books directly fom,
the internet without purchasing from the market. Many writers of the world $

Use of Spreadsheet 53
have arranged their books available on the internet. If you surf the internet, you
will get your favourite books free of cost. However, you should be cautious
about downloading any book preserved online, keeping in consideration the
Copyright Laws.
We know that our sstudents are not satisfied with what they get in the
textbooks. Therefore, they open science, mathematics or literary clubs. Once,
students could participate in the activities of the clubs physically, but now they
access the clubs virtually open on the Internet. Now students of the whole
world can participate in the activities of the clubs and increase their academic
competence.
My Career and ICT
In future, it will impossible to think of a day without ICT. Because of the
multifarious use of ICT, it will become an important factor in appointing
employees or establishing new business firms.
You should be careful to develop expertise in ICT for your own career. It will
be simply impossible to get any job without having preliminary skills in office
software, internet, e-mail, social networking system, etc. The demand of
programming, designing website, expertise in specialized job like the security
of computer, etc. will increased. Therefore, the prospect of ICT as a career is
undoubtedly bright. You should give effort in enhancing the skills in ICT
henceforth. ICT is a great field for developing career in the world. Computer is
the main requisite of ICT. The potentiality of ICT in providing new avenues for
numerous computer-related jobs is beyond imagination. Computer science,
computer engineering, office automation system design, artificial intelligence,
robotic engineering, mobile communication, data communication — these are
only a few of the thousand possible sectors that lead to successful career in
ICT.
The wide scope of programming is extending in Bangladesh like other
countries. The demand of programming is high right now. Everything is being
computerized. Programmes are made by software. Different applications of
smartphone are created by programming. The technology advances so quickly
that one day the television, refrigerator, air-condition, etc. of home would be
controlled staying at office. The symptom of diseases can be detected by the
mobile devices. The size of electronic devices are getting smaller, but their
xo efficiency and performance are increasing. It will gradually increase. The
& control of everything including kitchen to satellite will be within the reach of

54 Information and Communication Technology
human being. All will be controlled through computer programming.
The efficient programmers of our country are now working for the world
famous companies like Google, Microsoft, Intel, Facebook, etc. on freelancing
sites. Besides, skilled programmers can open software farms if they want.
Programming as a profession has a special importance. There are wide scopes
to prove one’s efficiency through participating in different online programming
contests. Thus these contests have created opportunities for university
graduates from Bangladesh to work in the universities of Bangladesh,
opportunities have been availed such as Microsoft, Google, and Facebook.
Every year, many students of our country by using their talents make strong
position in these renowned companies. In most of the cases, they do not need
to apply for the job. These companies find out skilled programmers from
different countries.
There are other job facilities especially available in the ICT sector. It provides
the scope of doing office from home. The renowned companies in developed
countries, because of unavailability of skilled workers in their own countries,
offer job opportunities to the skilled workers in developing countries. The
workers of our country are of global standard. Now the programmers and other
ICT professionals of our country are working through the Internet for the
renowned companies of America, Canada, Britain, etc.
Patience is required for working freelance, and proficiency in the English
language is necessary for communication. Besides, ICT provides opportunities
for working in computer network. The companies using servers of their own
need experts for developing computer network and maintenance. That is why it
has a very good prospect in job market. The demand of ICT increases day by
day in this age of information and communication technology. It is forecasted
that the demand will be doubled by the next 2-3 years.
Some software companies have already been established in Bangladesh. They
are exporting their software and mobile apps to other countries of the world. It
is an honour for us. The younger generation is entering the profession. This
sector needs more skilled workers in future. Therefore, the prospect of ICT as a
career is undoubtedly bright. You should try to enhance your skill in ICT
considering all these factors.

2

8

Use of Spreadsheet 55
Exercise
1. Which one is essential to excess the website?
A. Desktop PC B. Tablet PC
C. Smartphone D. The Internet Connection
2. Which one is the constituent part of Information and Communication
Technology?
A. Computer B. Television
C. The Internet D. Smartphone
3. Digital contents are_
i. e-books, Blogposts and e-articles
ii. Info graphics and Animated Film
iii. Audio and Video Streaming
Which one is correct?
a. i&ii b. i & iii
c. ii & iii d. i, ti & iii
Read the section below, and answer the questions 4 & 5:
The father of Rini and Rony purchased a Tablet PC for them. Rini and Rony
read in class IX and X respectively.
4. The best use of the Tablet PC for Rimi and Rony will be for -
A. Playing games B. Listening to music
C. Calculation D. Study
5. For the highest use of the Tablet PC, Rimi and Rony will need-
i. a faster internet connection
ii. cheaper internet service
iii. better skills in the English language.
Which one is correct?
a. i&ii b. i & iii
c. ii & iii d. i, ti & iii
6. How can ICT be helpful for building up our career? Explain.
7. ‘Now it is impossible to study without the help of the Internet,’ explain with
S supporting argument.

Fourth Chapter
My Writings and Accounts
al we PR ac sane acd uace nes ALS a 5134 a aires
ee oy WL i fe. karin
. = 2 Dey Seq Cscta . fet
|| Ll co [oo
= (eal
Week? Weel Week
2, 19H (tact) ie fon
PC F(T) Ee ewe g erp Pew teh eg ae ce ree eA om Wier eT a Pe ta |
{ofa ee it een epi Det raewP Pa O «et Sey aft crmten veer « miter ey ee , \ uy
0g ee cea ay oer ee a eee 2 _—_———| —_—
| Ose
1 9 ete ety ree te eerie cee whe rmae wt qe Sea beter her cere wate ate, cel ner 1
(ane Sewer er me 4 TR eyipe eae Feerae TN eee ERE Dem adem oa epee Hftpe eet | lee | Ital | | dew
eh ree ge fe Seve er 9 cree eh Late Deve ener wpe freee entes es Sa vey tee, vee | |
{een cee eign mu Sr exis Ser meee A ees, crt open ve py Sey ore yee eed eect hy
uy De, ere «ep ere cx eh eet cen we men ey enter ean iy age ee ere he eve ee a 7 hat f 1 im
After completing this chapter, we will be able to:
> Explain the important aspects of word processor;
> Describe the technique of using word processor;
> Explain the important aspects of spreadsheet;
> Idnetify the fields of using spreadsheet;
> Describe the technique of using spreadsheet;
> Edit by using word processor; and
> Keep the details of account by using spreadsheet.
=
Rg

Use of Spreadsheet 57
My Writings on Word Processor

Writing is a medium of expression. We have to write for different needs. It
might be a piece of literature like poem, short story, novel, diary, etc. In our
daily life, we have to maintain different kinds of accounts, both big and small,
like expenditures of daily necessities, house rent and result sheet of
examination, etc. Once, writing and keeping these accounts were very difficult,
but now we have a lot of software for doing these works for the development
of information and communication technology. These software are called office
software. These software can be used in our desktop, laptop and smartphone.
We have word processor for writing and spreadsheet analysis software. You
have got preliminary ideas about these in the previous class. Now you will get
advanced ideas regarding these topics.

Writing of anything means bringing the imaginary world to reality in words.
We know the history that human beings started the art of writing to
communicate their thoughts and their ideas and convey their imagination to
others. Now ICT is being used in this work, and the importance of word
processing is immense in this regard. Something written is required for
receiving and presenting information on television, mobile phone or computer.
Now all types of writing are done by the help of the word processor. The word
processor provides lots of facilities in terms of writing.

¢ The writing job can be done correctly. Any correction in writing can be
done immediately. Because of the varieties of editing options, any piece of
writing can be presented aesthetically.

* A piece of writing can be presented in different ways, for example, by
enlarging or shortening the font-size, colouring, making box, etc.

* There is the facilities of inserting new paragraphs, deleting parts or
rearranging the whole writing without composing the piece of writing from
the begining.

¢ A document can be more attractive by inserting photographs, graphs, tables,
charts, etc.

¢ A document can be saved and used again at any time. The same work need
not be done repeatedly.

¢ Any part of a document can be copied to another one if necessary.

58 Information and Communication Technology
¢ Itis possible on work with several documents simultaneously.

¢ By using find-replace command, a word in a big document can be found
and replaced quickly.

* When a document is needed to use repeatedly, it can be saved as template to
avoid the wastage of time. For example, if it is required to prepare
lab-report every week, it can be saved as template to use again and again.

¢ In a large document, such as, in a research paper, tables, references, images,
bibliography, etc. can be inserted and edited within a very short time.

* Spelling errors can be corrected easily by the spell-checker. Automatic
correction of spelling is also possible in the word processor with its built-in
programmes.

« It is possible to print a document as many times as required by saving it.

* A document can be sent to any destination through the medium of
electronic communication.

¢ Files prepared in word processor can be preserved easily.

¢ files, an indispensable part of the modern office management, has become
easier for the word processor.

Besides, the word processing software provides more facilities. The number of
users are gradually increasing day by day for its usefulness.
In the previous class, you learnt the process of creating and opening new
document in word processor. Now we will learn some new technics for which
you need to use your previously earned knowledge and skills.
Office Buttons and Its Options On
A new window will open after running word 2007. This “3. icon at the left
corner above this window is the office button. The options you will find by
clicking the button are shown in the following image:
~
8

Use of Spreadsheet 59
= ©) 5 == : ——
Set a = 5 tom —
Home Insert ba + Son
—— es fy . [aeons
S J Format Painter =~” > | eee
a Busines: Contact Manager * Mank.coc:
Clipboard ae |...
The following options are most important:
New: This button is to be clicked for opening a new document.
Open: It is to be clicked to open a document saved previously.
Save: To save a document, this button is to be clicked.
Save as: This button is to be clicked to save a document in several different
names keeping the original one.
Close: This button is to be clicked to close an opened document,
Formatting Text: Selecting Font Style and Colour
You have already learnt how to write using a word processor. What will be the
impression if an organised piece of writing is presented in a colourful way?
Certainly, it will look good. This task is called Formatting Text.'
3) \ ied : | Font Style Font Size
i@ / ay we —
Co = _1t-_ aie
Pas prormat roiter |B FU ~ abe x, xe Aa |? [AW] |
S — Ee
Pt

60 Information and Communication Technology
There are letters of different styles in a word processor. Those are called 'Font'.
In formatting a text, selection of font comes first. This selection is done from
the name of the font of font group from the drop-down box on the home-menu.
Pick the font that you like out of numerous fonts. Sometimes, it is required to
use fonts of different styles either to highlight or specify words or phrases. In
that case, the requisite section of writing, select the font in the similar way.
Click the number from the dropdown box at the right side of font box to
determine the font size. You can select the font colour as you like. Clicking on
the icon of the dropdown box of font group, the colour can be selected. There
are more facilities of fonts in the font group of home tab.
Activity
Composing a paragraph from your textbook in the word processor, format it by
using different font style, size and colour and finally save the document giving a
name.
Formatting Text: Bullets, Numbering and Line Spacing
Our Fruits Our Rivers
* Mango 1. The Padma
+ Blackberry 2. The Meghna
wi 3. The Jamuna
* Litchi 4. The Surma
* Jackfruit 5. The Bhairab
* Coconut 6. The Tista
Sometimes we make lists of different things, and use either signs, or letters or
numbers to maintain serials. This is called bullets and numbering in the word
processor. —SS_—_=_—_—ssssSea
There are icon command of bullets and f= f=] iz |= \(21\( 1]
numbering in the pragraph group of home == el aan jl
| Paragraph fa
) Geo 1-5 TIN) 2 cs a
| Ee se)2- 5)
J Paragray =| Line Spacing : This tool is used to determine the
space between two lines. a
g

Use of the Internet In Education and Dally Life 61
Activity
Write down the names of some of your favourite cricket players by using
bullets and numbering.
Formatting Text : Table and Different Mlustration
The insert tab of ribbon is used to insert a table, image, clip art, different
shapes, chart text box, word art, etc. into a document.
TS ree) ver [elena anim a A Pn Tai Ba = =
06 Serene |S ee jz a) AS) 4 2S
2 @= NN Click the (1) Insert tab on the = —
@ SAS). ot @ ) Tibbon of word 2007 to adda |) weave 2
= @- “=> table. (2) Then click table [m=
‘Siseeeeecsl and click (3) Insert table. 9 a jst cnn: 7
BS =-- == where you have to select the [| mcrontermersorsternen mties
steeeeenssl number of columns and a
i |e
~ i pateees . | Make a group of 10 students, and arenge the name,
Sepia s Dans ae aca numer cr ew student ina
Insert Picture =
By inserting picture document ===
can be presented in attractive [ltl
way. For example, you ate Insert | Pagelayout References —Mailings
watching a lot of pictures =|  » els) —) =
along with writings in this =) ||) (Leal ge) (P22) gi
text, You have to click the Page | Table Picture Clip Shapes SmartArt Chart
insert tab of the ribbon of = ais ~ —
word 2007. Then click the
picture icon of illustration group. A dialogue box will come. Select a space for
& the picture and the picture will be inserted into the document. Besides,

62 Information and Communication Technology
facilities of inserting clipart, shapes, smart art, chart, etc. are provided in the
illustration group.
Activity
Insert a picture in the document prepared by you with the
help of your teacher.
Insert Word Art
— —— You can insert fonts of different
Ao Eo i “"*" styles from the insert tab, and to
ce et ost os | — choose your style, you have to click
— mig, word art of insert tab's text group. A
sis ine eicad 1° dialogue box will come, and you
=e || ___| will get the desired style of your
— text after selecting the font.
Setting up Margin
(CURRENT 1 is required to click the page lay
Insert | “Page Layout | References Mailings Rey OUt tab of the ribbon to determine
= By = f=} Breaks ~ the margins of the text. Then
Be I =] mn lineNumbess~ Clicking the margin icon, desired
Margins Orientation Sue Columns iE ypbenation = a ig to be set. Diff t i
BE Bape See “ of margins will be on the screen
when you click on the margin icon. You can select the margin from the options
of use your own margin clicking the custom margin.
Activity :1
Render the name of your school in different styles of word art.
Activity : 2
Set the margin after preparing a document.
Line Spacing of Paragraph
Click the page lay out tab to -
select the space between lines ee - : one ~
of a document. It is needed to 1 9 = ance ales ed
select the points before and  * Right 0 Bi tl AS |
after lines inspacing of PR

Use of the Internet in Education and Daily Life 63
paragraph group. The command can be given after composing the document. In
that case, first the section of the document in which line spacing will be
inserted should be selected. Then it can be determined as per the instructions
given above.
Activity
Compose a ea from either from your Bengali or English textbook and
determine the line spacing.
Insert Page Number
Inserting page number on every page is an | a "EY Ala4
important task while composing any document. °° ndnoa- tor Bans
Clicking the page number of header and footer === 9 Se
group in the insert tab on the ribbon, the right | boce aris ‘
option can be chosen. You can insert page number a —_ - 2
either on the top or at the bottom of the page. Seren:
Activity
Save a document composed by you giving page number.
=
8

64 Information and Communication Technology
Spreadsheet and My Accounts
Analysis of Spreadsheet
You are very much familiar with the use of spreadsheet in class VII. Can you
remember the specialities of this programme? Let us have a look again on what
the specialities of spreadsheet analysis are.
Specialities of Spreadsheet Analysis:
c i D i = i a Ss
5
a 2aneOOE] Sheets Shen hese =<, i
— It is possible to work with statistics and letter-based data;
— It is advantageous for any kind of accounts;
— Classification is easier for the rows and columns;
— It is possible to work with voluminous data by using formulae;
— Analysis of data can easily be done by using different functions
methodically;
— Data can be presented with impressive graphs, charts, etc.
Different uses of Spreadsheet
A spreadsheet is an interactive computer application software used for
organisation, analysis and storage of data in tabular forms.
Different uses of spreadsheet are given below:
1, analysing exam results in the education sector;
2. maintaining income and expenditure accounts;
3. preparing budgets
4. maintaining records of employee salaries
§. making reservations for services, such as airlines
6. calculating and analysing income tax
7. counting votes in elections 3
8. analysing and evaluating performances of players

Use of the Internet in Education and Daily Life 65
Technique of Using Spreadsheet
You have already got some fundamental concepts of spreadsheet. You will get
advanced ideas in this book.
Multiplying
Put formula in the result cell for multiplying in spreadsheet. Formula always
start with "=" equal to. Multiplying process is of two kinds:
f=)
rr Monthly Shopping Eapendire gf 1. Usually press the enter
2 Precinct Name Price (tk) Quantity (Kg) Expenditure button, after putting the
- ia 2 |__ 700 | formula into the result cell.
2. Press enter button writing spreadsheet function= PRODUCT in the result
cell and giving the cell range.
D8 fe =PRODUCT(B3:c3)
ls A {8 |, c er, ey |
1 | Monthly Shopping Expenditure
2 ProductName Price (tk) Quantity (Kg) Expenditure
2 4 #
4|
The facility of multiplying by using function is that the result of multiplication
of numerous cells can be done by range, if necessary. The process of
multiplying 3 cells is shown in the picture below:
| Ds | =PRODUCT(A3:C3)
re ee ee ee
4 Volume of Cube
2) Length Width Height Volume
a
Activity
Opening a file of spreadsheet, multiply some imaginary data.

66 Information and Communication Technology
Method of Dividing
Dividing can also been done on the spreadsheet by a formula. You have to
write '=A1/B1' in the result cell to divide Al by B1. Here the sign / is used as
the sign of division.
C3 . Cade] =A3/B3 roe
ad i a Try to find out the
1 April 2014 | result by using the
= ~ __ | formula.
2) Monthly Income Number of Days ) Daily Income
Calculation of Percentage
How much is 15% of Tk 400? What is the selling price at profit 16% at the
purchasing cost Tk 1200? We frequently need to do these sorts of calculations
in our practical life. We can do these calculations on the spreadsheet.
zr Seas To solve the first problem by
ey ee ee | spreadsheet, put formula =A3*B3% in
— Tex cuciiicsn, | the result cell. The process of writing the
ee es | «formula in the result cell by using
= * [2] keyboard is to write the sign = and click
- a *~ the cell where 400 is
written. Then press * and click the cell where 15 is written. Then writing %
{press shift key and 5), press enter button. You will get your result.
The formula =A3*B3%+A3 should be used to solve the second problem. The
process of writing this formula is similar to the process mentioned above.
Activity
Solve the problems of calculating percentage under the guidance of your
teachers.
The monthly basic salary of Mr. Chowdhury is Tk 16500. He draws residential
allowance at the rate of 55% and medical allowance Tk 700. He subscribes Tk
90 to the benevolent fund. What is his monthly net salary? S
N

Use of the Internet in Education and Daily Life 67
Exercise
1. Why is a document saved as a template?
A. For Aesthetics B. For frequent use
C. For rearrangement D. For the facilities of making copies
2. Which one of the following is used for saving the document for the first time?
A. New B. Open
C. Save D. Save As
3. Using spreadsheet analysis __
i. preparing text is easier.
ii. theory can be applied.
iii. data can be arranged.
Which one is correct?
a. i&ii b. i & iii
c. ii & iti d. i, ii & iii
Read the section below, and answer the question nos. 4 & 5:
Soumitra writes on nature and environment for newspaper voluntarily.
Sometimes he has to attach picture of flowers, birds, or rivers. He is an
accountant by profession. He has to keep the account of the employee and
place monthly report.
4. Which software Soumitra has to use for his voluntary work?
A. Word Processor B. Spreadsheet
C. Graphics D. Database
5. In his professional work, Soumitra has to use _
i. The template.
ii. Theory.
iii. Data arrangement.
Which one is correct?
a. i&ii b. i & iii
c. it & iti d. i, ti & iii
6. What kind of formatting is used in word processor for making a list?
ie Describewith examples.
s 7. Write five advantages of analysing spreadsheet.

68 Information and Communication Technology
Fifth Chapter
Concept of Multimedia
hy — Samed —*)6 |S eee ra BIS SIG AB hogy ng MT
Ne canite SE oon OEE A del ORME) Penne: PANE LSet emis pee,
— hr DF ] 1
After completing this chapter, we will be able to:
>» Explain the concept of multimedia;
> Describe the method of multimedia;
> Identify the fields of using multimedia;
>» Explain the idea of presentation software;
> Analyse the significance of presentation software;
> Describe the technique of using presentation software;
> Explain the idea of graphics;
> Describe the technique of using graphics software;
> Make subject- oriented slide by using presentation software and present
it; and
> Draw creative pictures by using graphics software and present it. x
a

Use of the Internet in Education and Daily Life 69
Multimedia and Graphics
Human beings have been using different media to express themselves since the
ancient time. Writing is an expressive medium, so are the sound and image.
Multimedia is the integration of multiple forms of expressive media, such as
texts, graphics, drawings, photographs, videos etc. With the evolution of
civilisation and development in technology, these mediums have been used in
various ways. Specifically in today’s digital era, the nature of these mediums
has also changed.
The media of the analogue age are not the major media of the digital age.
Rather the media of analogue age have been using in a new dimension. Once
the media were used separately, but nowadays they are harmoniously combined
together. The potentiality of multi-media has enhanced with the integration of
programming ability of digital machines. Hence, it is also called ‘interactive
multimedia’ because of its multiple dimensions and different programming
abilities. Interactive multimedia is widely known to people. In one word,
multimedia means numerous media. Interactive media means the media with
which the users can connect and interact.
Multimedia is the combination of different expressive media. We express
ourselves by using, at least, three media which are colour, image and sound.
These three media have various forms too. They appear before us either
individually or collectively. Different kinds of media are known to us as paper
publication, radio, television, video, cinema, video games, educative software,
webpage, etc. We can call television-video-cinema multimedia, but video
games, educative software, and webpage are called interactive multimedia.
Multimedia is usually captured by a digital machine or device. It can be directly
presented on the stage or projected in a different way. Sometimes some electronic
devices are called multimedia to capture the subjects and or directly broadcasted
in different forms. If we want to use three media in one activity, we should start
from cinema. In the last phase of 19th century, in 1895, with the invention of
cinema, text, graphics, sound and movement were added to it. Therefore cinema
is called the earlier invention of multimedia. Even though this form of
multimedia came into being ages ago, the integration of computer to it a quite a
recent development.
Mediums of Multimedia

vey

S We know that computer, the most popular digital device is widely known as

70 Information and Communication Technology
the calculating machine. Processing and transferring data wasanother important
work of computer. Later on, it was widely used for typing.
In the beginning, only one medium was used to do all these works, i.e. text.
However gradually graphics and sound have been added to it. Besides, the
computer has the ability to do programming. In fact, computers are capable of
creating an interactive experience for users with the combination of text,
graphics and sound. Now multimedia promised dynamic experiences than that
of the previous time. Multimedia is used not only in computer, but also in
mobile phone, Smartphone, tablet, and other digital devices.

The main mediums of Multimedia

There is a well-wide preferences for computers and they tend to replace the

conventional machines.

1. Text: Any work is relation to written text is world-wide done on computers.
Once it was done by the typewriter. At present, computers are used for all
kinds of writing tasks in offices to professional printing houses.

2. Graphics: Computers are used for graphics design, editing, and so on. In
our country, the use of computer is very limited in graphics design,
painting, drawing, and even in commercial graphics included in Fine Arts.
However, computers are widely used in printers and packaging industries.
The use of computer started in 1990s in printing, publication and graphics
design. It was first used in editing scanned photos by Photoshop.
Gradually, computers have been used in design and graphics.

2.1 Video: Video is a kind of graphics. It is better to call it a moving graphics.
Video is an established medium all over the world. Video has been
extensively used in TV, Home Video, Multimedia Software, Web, etc.

2.2 Animation: Animation is a kind of graphics. But it can be either
moving or static. It can be either 2D or 3D. The use of animation is
gradually increasing in our country. In advertisement, animation is a
favourite media, but we lack skilled people in this sector. In fact,
animation is never used as a single medium. It is combined with with
audio, video, text, graphics, etc.

3. Sound or Audio: The whole world depends on computer for sound or
audio recordings, editing, etc. Analogue system has completely been
obsolete in sound engineering. Now sound recording can easily be done in =~
computers. S

Use of the Internet in Education and Daily Life 71

Use of Multimedia in ICT

There is an increased use of multimedia in ICT.

1.As teaching aid : The use of multimedia as a teaching aid is widely used.

The learnes will understand a topic easily if multimedia is used in the class

room. The teacher can easily make the lesson effective and interactive.

Besides this, there are multimedia software for education.

1.1. Multimedia Software : The multi-media software has just started
being made in Bangladesh. Multimedia technology has been used in
with ‘Bangladesh-71’, ‘Abosor’, ‘Biswakosh’, ‘Namajshiksha’, ‘Bijoy
Shishushiksha’, etc. They are not much interactive. However, we
expect that in Bangladesh, multimedia software will be definitely
developed extensively in the 21st Century.

1.2. Digital Publication : Our publication is still paper-based, but 21st
century will definitely be the century of digital publication.

2. Entertainment : Multimedia is widely used in most of the genres of
entertainment. Cinemas and plays are being made livelier by the special
effects of multimedia.

3. Advertisement : Because of the use of multimedia, advertisements have
become attractive. Both real and fictional elements can be shown in
advertisements with the help multimedia.

4. Games : Multimedia is extensively used in computer games or video
games. Because of the use of multimedia, the games seem as real as real
life.

The man who works with text, graphics, audio, video, animation, etc. is called

the multimedia contents developer. Many pieces of software like Adobe

Photoshop, 3D Studio Max, Maya, etc. are used for multimedia contents.

However, depending on the content that they develop and the interactive

applications that they use, multimedia contents developers should be called

‘multimedia programmers’ or ‘multimedia authors’. In fact, there is a

difference between developing contents and adding interactivity. Adobe

Premier and Adobe Photoshop can make an interesting piece of multimedia

content. By contrast, in order to make the multimedia content interactive,

‘Director’, a programme of creating software, combines the media made in

‘Premier’ and ‘Photoshop’ and create an interactive application.
N

72 Information and Communication Technology
In this connection, we should know a piece of information about interactivity.
Application of any style, such as Microsoft word scroll or flash, into the text or
any effects of animation into the video does not make the text or video
interactive. Something created by the powerful authoring software like ‘Flash’,
‘Director’, and ‘Authorware’ that makes interaction possible between the user
and the computer is called ‘Interactivity’.
In future, the demand and number of multimedia programmes will definitely never
lessen.The demand of multimedia contents developers and programmers, along
with business software developers and maintenance experts, is also increasing.
Presentation Software
Creating Presentation
It is the age of exchanging information and ensuring human welfare through
free flow of information. Now, the exchanging of information among the
researchers, educationists, social workers, professionals of national and
international levels has been emphasized most. Meetings, seminars,
symposiam, workshops are frequently arranged fln order to ensure free access
to information. As a result, experts have up-to-date information about their
respective fields.
Presentation software like Power Point, Pikasa, Impress etc. are mainly used to
present information in an attractive and effective way in meetings, seminars,
symposiam, workshops. ‘PowerPoint’ is a piece of popular software or
application of Microsoft Office. It is called ‘Presentation Software’ too.
Information can be presented attractively with texts, graphics, audio and video
through Power Point. In fact, right at the moment there is some alternative to
Power Point software. That is why it is widely used for presenting information
in meetings, seminars, symposiums, and workshops.
As a word document in a Microsoft Word Programme, has numerous pages, a
Power Point presentation also has several slides. A page containing more than
one slides is called ‘Handout’. A draft should be made for organized
presentation in Power Point. This draft is called ‘Slide Layout.’
Opening Power Point Programme and Creating Slides
To open Power Point Programme
1. At the left corner below the screen, ‘Start’ is written. It is the ‘Start’ button. x
&

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 73

2. Click the ‘Start’ button taking the mouse pointer on it, and a menu will be
viewed on the screen.

3. Place mouse pointer on ‘All Programs’ command and get a ‘Flyout’ menu.

4. Click ‘Microsoft Office’ menu from this 'Flyout' menu and get the list of all
the programmes of Microsoft Office on another 'Flyout' menu.

5. Select “Microsoft Office Power Point’ ess: sissi=ammsm
command from this list and the first | n= ae ie es!
slide will be shown on the screen, In |— =
the main part of the slide ; ; i

Click to add title —

- ‘Click to add title’ and ‘Click to add Sa fe a
subtitle’ are written on the box. a
Click both the writings and a text —
box will be shown with the insertion .. 0 == j
pointer. Type title and subtitle while azmic= inno
the insertion pointer is in the box. If you click outside the box without
writing anything those two writings will be viewed again.

- Click the textbox border and press delete button after selecting, the textbox
with the writing will be deleted.

- Select textbox icon from the ribbon of ‘Home’ menu and take the insertion
pointer inside the screen and the insertion pointer will be changed into a text
pointer. (create a box, dragging)

- The insertion pointer will be on the box.

- The keyboard will be transformed into ‘Bangla’ for typing in Bangla.

- Select font, fontsize, colour, etc. from the toolbar and ribbon for typing work.

- ‘amit or is typed selecting "So. en ed
Sutonny MJ, font size 150 and blue | : ;
colour. ae |

- The textbox will remain selected
after being typed. There will remain
round and hollow selection points, i |
four on the four arms of the selected crm = enrmeni is eS
box and four on the four corners. Dragging these selection points, the size of
the box can be made small or big either sideways or from top to bottom to

74 Information and Communication Technology

contain texts. The selection will go away if you click outside the box.

- The box can be moved to any place of the screen by clicking any arm of the

box and by dragging it.

- On the left side of the slide making window, the small version of the slide is

shown in thumbnail view.

Saving Presentation

- Give Save command from the file menu, and Save as dialogue box will

come.

- Type the name of the file in Save as dialogue box. Suppose that the name is

“My Country.’

- Click the button ‘Ok’ in the dialogue box, and the presentation will be

saved as ‘My Country’.

- The file can be opened next time to complete the unfinished work.

Adding New Slide

Many slides may be included in a single presentation. To add new slide

1. Select the command of ‘New Slide’ on the ribbon of ‘Home’ menu or Press
Ctrl1+M from the keyboard, a new slide will be added.

- ‘Click to add title’ and ‘Click to add text’ will be shown in the newly added
slide. Both the writings will be deleted following the previous directives.
The small version of the newly added slide will be shown on the left side of
the Window in thumbnail view.

2. Type the title of the new slide ‘ag*t cat# aster’ in the textbox following the
process described earlier.

3. Folloing the same process, type the three titles in three different boxes:
SbeQ TIE 2) GRA Sat BIeMINAT Cer FS
fran RTO wee mB BT STS yay A CE ATER
AP WS TR CY VT a
389) FIG sy feord arias Ree her 4 iz sn reste

=
g

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 75

- The three boxes will be placed one after another from top to bottom. The
title will be on the top. Another slide will be added following the process of
adding the second one. That will be the third slide. To add this slide

4. Type ‘I<’ as the title of the new slide geese
in the textbox following the process “— - =
described earlier. EI =~

‘saa ae

- By adding numerous slides, complete the : (=
work of presentation as required. 4% sana

- After preparing the primary presentation, —§ ‘= =
adding different varieties make the entire cemsrissrnesssies=iseseersss=s
presentation attractive.

Display Slides in Presentation

Making two slides for presentation, check it whether it has been workable as

well as presentable. For having the job done

- Press the button F5 from the keyboard or select Slide Show on the ribbon
of View menu or click the icon of Slide Show on the status bar, the first
slide of the presentation will be displayed.

- For viewing the next slide of the presentation, press the right arrow of the
keyboard, and to go back, press the left arrow.

- For starting the next slide show from the middle of the presentation, press
Shift F5 button.

- Press Esc button to revert to the window of editing from the window of
slide show.

You can be sure whether the slides are presentable or not by watching at any

phase of preparing the slides.

Changing the Background of Slides

The color of background can be changed either during the processing or after

the making of the slides. Any image can be used as the background of the

slide.

Adding or Changing Background to the Slide

1. Keep the slide open or active to add background to it. The first slide of the

iS current presentation is kept open.
N

76 Information and Communication Technology

2. If you click on the drop-down bar of [| EEE "oo “oe.
Background Style on the right of the psosgqsSOSSS
ribbon of Design menu, a palette of [om Shun
gradient and solid color will come on the Sderot
screen. If the mouse pointer is placed on a Pe se at
color or gradient of the palette, in the litiiviii e
original slide, the background of that seo eeemee |
color or gradient will be viewed. |

To use more colors, textures and images ~ *

1. Select Format Background at the bottom, and a dialogue box of that name
will come on the screen.

2. Clicking Solid Fill Radio button on the left above the Format Background
dialogue box, make it active. Click Color Drop-Down Arrow, and a color
palette will be viewed on the screen. The color swatch, which will be
clicked from this palette, will fill the background of the slide.

3. Clicking radio button of Picture or Texture Fill, make it active, and Texture
drop-down will be viewed instead of color. Click this drop-down arrow,
and different kinds of texture will be shown. The texture swatch, which
will be clicked, should be selected from the original slide.

4. The dialogue box called Insert Picture will come if File button below Insert
Box is clicked as the radio button of Picture or Texture Fill is selected.
Select picture opening the folder of the dialogue box that contains the
picture.

5. Click the Insert Box button of the dialogue box, and it will disappear, and
the picture will be set as the background of the slide.

6. To remove the imposed background
Click the Solid Fill radio button of the dialogue box of Format Background
and make it active. Click the drop-down arrow of Color, the palette will be
viewed on the screen. Select White from this color palette.

7. Click Close button of the dialogue box.

Insert Picture in Slide

Sometimes, it may require to insert Picture on the slide.

To insert picture into slide S

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 77
1. Click the icon of Picture on the ribbonof (“"
Insert menu, and the dialogue box of ©. =. 555 ©
Insert Picture will come on the screen. anee
2. Open the folder of the dialogue box of WTNICAa CA*T
Insert Picture in which the requisite | F ——
picture remains, and after selecting the = sien,
picture, click the Insert button. The eee
selected picture will be added to the = =
slide.
3. Clicking the resize box and dragging it, the size of the picture can be
resized and replaced elsewhere if required.
Inserting Transition into Slide
Usually slides are presented one after another, and effects are used to shift
from one slide to another. This effect is called ‘Transition’. It works on the
slide into which transition is applied by keeping it open. To insert Transition
into a slide
1. Keep the first slide open.
2. Click the Animations menu to activate it.
Animations | Slide Show Review View
= = =i = = = ~ a Transition Sounc
2 aa ae | = i 9 331 Transition § eed
ES) BM 2) 2) Se) |S) 2) | Sees
= Transition to This Slide =
On the ribbon of Animations menu, a row of Transition sample will be viewed.
The sample on which the mouse pointer is placed will be viewed in the slide.
There are three arrows on the right to pick more from the given samples. If you
click repeatedly on the middle arrow, a new row will be viewed with every
press of the mouse button. If you click the arrow on the top, a column will
come down the apex. If you click the arrow at the bottom, all the samples will
be viewed. Click the sample chosen, and the transition will be applied to the
slide.
3. If you want to apply the same transition to all the slides, click ‘Apply to
20 All’ button on the right side after applying it to the first slide.
S
N

78 Information and Communication Technology

4. Ifyou want to apply different transition to every slide, you have to apply it
separately following the same process for every slide.

Applying Transition Separately in Text

One slide may contain several textboxes. There are texts in three textboxes in

the second slide of the current presentation. If different transitions are applied

in these three textboxes, they will come to slide in three different processes. To

insert transition to the textbox

1. Keep the second slide open.

2. Select the textbox.

3. Click Animations menu to activate it.
A command called Custom Animation will be added to the bottom of
Animation. Click Custom Animation and a palette will come.

4. Select Entrance from Add Effect drop-down list of Custom Animation, and
a list of custom transition will come. From this list

- ‘Blinds’ is selected for the first textbox.

- ‘Fly in’ is selected for the textbox.

- ‘Diamond’ is selected for the second textbox.

- Ifyou select ‘More Effects’ from this list, another list of transition will be
viewed. Selection of any transition from this list will show the same effect.

5. In order to remove a transition from a specific textbox, select it. Click the
‘Remove’ button to exclude the transition.

Apply Sound to Transition

Keep the slide open to add sound to the transition, and select the name of a sound

from the drop-down list of Transition Sound. Camera is selected for the first

slide. Click Apply to All button for applying the same sound to all the slides.

If different sound is required to apply in every slide, separate application of

sound following the same process for every slide will be needed.

Add Video to the Slide

Video can be added to any slide if necessary. Usually video is added to the

introductory slide. Suppose that video will be added to the introductory slide of «

the presentation of Our Country. For this S

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 79

- Keep open the introductory slide of the presentation of Our Country.

- Clicking Movie drop-down on the ribbon of Insert menu, get ‘Movie from
file’ command. Select the command and ‘Insert Movie dialogue box’ will
come.

- A movie file will be selected from the video folder of the Insert Movie
dialogue box.

- Click Ok button of the dialogue box.

- A message box with a question ‘How do you want the movie to start in the
slide show?’ will appear.

- The Messaging box will contain two buttons ‘Automatically’ and ‘When
Clicked.’

- The Messaging box will disappear if required button is pressed, and the
video file will be added to the slide. You can place the file anywhere on the
slide by dragging it and resize it by dragging the resize box.

- The first slide will be viewed if you press F5 keyboard.

- The Thumbnail view of the video file will be shown on the screen.

- Click the Thumbnail of the video file and it will start playing.
If‘Automatically’ was selected at the time of adding the file, it will start
playing with the display of the slide.

Activity
Make a power point presentation about your school and present it.

Graphics

Importance of Graphics

Photographs, drawings, paintings, illustrations, designs, etc. are need to be

scanned and transferred to the computer first for editing. Now pictures

captured by digital camera can directly be copied to the computer. After the
editing, these photos can be used on printed invitation cards, posters, banners,
advertisements, etc. through digital media.
o There are numerous programmes to edit photo in computer. Of these
$S programmes, Photoshop is popular worldwide. Brightening or darkening the

80 Information and Communication Technology
entire or a part of picture, designing cover of a book with several pictures,
making poster, cutting off the irrelevant part of the picture, erasing blotchy
marks on the picture, etc. can easily be done by Photoshop.

Photoshop, an editing software should have been installed in the computer or it

should be installed. Editing can be done on a file created earlier.

To open Photoshop program

1. Click start or windows Logo Button and place the mouse pointer on ‘All
Programs’ command, and get a Fly out menu.

2. Click Adobe Photoshop Programs, from this menu and ‘Adobe Photoshop’
will open.

To prepare new file in Photoshop program

- Click ‘New’ from ‘File’ menu after opening up the Photoshop program,
and get ‘New’ dialogue box.

- You will get ‘Untitled-1’ selected in the square space of ‘Name’ of the
dialogue box. Pressing the backspace button of the keyboard, erase the
writing and type a name. It will be the name of the file. Suppose that
‘Practice’ is typed in the ‘Name’ box.

If you type the name in this stage, you need not to type it further while
closing the file, a new dialogue box will come when you will go to close
the file.

- In the box of ‘Width’ and ‘Height’ in New Dialogue Box, type numbers on
the measuring unit ‘inch’, for example, width of 7 inches and height of 8
inches. There is a dropdown menu to determine the unit of measurement on
the right side of these two boxes such as inches, pixels, piacas, points, cm,
mm. Select the requisite unit from this dropdown menu. Fix the
measurement by inches. Suppose that the measuring unit of the present job
is inch, and 7 in the box of width and 8 in the box of height have been
typed.

- The Resolution, for example, 72 Pixel, is kept unchanged.

Images or pictures are created in Photoshop by pixels. Pixel is the smallest

square unit of image. 72 pixels per inch mean crossing 72 lines vertically and

horizontally in per inch space. The total number of pixels in one square inch

will be 72°72= 5184. The number of pixels in per square inch is called 8

&

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 81

resolution. If 130 is typed in the box of pixel, the resolution will be
130°130=16900. If an image is enlarged, the pixels could be visible. This view
is called pixelated. In simple words, it is called split image.

- From the dropdown menu of color mode in the dialogue box, RGB,
CMYK, Bitmap, Grayscale, and from Lab Color RGB can be selected as
all the images on the monitors of computer, television, and other electronic
media are viewed in RGB mode. RGB is the abbreviation of red, green and
blue.

- There are three options in the ‘Background Contents’ of dialogue box. The
options are White, Background and Transparent.

- If ‘White’ is selected from the dropdown menu, the background will be
white. If a colour is selected from Background toolbox, it will turn into the
colour of the canvas. If transparent is selected, the background will be
transparent and checkered. The background option can be selected as you
like. White can be selected here.

- Without following the steps described above, Default Photoshop Size can
be selected from the ‘Preset dropdown list. Thus, all the units of Photoshop
will be selected as per the requisition.

- Completing the measurement of dialogue box, press ‘OK’.

- A window will be viewed as per the measurement given in the dialogue
box. On the left of the screen, Practice @ 100% (RGB/8) will be viewed.
This bar is called the title bar. If any name is not used in the Name box of
the new dialogue box, Untitled-1@ 100% (RGB/8) will be viewed on the
title bar as file name.

- Double click on the title bar, and it will be viewed on the screen.

- The menu bar is located under the title bar and the option bar is below the
menu bar.

- The ruler is located below the option bar.

- The Photoshop work is to be done below the ruler on the screen.

The screen can be compared to the canvas of painting of an artist. On the left

side of the canvas, there remain brush, color, and different kinds of editing

tools, and the palette on the right side.

82 Information and Communication Technology
(3 Adobe Photoshop - [Practice @ 100% (RGB/B)] Cer = al]
— Drie Eat — _ sli — View Window Help a asia Site: ee me
ing 2 D> | Iw | reatners[ ope | Style: | Normal ¥ aSmmnEGnon 72%
e Lt 1 iz i 4 5 ei fae :
0. # a =|
Bo a)
ae | [Layee Charnes “Oath |
oe s Fadl RGB irl+™ |
ae >| Es one fi
wy ry He: Cirle |
| i eS |
goaf 1
TN Bicox ae Doc: 534.6K/0 bytes b\« > si (=e)

The Toolbox of Photoshop and Palette Distinction

At least 69 kinds of tools are there in the Photoshop. Besides, numerous option

palettes, dialogue boxes, etc. are there. There is a relationship between

different tools and option palettes and dialogue boxes.

In addition, there are brush colour or foreground and colour control icon for

canvas or background, visual space control icon for the monitor, mask icon,

etc. If a line is drawn either with pencil or with brush tool, the color of
foreground works as the color of brush.

- Different palettes are kept on the right side of the screen. The minimise
icon is viewed above the right side of the palette. The palette will be
minimised if you click the minimise icon, and it will turn into a square or
maximise icon. It will be again extended if you click the maximise icon.

- Ifyou double click on the top bar of the palette, it will be either maximised
or minimised.

- Clicking and dragging the top bar, the palette can be replaced anywhere.

- There is a toolbox on the left side of the screen. It has included different
kinds of tools for different jobs. The tool, which is required to work,
becomes activated when clicked. If the mouse pointer is taken inside the
screen after selecting a tool of the box, the tool is either viewed on its
actual size or as a plus (+) sign, and the editing tools are viewed as circles. cS

S
AQ

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 83

Selection of Tools and Acquaintance of Move Tools

- 3 selection tools and 1 move tools are viewed on the top of the tool box. At
the bottom of the right side of some tools, small arrow sign Z is viewed. It
indicates that in the same position, more tools of the similar types remain
there, for example, 4 Marquee tools in the same position and 3 Lasso tools
in different positions are there.

- Place the mouse pointer on the tool, and the name of the tool will be
viewed. Click the tool to activate it. If the mouse pointer is brought inside
the screen, it will be viewed either as the own shape of the selected tool or
as a plus (+) sign.

- Making squares, circles and objects is possible with marquee tool within
selected tool.

- Pressing shift button and dragging Rectangular Marquee Tool, perfect
square, and pressing shift button and dragging Elliptical Marquee Tool,
perfect circle can be drawn. If you drag pressing Alt button, selections of
square and circle will be made being extended from the centre point.

Shifting of Selection

- After making the square of selection by Rectangular Marquee Tool,
remove the finger from the mouse, and the selection of square will be
viewed on the screen.

- Ifyou take the mouse pointer inside the selection, a rectangular icon will be
viewed below the pointer. Pressing and dragging, the selection can be
shifted elsewhere.

- Select ‘Deselect’ command from the Select menu or click the mouse pointer
taking outside the selection while it is floating, it will go away.

Fill Colour in the Floating Selection

- There are colour icons of ‘Foreground’ and
‘Background’ at the bottom of the toolbox. 1-10
The icon above is for ‘Foreground’ and the =
icon below is for the ‘Background’. To fill a =
selection with colour while floating: he

co - Press Alttbackspace, and the selection will x,
s be filled with the colour of the brush or oe,

84 Information and Communication Technology
Foreground. If you press Ctrl+backspace or only backspace, it will be filled
with the colour of Background or canvas.

- The selection filled with colour will float. It can be shifted elsewhere by
dragging.

- The object will stay at the same position after shifting the selection.

- Ifthe shifting is done by pressing the Ctrl button, the object will be shifted
being cut.

- Press Ctrl and Alt during shifting, the object will be shifted being copied.

- The selection will go away if you click the mouse pointer taking outside the
selection.

The Use of Feather

- Typing the number from 0-250 in the box of feather on the option bar, the
edge of the object can be softened. The room of the feather extends equally
from the edge of the object to inside and outside. If 10 is typed in the
feather box, the softness of the edge will be 20.

- The feather effect will be activated by pressing enter button after writing
different numerical figures in the box. Fill colour by using either
rectangular marquee tool or elliptical marquee tool, and the effect of
feather will be visible then. The effect will be still viewed after pasting cut
or copied object.

Select with Lasso Tool and Polygonal Lasso Tool

- Select lasso tool in the toolbox. SiS INNING
Numerous selections can be made with |; a x 5 —T =o
lasso tool such as oe re ae

- Clicking and dragging on the canvas after 28 3 : s eu), ‘z)
selecting lasso tool, selections of |: || Sure a!
non-circular and uneven edge can be os s , ;
created. If you release the finger from the |", I £5 ter =
pressing position on the mouse while |2; : ee :
dragging, a closed selection will be ete;
created from that position to the first
clicking point.

- Clicking inside the selection while floating, it can be shifted elsewhere by 3

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 85
dragging. Filling any floating selection with colour, it can be shifted any
filled either with the same or with a different colour.

- Opacity is used to determine the thickness of colour.

- The ‘Fill’ dialogue box will come after giving ‘Fill’ command under ‘Edit’
Menu.

- The foreground is kept selected in the ‘Use’ box of ‘Contents’ under ‘Fill’
dialogue box. It can be changed from the list of dropdown menu if required.

- In the opacity square of the dialogue box, type a number to determine the
thickness of colour. The full intensity of colour is 100%. If the percentage is
small (%), the colour will be light. Typing 50 in the Opacity box, click OK
button, and the foreground of the selection will be filled with 50% of the
total thickness.

- There is opacity in the option palette of selection too. The intensity of
colour can be increased or reduced with selecting the opacity of this palette.

Stroke

- The border of the selection can be made by ‘Stroke’ command.

- Select ‘Stroke’ command under ‘Edit’ menu as the selection is floating, and
you will get the ‘Stroke’ dialogue box.

- Any number from 1-16 can be typed in ‘Stroke Width Box’. The extension
of the border is determined with this number. To create the border outside,
inside or at the middle of the selection, activate any of these three options
by clicking the radio button attached with them.

- Click ‘Ok’ button of the dialogue box.

- Border can be created either by using the colour of the brush or of the
foreground in the Stroke process.

Saving File

- Give ‘Save’ command from ‘File’ menu, and ‘Save As’ dialogue box will
be viewed.

- In the box of ‘File Name’ of ‘Save As’ dialogue box, type the name of the
file, for example, ‘Practice’.

- Click ‘Ok’ button in the dialogue box, and the file will be saved as
‘Practice’.

S — -- ‘Practice’ can be opened for further work later.
N

86 Information and Communication Technology
Layer
Idea of Layer is required before creating objects or editing photos. Almost at
every stages of editing photo, you have to work through Layer.
Layer is the screen of editing photos or the phases of a canvas. In this process,
editing can be done putting numerous transparent canvases one after another. If
the canvas is transparent, editing becomes easier as the existing photos can be
watched, but if the canvas of the upper layer is not transparent, the editing of
the lower layer can not be seen. If any photo with colour background is
opened, ‘Background’ will be written on the layer palette. The background will
not be transparent in spite of being white because white is a colour.

- Suppose that a file with the pgp ccisssiinennione oe
picture of a flower is | Tae)" _—
opened. ‘Background’ is |/J . e aS — ry 7
written on the layer palette. | } =
An icon of a lock is viewed |} ; i»
to the right of a layer bar. It Ye :
indicates that the layer has |/ SOS CRIS EAS LES
been locked. The object of a |F == 7k a-
locked layer can not be
shifted by clicking or dragging with ‘Move’ tool.

- If ‘White’ is kept as ‘Background Content’ and ‘Background’ while opening
new file, ‘Background’ will be viewed on layer palette.

- ‘Background’ can be transformed into layer to shift the sample picture of the
flower elsewhere.

To accomplish the task © chepantbemumsoa 0 2 we

- Double click on |) hel mc, v =ees a
‘Background’ of layer Ki Ag -
palette, and a dialogue box ||y =)
named ‘New Layer’ will be f , :
shown. In the ‘Name’ box (77% / » ee
‘Layer 0’ will be viewed. |" ==" "ae" .-

Click OK button of the

dialogue box, it will disappear, and the ‘Background’ layer will be
transformed to ‘Layer 0’. The ‘Background’ layer will be ‘Layer l’ ifitis
written after erasing ‘Layer 0’ in the ‘Name’ box of the dialogue box. S

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 87

- If you click on any part of the picture with ‘Background Eraser’ tool, that
part will be erased, and the layer of the palette will automatically be
transformed into ‘Layer 0’.

- If any part of the picture is erased by Eraser tool, the layer will not be
transformed into ‘Layer 0’.

Insert New Layer

Many layers should be used to work with more than one file in Photoshop.

Keeping different pictures on different layers, their arrangement and editing

should be done.

To add new layers in palette

- Click ‘Create a New Layer’ icon below the palette, a new layer will be
added above the existing or selected layer. This layer will be a transparent
one. Creating any new object in the newly added layer, shift it elsewhere if
required. If five layers are created in this way, layer no. 2 will be above
layer no. 1, no. 3 will be above no. 2, no.4 will be above no. 3. If more
layers are added, those will be arranged serially.

- The arrangement of steps can be changed if required. Clicking layer no.2
and keeping press on the mouse, drag it and release on layer no. 3, and it
will be place in between layer no. 3 and 4. After the selection of dividing
line between two layers, release the pressure on the mouse.

You should remember that ‘Background Layer’ can not be shifted in this way.

Background should be transformed into layer to replace it into another stage.

Make Picture Visible and Invisible on Layers

There is the icon of eye on the extreme left of every layer. This icon is called

‘Layer Visibility Icon’. Click on the icon of eye, it will disappear along with

the picture on the screen. Click again on the empty place of the eye, the icon

will be visible again,

and the picture on that layer will be visible again. The picture of the flower on

the layer can be made visible and invisible for experimentation.

Thumbnail Icon

There is a thumbnail icon on the right side of the icon of eye. The meaning of

thumbnail means the miniature version of large picture. This miniature version

« on the layer along with the picture on the screen is viewed in the thumbnail
S icon. It facilitates to edit the pictures on particular layers.

88 Information and Communication Technology

Clustering, Integrating and Segregating Palette

Numerous palettes can be panelled together, for example, Layer, Path and

Channel can stay together. The names of the palette will remain as tabs. The tab

receiving a click will be activated. The combined situation of several palettes is

called clustered palette.

- The present palette is activated as a ‘Layer Palette’. Click the layer tab and
drag it outside the palette to release. The Layer palette will exist as an
individual or single palette.

- Again clicking the tab of the individual Layer, release inside another
palette by dragging it. Thick lines around the palette will be viewed. Thus
the Layer taken by dragging will be included in the cluster.

- Ifthe ‘Layer’ palette is not viewed on the screen, select ‘Layers’ command
from ‘Window’ menu, and you will get the ‘Layer’ palette.

Making Layer Object

The process of making Selection and filling it with colour has been learnt. Now

we will learn how to make two simple objects with rectangular and circular

selection tools. We will learn how to write with using the text tool too.

A. Creating rectangular object on Layer no. 1:

- Select White from the option of Background Contents of New dialogue
box, and Background will be as the base of Layer palette. For making a
transparent layer on white background

- Click on the icon of Create a New Layer below the palette, and a new
Layer will be added above the selected layer. This will be Layer no. 1, and
it will be transparent too.

- A rectangular selection will be created on Layer 1 with the Rectangular
Marquee Tool, and that will be filled with green colour.

- The rectangular object can be shifted elsewhere by Move tool.

B. Insert Layer no. 2 in the panel, and make a circular object:

- Click on Layer no. 1, and it will be selected.

- Click the icon of ‘Create a new layer’ below the palette, and it will be a
transparent layer.

=
8

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 89
Or

- If New Layer command is selected from the dropdown menu of the layer
palette, New Layer dialogue box will be viewed. In the square space of
Name of the dialogue box, Layer 2 will be viewed. Type Circle in the
Name box and press Ok button, and the dialogue box will disappear. A new
layer named Circle will be inserted above layer no.1 in the layer palette.

- Now create a circular selection with the Circular Marquee Tool so that half
of the circle will rest on the green field and the rest half on the white.

- The selection will be filled with red colour, and a red circle will be viewed
in thumbnail of Layer circle.

C. Preparing Text Layer _

- You should keep in mind |/B&"*™ ener ee
that if text is started with rr ea
Type tool, the text will a .
automatically be written on | coe
the Text layer. The new =| ann
text layer will be [eter 0
transparent. “/ E : i | a ee

To write on Text Layer:

- Click on the canvas selecting Type tool from the toolbox, and instantly a
new layer will be added to the Layer Palette.

- Selecting Text tool, click the mouse pointer on the canvas, and the requisite
dropdown option list will be found on the Option bar to determine font,
font size, etc.

- Select SutonnyMJ from the dropdown list of fonts.

- The size of the font will be initially selected 72 from the dropdown list of
font.

- The font colour will be initially black.

- Type ‘ona =ret’, and it will added as a new layer. The letter ‘T’ will be
viewed as thumbnail of the text layer on layer palette.

- The text will be shifted elsewhere with Move tool or mouse pointer.

- Now square, circle, and text can be shifted somewhere with Move tool.

90 Information and Communication Technology

- Ifthe combined position of the three objects is satisfactory, the file can be
saved for further use.

Transferring Picture from One File to Another

All the pictures should be transferred to a single file to work together. Prepare

an empty file named Default Photoshop Size. Another file called Banana is

opened with the pictures of bananas. Now clicking on a banana with the Move

tool, and drag it to the =O

Window of the empty file. The picture of the Li) we | La

banana will be shifted to the empty file. Close v1 , ex

the file of Banana. Y a |) Ge | |

In the same way, more pictures of mangoes, | | = —

pineapples, etc. can be prepared and shifted to | __ Se . y SS

the new file.

Fixing Target Layer

- The layer in which the picture is edited is called Target Layer.

- Any picture of any layer can be edited whenever required. The picture of a
single layer can be edited once.

To change a layer into Target Layer:

- Click mouse pointer on the layer, and the layer will be changed into the
Target Layer. The Layer will be viewed selected then.

Changing the Opacity of the Layer

- Opacity is the intensity of colour. In the opacity text box on the right side
above the Layer palette, 100% is viewed as the full intensity of colour. If
you put mouse pointer on Opacity, it will be transformed into a
two-pointing arrow. When it will be dragged to the left, the opacity will
decrease, and when it will be dragged to the right, the opacity will increase.

- Besides, typing numerical figure in the opacity textbook the opacity can be
changed.

Removing Layer

Select the Layer to be removed. Then

- Give Delete Layer command from the pop-up menu of the Layer palette. %

>
AQ

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 91
Or

- Selecting the Layer, click the icon of Delete Layer below the palette, and a
dialogue box with a question, ‘Are you sure you want to remove this
Layer?’ will come. If you click ‘Yes’ button, the layer will be removed, but
if you click ‘No’, the removal process will be stopped.

Combining or Merging Layers

Sometimes it is required to edit all layers together in Photoshop. After

finishing the job, if it is required to take print by a different printing machine, it

should be copied on CD or pen-drive. The size of the file will be small for
getting this job smoothly. The size of the file will be comparatively small if the
layers can be combined.

To combine layers

- There are three commands called Merge Visible, Flatten Image, and Merge
Down on the pop-up of the Layers palette.

- Ifany layer is invisible, give the command of Merge Visible, and only the
visible layers will be combined.

- If Merge Down command is given, the selected layer and the layer below of
it will be combined.

- Ifyou choose Flatten Image, all the layers will be combined.

- If there is any invisible layer, an inquiring message will come whether it
will be removed or not. Click Yes button, and the invisible layers will be
removed and the visible layers will be merged.

Cut, Copy, Paste and Paste into

Selecting any object or image either fully or partially, cut, copy and paste

command can be effective. If you paste any object after cutting or copying, a

new layer is created, and the object is pasted on the new layer. If any

transparent layer is created before pasting, any cut or copied object can be
pasted on the layer.

The Use of Crop Tool Soe: faves |

The border of pictures collected eS as fi

from different sources can not be oe ' ez |

By bes oe.
perfect or precise. It can be |» age Siew "ae §
x required to cut off the edges or |] Sa i

92 Information and Communication Technology
unnecessary parts. In spite of that, the image can be tilted to one side without
being straight.

Before starting editing, this kind of problem can be mended. Crop tool is used

to cut off the unnecessary part of an image. Crop means cutting off.

- The border of this old picture has been uneven, and the first step of editing
the picture will be cropping up the uneven edges. To get the job done:

- Select Crop tool from the toolbox;

- Select the necessary part keeping the uneven part outside by clicking and
dragging it like the rectangular marquee tool.

- Eight hollow square boxes will be viewed, four on the arms of the selection
and four on the comers. Clicking any one the boxes and dragging it, the
area of the selection can be either reduced or increased.

- After fixing the selection area, press the enter button of the key board, and
the outside of the selection will be cropped.

- If you think that the crop command should not be given even after
selecting, press Esc button to undo the effect. Selection can be made again
if required.

Cropping up Tilted Picture

- To crop any tilted picture, the picture is to be opened and Crop and
Straightened Photo command is to be selected from the sub-menu of
Automate command in File menu. This process is applicable only for solid
background. If the background is of multicolor, the work of cropping will
be impossible. In that case

- Select with crop tool.

- The mouse pointer will be transformed into a curved pointer or rotate tool.
The selection will be attached with the tilted position of the picture, and the
area of cropping will be finalized with other handles.

- Press Enter button, and the cropping up of the picture will be done, and its
positioning will be straight.

The Use of Eraser Tool

- When any color is erased by eraser tool, the color is covered with the color
of the canvas. If the color of the canvas is white, it seems that the color is %

S
AQ

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 93
being erased, but if the color is different, it will be viewed. The picture on
transparent layer will be simply erased.

- Press Cap Lock to erase the minute detail, and the eraser tool will take the
shape of plus (+) sign. The editing of small parts will be done then.

- The work of erasing can be done by selecting brush, pencil, or block from
the list of Mode drop-down of the Option bar on eraser tool. The rubber
eraser works like an electronic version if block is selected. The Opacity
options of other tools can be used if they have been selected.

Creating Blend with Gradient Tool

Paint Bucket Tool is kept on the same position of Gradient Tool. If you select

Gradient tool, icons of creating five kinds of gradient will be viewed on Option

bar, for example, Linear Gradient, Radial Gradient, Angle Gradient, Reflected

Gradient and Diamond Gradient.

Blurring of a color from the

beginning to the end is called

blend. The color blurs from the

beginning edge to another in

linear blend. On the contrary, in radial blend, the color diffuses either from the

centre to periphery or periphery to centre.

To create linear blend with gradient tool

- Aselection of 3 inches width and 2 inches high can be created.

- Selecting gradient tool, bring the mouse on the canvas, and it will be
transformed into a plus (+) sign. Now drag it from the left-middle of the
selection to the other end, and release the pressure of the finger from the
mouse pointer. It will be viewed that the selection starting with deep black
color gradually diffuses to the end.

- Blend can be created from the right to left, left to right, top to bottom,
bottom to top and diagonally. If anything is not selected, blend will be
created through out the screen.

- Activate radial gradient icon on option bar by clicking it for creating radial
gradient.

- The mouse after bringing onto the screen will be transformed into a plus
(+) sign. Now drag it from the middle of the selection to the other end, and

x release the pressure of the finger from the mouse pointer.
x

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 95

Adjusting Brightness and Contrast of Picture

Pictures that have been scanned or /@%=.(sisies

captured by camera can be indistinct. . — —— =

Visibility of color or black and white ha =n ce

can not satisfy the expectation level. In De | | coor: . al

that case, increasing brightness and || A my, Biv taney

combining contrast are required. To = ~ 4

increase the brightness and contrast Set

- Select Adjustment command from Image menu and get a submenu from
where click Brightness/Contrast, and the related dialogue box will be
viewed.

- Moving the triangle of brightness/contrast-slider in dialogue box either to
the right or to the left, the brightness and contrast can be increased or
reduced.

- If any part of the picture is selected before coming of the dialogue box,
increasing or reducing brightness and contrast only of the selected part can
be done by giving command.

Activate Preview check box in the dialogue box by clicking it, the work of

changing color can be viewed instantly. If the changed form does not seem

satisfactory, press Alt button of keyboard and the Cancel button of the dialogue
box will be changed into Reset button. Keep pressing Alt button and click

Reset button, and the work previously done will be cancelled.

Illustrator

Painting with Adobe Illustrator: Adobe Illustrator is the programme of drawing

picture, illustration, making logo and designs. As the scope of making design

with Adobe Photoshop is limited so the scope of doing editing work in Adobe

Illustrator is almost zero. The main job of illustrator is drawing.

Now the artists of our country have already left using paint and brush for cover

designing of books. They design covers by using Adobe Illustrator. Making

invitation card, advertisement, poster, banner, bill-board, etc. can not be
imagined without illustrator.

There are plenty of programmes in computer for making designs, but the

demand of illustrator is on the peak for facilities and varieties. That is why ,,

Illustrator is popular throughout the world. s

94 Information and Communication Technology

Editing Gradient

- Starting, finishing, and changing or combining color in the dialogue box,
the editing of gradient can be done. To get the job done

- Gradient Editor Dialogue box can be viewed by clicking on gradient bar.

- Color Stop triangles can be viewed at pee aa
the left and the right end of the or a) =
gradient slider of gradient editor _ pare ==
dialogue box, and Opacity Stop [ _—————= =
triangles are found on the top of the | ° : lobe
same dialogue box. Suppose that the _— 1
starting color of a linear gradient if | ewww. oe 7
red and the finishing touch is yellow. :

To use blue instead of red

- Click the Color Stop Triangle at the left end of the gradient slider, color
swatch will be activated at the end. Click Color swatch and Select Stop
Color dialogue box will be viewed. Selecting blue color in this dialogue
box, click Ok button, and blue will be the Stop Color at the left-end on
gradient bar. Now drag with gradient tool from one end to another, and a
gradient of blue and yellow combination will be created.

- If you select Color Stop at the bottom edge and Opacity Stop on the top
edge of gradient slider, an icon of diamond shape will be viewed in the
middle. This icon indicates the middle point of the gradient from where the
color starts diffusing.

Selecting the middle-point icon, type a position-fixing digit in the location
box to fix the middle. The middle point can be shifted by dragging the icon
either to the left or to the right.

Adding and Removing New Color and Color Stops

If more than two colors are to be used for gradient, add new Color Stops to the

slider. To do this

- Click anywhere at the bottom of the slider, new Color Stop will be added to
color beside with the diamond for determining color blending middle point. In
the same way, Color Stops of requisite number can be added to gradient slider.

so -  Ifany additional Color Stop is needed to remove or crop, click that color stop
& icon and drag it to the outside of the slider, and the Color Stop will be removed.

96 Information and Communication Technology
Apart from writing in the Illustrator programme by using keyboard, writing is
possible as an artist does by using brush. The font size and shape can be
changed as required.

Like other programmes, open Illustrator and start making new files.

Open Illustrator Programme

To open Illustrator programme

1. A menu will be viewed when you will click on Start button at the left end
of the screen with mouse pointer.

2. You will get a fly out menu placing the mouse pointer on All Programmes
in this menu.

3. Clicking Adobe Master Collection menu in this menu, get another fly out
menu. You will get the list of programmes of Adobe in this menu.

4. Ifyou click on Adobe Illustrator from the list, the programme will open.

To Open File in Illustrator

- Give New command from File menu or press Ctrl N, and New dialogue
box will be viewed. In the New dialogue box

- Type a name in the Name dialogue [RZ=mRi
box, for example, Ankon-1. Any | sre sien a
name can be used instead of this OES cee OT
one. The name which is easy to Units [ncnes | Height [1.6529 in
remember or compatible with the See
subject can be given. Finding out the ae ae
file next will be easier for this.

- A detail drop-down list will be viewed by clicking the drop-down arrow of
size-box. Different size of the paper will be viewed here. The size of paper
which is required should be selected by name, and the height and width of
the paper will be seen in the box.

- The units of measurement are found in Units box. The users of our country
are familiar with the measurement of inches, but points, picas, millimetres,
centimetres, pixel, etc. can be used to work more precisely. Click the
drop-down arrow in unit box, and a detail drop-down list will be visible.
The requisite unit of measurement can be fixed from this list. co

- Pictures of two persons are viewed on the right of Orientation. If you click s

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 97
the first one, the position of paper will be portrait, but it will be in
landscape position if the second one is clicked.

- Two options are shown as RGB and CMYK in Color Mode. CMYK mode
is suitable for printing work, but RGB mode is better for electronic medium
though on computer screen, the difference of these modes are not precisely
distinguished.

- Fixing the measurement, press OK in the dialogue box, and it will
disappear. A new window will come.

In the Name box of New dialogue box, type a file name, and it will be viewed

on the title bar at the right side of Adobe Illustrator above the menu bar. If any

file name is not typed ‘Untitled...’ will be viewed on the title bar.

Work Tools

New vacant file will be found on the screen after creating new file. Numerous

objects like menu bar, toolbox, floating palette, scroll bar, etc. will be viewed for

starting work.

Title Bar Bete ran 0 104 REP

After opening the Illustrator [res i a eee ie

Programme, on the left-end above :

the screen, the other information of | |* >: E —

the document with the name of | |<" =se

application on the title bar may be | |3~ i

viewed, for example, Adobe | |?% aes,

Illustrator-[Ankon-1 @ 70 | |x ——<—<—

(RGB/Preview)]. Here, Adobe a.

Illustrator is the name of | |:4 —sss

application, Ankon-1 is the name | == “T-lelel- lei

of file if this name was given | err

during its creation, and @ 70

(CMYK /Preview) is the size of visible area and presentation of color mode. The

entire part stretching to the right is the title bar.

- If any name is not given during opening a file, it can be given after
completing the work and saved as well. Files are given different names, and
when a file is opened, its name is viewed on the title bar to the right of the
application.

Forma-13, ICT, 9-10

98 Information and Communication Technology
Different kinds of tools and options for designing and drawing are arranged in
Toolbox & Palette. Designing and drawing can be done by using these tools
and options, and editing work is possible to get the image in its expected form.
Names of the Necessary Tools of the Toolbox
Names of the necessary tools should be known before starting work. Ellipse,
polygon, star, and spiral tools stay on the linear position in the toolbox. These
are called ‘Group Tools’. Right-faced triangle is attached with these tools. If a
triangle sign is attached with the tool, it means that more tools are kept in the
same position. If you click the visible tool in the box and continue pressing the
mouse, all the tools will be viewed together. Drag the mouse pointer on the
tool required to use and click, the tool will be visible in the toolbox.
There are some icons in the swatch below the tools of toolbox. Imposing color
in the object or on the edges of object or canceling command can be done with
these icons. Create an object to understand the use of the icons. To make an
object like this_
Toggle column ——>
(v) Selection Tool |[k] &,| Direct Selection (A)
(Y)Magic Wand = §® | Lasso (Q)
(P)Pen =, T,| Type)
(\) Line Segment \,, @j,| Rectangle (M)
(B) Paintbrush s,| Pencil (N)
(R) Rotate | £}, S| Scale (S)
(Shift + R) Wrap ee | Free Transform (E)
(Shift+$) Symbol Sprayer “@), all, | Column Graph (J)
(U) Mesh gal Gradient (G)
(1) Eyedropper | #, & Blend
(K) Live Paint Bucket Oe @ Live Paint Selection (Shift + L)
(Shift +0) CropArea  3t, &, | Eraser (Shitt+E)
(HyHand ©, & | Zoom (2)
(X) Toggle fill — a7 Swap fiti/stroke (Shift+X)
(D) Default fill/stroke —> OE — Toggle Stroke (X)
(<) Color ica —— None (/)
(>) Gradlent oe
Change sreen mode (F) x
F N

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 99

- Click the rectangle tool with mouse pointer, and the tool will be selected.

- Bringing the mouse pointer inside the screen, and after clicking elsewhere
drag diagonally right below for an inch, and release the finger pressure
from the mouse, a rectangle or square object will be created.

- The object will be selected and filled with a color.

- Four hollow boxes will be viewed on the four corners of the selected
object. Four small solid boxes will be viewed on the four corner.

- Ifthe object becomes free from selection, click Direct Selection Tool in the
toolbox with mouse pointer, and the Direct Selection Tool will be selected.
Now bringing the mouse pointer inside the screen, click the object with
Direct Selection Tool, and the object will be selected. In this situation,
again click Selection Tool, and four solid boxes will be viewed on the arms
along with four solid boxes on the corners.

Filling Color on Object

Fill and Stroke

- The edge or border of an object is
called ‘Stroke’ and the internal part is mR,
called the ‘Fill’. The use of ‘Fill’ and a =
‘Stroke’ swatch is related to color) | Wa
palette. If the color palette is not a =
viewed on the screen, either give ww mE
Color command from window menu | | 3“
or press F6 button, and the color | | *.%. —
palette will be visible. Click Fill | | <°]|[eseses== :
swatch and it will be activated and | | ya |)|Gum ——
viewed above. Thus only the work of Al ——— 5
filling can be done. Though an object sim
can be filled, not the stroke. Similarly, |; L“@="
clicking the Stroke swatch, activate it
and stay over Fill swatch. Thus, color can be imposed on the strokes of
object. It will be impossible to fill object with color from here.

- When the Fill swatch is active and the color that will be clicked on the
Color Spectrum Bar of the color palette, the inside of the selected object
will be filled with that color. Similarly, when the stroke swatch is active
and the color that will be clicked on the Color Spectrum Bar, the strokes of

20 the objects will be filled with that color. The color inside the object will
BS remain unchanged.

100 Information and Communication Technology

- Stoke can be thick for a clear view. For having this effect, select stroke
command from Window menu, and Stroke palette will be viewed on the
screen. Select at least 10 from the weight drop-down menu in Stroke palette.
In this stage, if color is imposed or changed, it will be clearly visible.

Color, Gradient, and None

Color, Gradient and None are the three icons respectively wiles

below the Fill and Stroke swatch. Clicking Color and rt

Gradient icon separately activate Color and Gradient palette.

Click None icon, and the fill of selected object or the color of ay

stoke can be inactive or cancelled. If the object is filled with Ba?

color or gradient, the color will be viewed. If the object is —

selected, the color will be changed as well. Ga

Increasing and Reducing the Size of Object

Many minute jobs are done to create object. Doing minute jobs may be

troublesome in the usual size of the object. If a specific part of the object is

viewed big, it facilitates doing the work easily. Viewing page in increased size
while working in Illustrator is called Zoom in, and Zoom out in decreased size.

Object will also be viewed either big or small with increasing or decreasing size.

To view object big or small, the visible size of the page will be made big or

small by using Zoom Tool. To get the job done

- The Zoom Tool will be selected if it is clicked in
the Zoom Tool box. x =<

- After selecting Zoom Tool if the mouse pointer is =e = =
brought on the screen, it will look like a o a
flint-glass, and a plus (+) sign will be visible in —
the glass.

- The size of the screen will be bigger when clicked with Zoom Tool on
screen. With the increasing size of the screen, the object will stay on the
screen being enlarged. If it becomes enormously enlarged, some objects
will not be viewed on the screen. Clicking on the screen and dragging with
hand-tool, that part can be brought on the screen.

- Press Alt button while the Zoom Tool is active, and the Zoom Tool will be
transformed into Zoom Out Tool. Keep pressing the Alt button and
continue clicking with Zoom Out Tool, the size of the screen will be
gradually smaller.

- Press Ctrl - or Ctrl = button for completing the work of Zoom out and «
Zoom in. s

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 101

Changing the Positioning of Page By Hand Tool

If the size of the page is made small or big, the necessary part of the object can

go outside the visible area. In this case, to shift the object in a suitable place on

the screen

- Select Hand Tool clicking it in Hand Tool Box.

- Clicking on the necessary object with Hand Tool and dragging it to a
suitable place, release the pressure of finger on the mouse.

In this way, the positioning of the original page will be changed. The object

that has been clicked will not be shifted in a different way.

Mode of Viewing Object

There are some modes to view objects in Illustrator programme. Any of these

can be selected from View menu as required.

- In Outline Mode, the object is viewed as outline or linear shape. In this
mode, editing of the shape or structure of the object, particularly the detail
work of editing line or path can easily be done.

- The object is viewed perfectly in Pixel Preview or Preview mode.

- The image viewed in Overprint Preview Mode can be printed out.

Creating Object

In the preparatory stage of creating object, the elementary process of making

different kinds of shapes should be learnt, for example, square, rectangular,

circular, elliptic, multi-angular, starry, spiral, etc. To create an object

- The Rectangle Tool will be selected if clicked with mouse pointer.

- Bringing the mouse pointer inside the screen and clicking anywhere, drag
diagonally below an inch and release the pressure on the mouse, and a
square or rectangular object will be created.

In the same process, select another object tool from the Tool box and make

other objects. No object can be created once. By erasing the object partially or

fully, we can start in a new way. For getting the job done, it is required to learn
how to erase the entire object or part of the object.

Selecting Object and Erasing Borderline or Path

- If the object is filled with color, the object will be selected if clicked with
Selection Tool or Direct Selection Tool. Keep pressing the Alt button and
click on the path of object, the entire object will be selected.

- To erase the path of object or the part of path, select them with either

oo Selection Tool or Direct Selection Tool. Press Backspace or Delete button,
s the Path or the part will be deleted.

102 Information and Communication Technology
If Backspace or Delete button is pressed, the object is erased. Select Cut
command from Edit menu, and the object goes to temporary memory called
clipboard and stay there until other object is not cut or copied. When an object
stays on the clipboard, selecting paste command from Edit menu will restore
the object to the document.

Path

The path of the object can be formed with more than one segment. A single

segment can also be used if necessary. The border of the object is called Path.

A straight line is called Path too.

Selection Tool

- Selection Tool, Direct Selection Tool or Group Selection Tool can be used
to select either the entire object or a part of an object.

- Selection tool is called the Black Arrow. Click the selection tool with mouse
pointer for using the tool, and it will be selected. If the mouse pointer is
brought on the screen after selecting the tool, the mouse pointer takes the
shape of a black arrow or selection tool with which click on the object and it
will be selected. Selection Tool is used to select the entire object.

- If any object is selected with Selection Tool, rectangular, circular or
bounding box is created around the object. Four hollow boxes on four
corners and four on the four arms will be visible. These boxes are called
Resize Box. Clicking and dragging on the resizing boxes, the size of the
object can be enlarged and reduced. Keep pressing shift and drag, the object
will be big or small according to proportion.

- Clicking the centre of the selected object with Selection Tool or on any of the
arms or any part of the object and dragging, it will be shifted to anywhere.

For selecting more than one object together_

- After selecting the first object, keep pressing shift button and select the next
object. In this way, select as many as objects required. When all the objects
are selected only one bounding box will square them.

- Clicking and dragging the resize box of the bounding box, all the objects
will be enlarged and shortened together.

- Click the mouse pointer on an empty space on the screen, the object will be
selection-free. If any particular object requires to be selection free from
numerous selected objects, click the object pressing Shift button.

Direct Selection Tool

The white tool on the right of the Selection tool is called Direct Selection Tool. x

This tool is called the White Arrow. §

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 103
Direct Selection Tool or the White Tool is used to select the segment of the
object or the entire object. A part of the object can separately be enlarged or
shortened by selecting any anchor point of the object with Direct Selection
Tool.
Grouping Object
To create a group of objects after creating many circular, elliptical, square, and
rectangular:
A. Select either all or requisite objects.
B. The selected objects will be grouped if Group command is given from
Object menu.
Clicking on a blank space, make all the objects selection-free, and then click
any object with black arrow or selection tool, a rectangular bounding box will
be created around the grouped objects. Thus the objects inside the selection
box will be selected together.
To make the grouped objects ungrouped:
A. Click an object, and the grouped objects will be selected.
B. Give Ungroup command from Object menu, and the grouped objects will
be ungrouped.

Lock the Objects
While working with more than one object, it is required to keep one or more
than object locked. As a locked object can not be selected, the editing work can
not be done. So the locked object can not be changed inattentively.
To lock an object:
A. Select a particular object.
B. Give Lock command from Object menu.
If it is required to edit or change locked object, unlock it. To unlock an object
select ‘Unlock All’ command from the object menu. Thus all the objects will
be unlocked. An unlocked object can be edited in a usual way.
Use of Cut, Copy and Paste Command
After selecting any object with selection tool and giving Cut command from
Edit menu, the object will disappear and it will be copied if Copy command is
given. Any cut and copied object is stored on clipboard, and if Paste command
is given from Edit menu, the object will be pasted on the screen. The object
can be shifted elsewhere by dragging with selection tool.

co Ifany object is dragged Pressing Alt button of the keyboard, it is shifted after a

& copy has been created.

104 Information and Communication Technology
Give Paste in Front command, and the object will be placed above the existing
object.

Give Paste in Back command, and the copied object will be placed below the

existing object.

Layer

Layer means step. In doing work in this process, editing can be done keeping

different objects on different steps. This layer or step can be compared to

transparent glass or polythene. If three objects or pictures are created on three
glasses or transparent media and placed one after another, three objects will be
viewed. These three glasses or media are regarded as layers.

The facilities of working in layer process are as follows:

e Arranging steps among Layers;

e keeping more than one layer invisible;

e keeping layers locked;

e Add new layers and remove unnecessary layer, etc.

Creating New Layers

If Layer palette is not viewed on screen, Give Layer command from Window

menu, and the layer palette will be viewed. At the beginning, only one layer

will be on the palette. Finishing the work of a layer, add a new layer on the
palette to create new object. To add new layer

A. A new layer will be added on layer palette when you click Create New
Layer icon below the row of Layer Palette.

B. If any layer numbered serially needs to be identified with a particular
name, double-click the layer and a dialogue box called Layer Options will
be viewed. Type the necessary name on the Name box, and click Ok
button. The serial number or name of the concerned Layer (if the name was
previously given) will be changed into the name typed in the dialogue box.

Cancel Layer

A. Selecting the Layer and Delete command from the pop-up menu on layer
palette, the selected layer will be cancelled.

- In the process of deleting layer of artwork or object oriented, a cautionary
message like ‘Delete Layer?’ will be viewed. Click ‘Ok’ button, and the
layer will be deleted. Click ‘No’ button, the deleting process will be
stopped. But clicking and dragging the layer, place on the Delete icon, no |
such message will be viewed. s

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 105

Merging Layers

After the completion of creating and editing objects of two or more layers,

those will be merged together. To get the job done:

A. Select the layers.

B. Select ‘Merge Selected’ command from pop-up menu of layer palette, and
the layers will be merged.

Use of Color in Object

After creating object, fill color as required. Color palette, color bar, or color

spectrum bar, gradient, etc. are used to fill color in object.

Color Palette

If color palette is not viewed on screen, give color command of Window menu,

and the color palette will come.

- On the left above the Color Palette, [= |(&)
indicator box of Fill and Stroke or |} #Color ‘Swatches \_ y i)
Swatch is found. Color Slider and Color
Spectrum Bar are found below it. If a *———_—— li
work is done on grayscale mode, only G en | 00
one color slider will be viewed. If work a —
is done on RGB = Red Green Blue 5
mode, 3 color sliders will be viewed,
and if work is done on CMYK mode, 4 es
color sliders will be viewed.

Fill Color

To fill color in any object: acco. Be

A. Select the object. B- |

B. Clicking in Fill Indicator Box of eT
Color Palette, activate it. 2 mn | CC
Activated Fill Swatch will stay i
above the Stroke icon.

C. Click the requisite color in Color Spectrum Bar.

- The selected object will be filled with the color in Color Spectrum Bar. On
the extreme right of the Color Spectrum Bar, Swatch of black and white
color will be found. If black swatch is clicked, the object will be filled with
entirely black color, and if the white swatch is clicked, the object will be
filled with entirely white color.

106 Information and Communication Technology

The Use of Stroke

The border of object is called Path. The measurement of making path thick or thin

is called Stroke. Object of grouped and ungrouped path, straight, curved lines, etc.

are controlled by Stroke. Controlling strokes means make path thick or thin and
filling color. Making Stroke thick and thin can be done with Stroke Palette. To
get the job done

A. Select object or path. If the Stroke Palette is not viewed on the screen, click
Stroke command from Window menu, and the Stroke Palette will be viewed.

B. When the object or path remain selected, click the downward arrow of
Weight box in Stroke Palette and keep pressing the mouse, many
measurement units will be shown in the dropdown list. Select a number
from the list as required. If a small number is selected, the stroke will be
thin, and if a large number is selected, the stroke will be thick.

C. A measurement unit can be typed al
directly in Weight box if required. Sa
The fraction of a number can be mem — iad
used too. Measuring the thickness sc Sun
and thinness, from 0-1000 points can ro
be used.

Pen and Pencil Tool

The main reason of being the Ilustrator programme popular is the use of Pen

Tool. It is possible to make complex and very small design with Pen Tool and

do the editing work.

Two anchor points are found at the two end of a path or line. The first anchor

point is called the starting point and the second anchor point is called end point.

There is a controlling handle with the anchor points of curved path and a

control point outside the control handle. Clicking and dragging the control

point, the curve of a line can be controlled, Anchor point, control handle, and
control point are not viewed in print.

Pencil Tool is another form of Pen Tool J ;

Curve lines can be made by dragging

Pencil Tool,

Pen Tool is the main tool of making | a }

vector object. A subtle object can be r ‘\ iF

created by keen path with the help of —

Pen Tool. es

8

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 107

Closed Path and Opened Path

A closed Path has no beginning and closing point, for example, circle and

square, etc. A closed path may have curved ends. On the contrary, an Open

Path has a beginning and closing end.

Pencil Tool and Pen Tool

A Path can be created easily with the Pencil Tool. Selecting pencil tool from tool

box, clicking and dragging on the screen path can be created by drawing curved

lines. The function of pencil tool is like making sketch by drawing on the paper.

On the contrary, path is created with Pen Tool by clicking and dragging. To

make path with Pen Tool

A. Select pen tool from toolbox. Click anywhere on the screen and release the
pressure of finger from the mouse.

B. Click second a little bit above and release the pressure of the finger from
the mouse.

C. Click on the right below from the place the second click.

D. Click above the right a bit, and drag righward.

E. Click on the right a bit below, and click again on the right from the position
of next moving a bit rightward from the previous click.

F. Clicking on the right above and drag further right from this position

G. Click on the right below.

A wave-like open path object can be created in this way.

Editing Path

A path can not be created according to the expectation at the first attempt.

After creating the path, give it the expected shape through editing. By editing

the path, new anchor points can be added, and it can be removed if required or

cropped up or the two separated parts can be connected. In this way, a change

can be made as many times as required.

Adding Anchor Point ; a oe

To add anchor point at any point of the path: /\ ( ; \ [ \

A. Select Add Anchor Point Tool from| / \__| Teel .
toolbox, and bring the mouse pointer
inside the screen, a plus sign (+) will be found on the right below the Pen Tool.

B. Click any place of the path with Anchor Tool Point, and a new anchor point
will be set on that point.

« ~The new anchor point added on the straight path is called Straight Corner
s Anchor Point and on the curved path is called Smooth Anchor Point.

108 Information and Communication Technology

Removing Anchor Point

To remove any anchor point on the path:

A. Select Delete Anchor Point Tool. After selecting the tool, bring mouse pointer

inside the screen, and a minus sign (-) will be viewed below the Pen Tool.

B. If you click any anchor point with Delete Anchor Point Tool, that anchor

point will be deleted.

Editing Curve Path

A circle/rectangular object or a design will be created with pen/pencil tool for

editing path. To edit curve:

A. Selecting Direct Selection Tool and clicking an anchor point, drag and shift
the position of it, and the curve and shape of the anchor will be changed.

B. Click an anchor point, the handle of it will be viewed. Clicking and
dragging the control point of any end of the handle, the part of the path
related with the anchor point, the curve will be reduced or increased or the
direction will be changed.

After creating open path with Pencil or Pen Tool, the strokes can be thick or

thin, and filled with color. Creating closed path with Pencil or Pen Tool, it can

be filled with any color.

Writing Job

Writing job is mandatory for the covers of books, magazines, poster,

advertisements, cards, etc. Type Tool is used for writing in Illustrator. Six

kinds of Type Tools are found in Illustrator. Arrangement of writing can be
done in three ways with these Type Tools, for example, Point Text, Area Text
and Path Text.

Point Text

In Point Text process, the way of typing is very easy. To type in this process:

A. Select Type Tool from the toolbox.

B. Click any blank space of the screen.

C. Change the keyboard into Bangla for typing in Bangla.

D. Click ‘Character’ in ribbon on the screen, and Character Palette will be
viewed. Select font from the Font Pop-up menu of Character Palette.

E. Start typing following the rules of word processing. Click any letter with
the Selection Tool, and a line will be viewed below it. This line is called
‘Baseline’.

Editing Writing &

The requisite commands will be found in Type menu and in Character Palette. $

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 109

Select Character from Type command of Window menu, or press Ctrl T, the

Character Palette will be viewed floating on the screen. When it is floating, it

can be used as required.

Selecting Letters —

Letters, words can be selected according to the |**™“c"" [SSSSeRee

rules of word processing while the Type Tool | “°° =" =

is selected, Click with Direct Selection Tool in | ~~ =

the writing, the entire typed part ic. the entire | P= 7" ~ a =

writing with baseline will be selected. In this |“ ~~ ™ ~*~

case, the letters will not be highlighted. The | = =~ IT =o ~

baseline under the letters will not be viewed. | “* © °" > =

Changing Color of Letters — “a Sr

To change the color of the letters: ssi bod

A. The requisite letters or writings should be selected.

B. The color on the bar of Color Palette or Swatch Palette that will be clicked,
the selected letters or words will assume the color.

Deleting Letters

A letter or letters or paragraph or the entire writing can be deleted by pressing

Backspace/Delete button if it is selected.

Enlarging or Reducing Font Size

A. Clicking the downward arrow on the right side of Font Size box in the
Character Palette as the letter or letters are selected and keep pressing the
mouse, a list of measuring number about Font Size will be viewed. Continue
pressing mouse and take on a measurement number, and the number will be
selected. After giving the command, release the pressure on the mouse and
the size of the selected letters will be either enlarged or reduced.

B. If the requisite measurement number is not found in the drop-down menu,
place insertion pointer in Font Size box clicking directly.

- Pressing Backspace button, delete the existing measurement number and
type new number.

- Press Enter button and the selected letter or letters will be either enlarged or
reduced according to the measurement number.

Increasing or Decreasing Font Size Vertically and Horizontally

To get the job done:

A. Clicking the drop-down arrow on the right of Vertical Scale and keeping

3 pressure on the mouse, get the list of measurement number. If a number
nN

110 Information and Communication Technology
bigger than 100% is selected continuing the pressure on the mouse and
dragging, the font size will be vertically big. On the contrary, if a number
smaller than 100% is typed, the font size will be vertically small. 100% is
the ideal measurement of letter.

To increase or decrease fonts horizontally:

B. Clicking the drop-down arrow on the right of Horizontal Scale and keeping
pressure on the mouse, get the list of measurement number. If a number
bigger than 100% is selected continuing pressure on the mouse and
dragging, the font size will be horizontally big. On the contrary, if a
number smaller than 100% is typed, the font size will be horizontally
small, 100% is the ideal measurement of letter.

Baseline Shift

If any text written with Direct Selection Tool is selected, the line seen below

the text is called the Baseline. Shifting the lower edge of the text up or down is

called Baseline Shitt.

Selecting measurement number from the drop-down menu in ‘Set the Baseline

Shift box’ of Character palette, or typing measurement number directly in the

Set the Baseline Shift box, the measurement of Baseline Shift should be fixed.

The use of negative number will take the text downward the baseline, and

conversely positive number will bring the text upward the baseline.

The Leading

The space between the lines is called the ‘Leading’ which can be required for

the text containing many lines.

A. Selecting measurement number from the drop-down menu in Set the
Leading box of Character palette, or typing measurement mumber directly
in the Set the Leading box, press Enter and the Leading will be activated.

B. If the upward arrow button of Set the Leading box is pressed, the
measurement of Leading will increase, and if the downward arrow button
is pressed, the measurement of Leading will decrease.

Any text typed or placed in square, rectangular, ab cerran cere

circular, elliptical or any closed path is called Area ( SESS TS a ET

Text. To type or arrange text in a closed path: ac es a

A. Create square, rectangular, circular or | |S" = C2 ar =e!
elliptical path. tech linge

B. Selecting Type Tool, place the mouse panggilan, =
pointer on the closed path, the Type Tool — R

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 111
will take the shape of Area Type Tool.

C. Click on the anchor point of the path, the insertion point will be placed
inside the closed path, and it will be used as a Text Box or Text Container.

D. Start the work of typing.

E. When you will reach the right edge of a line, the insertion pointer will
automatically go down the next line. If typing continues in this way, the
next line will be automatically started.

Typing in the Path

Typing work inside and outside the closed path, and below and above the open

path can be done with Path Type Tool of Dlustrator, Typing work inside and

outside circular object like making monogram can be done.

Typing outside Circular Object

A. Make a circular object, and if it is filled with color, click None icon either
of Color Palette or of Tool Box to delete the color of the circle.

B, Select Type on a Path Tool from the Tool Box as
the circle is selected. Click the anchor point of _ BRI,
this circle with the tool, and tho insertion point | 4 %
will be placed outside the Path of circle. & . &§

- The circle must be selected while clicking. If it is iy rr)
not selected, the works of step 1 and step 2 will| — sZ,
be completed. So

C. If typing is started, the text will advance following the path of circle usually
from left to right. In the same way, the text will be arranged outside
rectangular object if required.

D. Click the text with Direct Selection Tool and the Eyebeam between the
Path and the text will be selected.

E. Clicking the edge above or below the Eyebeam and dragging in a circular
way the text can be shifted elsewhere,

Arranging Writing in Open Path

A. An Open Path can be created with Pencil or Pen Tool.

B. Click on the selected Path with Path Tool, and the insertion pointer will be
placed on the Path. ;

C. Type following the usual mile. pot ete, So

The Path and the Text will be selected |,” ee

3 if the text is clicked with Direct

112 Information and Communication Technology
Selection Tool, and the text can be shifted elsewhere by clicking and dragging
the Eyebeam while selected.

- The Path will be selected if clicked with Direct Selection Tool, and the
anchor point of the Path will be viewed. Now the Path can be curve or big
or small by following the rules of editing. If the Path is made curve, the
text will follow the line.

- Ifthe Path is smaller than the text, the additional text will not be viewed.
When the Path will be extended, the rest of the text will be viewed.

Creating Outline of Letters

When the outline of letters is created, the edges of letters will be transformed

into Path. Clicking and dragging the Path and Anchor point, the shapes of the

letters can be changed. : 3 ,

A. Select one or more than one letter | “| “AL Mo \
or word.

B. Give Create Outline command from Type menu or press Shift Ctrl O, and
selected text will be transformed into Outline.

When the letters will be transformed into Outline, the text will no longer be

fonts. It will be changed into graphics. The shape of the letters can be changed

following the rules of editing Path, and filling color and adding gradient will be
possible, but can not be used as fonts.

Placement of Image in Illustrator

To place image in illustrator:

A. Give Place command from File menu, Place dialogue box will come.

B. Select the required file from Place dialogue box.

- Itshould be previously known that in which folder and after what name the file
has been saved. The required file will be selected after opening specific folder.

C. Click Place button in the dialogue box, and the image of the selected file
will be viewed on the screen.

- A cross sign will be viewed on the total image when the image of the
Photoshop is placed in the Illustrator. Click outside and the cross-sign will
be removed. Click the image with the Selection Tool, and the image will be
selected and four resize boxes on four arms and four on the angles will be
viewed. Clicking and dragging the resize boxes, the images can either be wo
enlarged or reduced. s

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 113
Exercise
1. How many media are combined in the multimedia?
A.l B. 2
C. 3 D. 4
2. In which work is multimedia used?
A. For preparing examination result; _B. For calculating shopping expenditure;
C. For preparing scoresheet of cricket; D. For making animation film;
3. Which one is multimedia Software?
A. Microsoft Work B. Microsoft Powerpoint
C. Microsoft Excel D. Microsoft Access
4. Application of Multimedia_
i. Has made the presentation of text impressive;
ii. Has made the work of printing and publication easy;
iii. Has made the accounts easy;
Which one is correct?
a. i&ii b. i & iii
c. i & iii d. i, ti & iii
Read the chapter below, and answer the question nos. 5 & 6:
Mr. Rakib is the chief executive of a renowned company. A foreign delegate
will come to visit his company tomorrow. He has made a presentation in his
laptop and he will show it to them. He took the help of a piece of Software for
the presentation.
5. Which Software is suitable for Mr. Rakib for his representation?
A. Microsoft Word B. Microsoft Powerpoint
C. Microsoft Excel D. Microsoft Access
6. The Software which is used by Mr. Rakib_
i. will make the presentation impressive by using animation.
ii. will show the activities of the company by using sound and video.
iii. will prepare the account.
Which one is correct?
a. i&ii b. i &iii
c. i & iii d. i, ti & iii
7. Explain the importance of Presentation Software to present anything.
8. ‘The present publication industry is completely dependent of Graphics
Software,’ explain with logic.

LJ
Sixth Chapter
The Use of Database
STE) ome | Cite Citemat Data) Database Yooh Addins _ @- 3 xf]
yx. = “> jailer feb ot Ci Sttertien viet 5
| SB cane a LS St Se ae
Mew) Pees | hao Sec tlie) Leh OI Se te eatore= NBS" Steppe teee|| meta vets Ge
sie easier S| a a
Be. Training Event Management =
m Training Events
Attendees:
Main Menu Course Status Start Date Time End Date Time Box. ‘Min. Enrolled!
Training Event! [Pum Speaking 101 (PSi[ a] Scheduled [x][3/30/2010)/ 2:00PM MT [3/9/2010] 3:30 9M MT 2 am :} Cf '
mete Public Speaking 101 (PS1[~] Cancelled [y] 3/1/2010 L100AMET 3/1/2010 2:00 PM ET, 20 my} |
FREER «| Pub! Speaking 101 (PSi[~] Scheduled [>] 4/1/2010 _s:copmcT 4/2/2010 _9:00 AM CT 3 a | |
TEESE 9) introduction to int (Tracing Avendee Deal poe eens 20 3; f
a * Training Attendee Detail Si 4
Attendees
—- Attendee Name BBM [=] Emma Hawthorne Bw
——_,. Email Address hawthornee@company.com
Companies ‘[Detais Attendees sakes
00} ‘aiues » tho Survey Result
- as = — Attended Course? ©) Sommary
Exit — iif attendee Melt 1. Mined Ser CO
[Recore Tor
OpenGate Software L J
a}
Femi 8 Minion fees (SRS SH iy
After completing this chapter, we will be able to:
>» Analyse the concept of database;
> Describe the techniques of Database Management System (DBMS);
> Expalin the importance of Database Management System; and
> Prepare a database by using the software.
=
S
N

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 115
The Concept of Database
Database is called the storehouse of information. It is a computer oriented
process by which collected information can be stored and recollected whenever
it is necessary. In other words, database is the store of collected data from
where information can be collected in different ways to take important
decisions. To define more easily, database is an organised list of voluminous
data from where a requisite data is identified and picked easily as well as
quickly. In this storehouse, voluminous information of different kinds are
saved. A user can collect any information from this

' Bile Edit View Insert Format Records Tools window Help

Sea os Le ae Oe Ae ee es OS = a

Foe | ee. Se |

a Abul Kasem 2F 2/2/1960 Tepra Kanaihat

| |2 M. A&A. Malek 18 1717/1990 Nanda Bhasantara

| {3 Kuddus Miah 35 2/4/1973 Basail Raukhali

| |4 Hamid Sheik i 3/4/1957 Dhakpara Dishanchar

| |s Habib Uddin Miah 30 2/6/1978 Dhakpara Dishanchar

| |6 Rahim Choudhury 28 3/6/1981 Basail Raukhali
store at anytime as per his/her requisition. Database is also called ‘Database
Management System’ (DBMS). As the data saved in the information
storehouse is used in different management work, it is called Database
Management System (DBMS). Classified information is stored in different
files with different names. So the requisite information can be found easily.
A database is usually formed with columns and rows. Every column has a
heading that indicates what type of data is contained on it. The headings are
recognised as fields. A row is formed with some columns placed side by side.
Each row is called the record.
Every column that contains Serial number, Name, Age, Date of Birth, Village,
Union etc., is a field, and under these fields data like Abul Kasem, 27,
2/2/1960Tepra Kanaihat are listed. Several fields, taken from the smae row
comprises a record. In the database placed above has 6 fields and 6 records.
Data has been started preserving in the database files in computer since the
1960s. Then a database was formed with a data table, but now the concept of
database has developed in many respects. Nowadays, one or multiple files of
datatables, query, form, report, maxo, module, etc., can be saved under a
database so database is one or multiple files enriched with data or information.

eo Some essential database programmes are Microsoft Access, Foxpro, Debase,
s Foxbase, Oracle, Fourth Dimension, Paradox, etc.

116 Information and Communication Technology

Characteristics of Database Programme

e Voluminous data is stored in an organised way by preparing tables in
database, and that can be used whenever required.

e The accounts of industries, inventory management, annual report,
production and sale accounts, etc., can be stoted and controlled easily.

e Any required information from the capacious store of enormous database
can easily be traced out.

e It is possible to take print out preparing a report with the necessary records
picking from the mammoth store of database. Graph, chart and picture can
be inserted to the report.

e Itis possible to create mailing label with the necessary records taking from
the database.

e The data entry is made limited by imposing condition in fields for not
making any flaw while giving entry in database programme. It is called
input validation. Suppose that entry is being given to a salary field of a
datatable where minimum salary is Tk 2000 and maximum is Tk 11500. If
a condition of input validation of >=2000 and <=11500 is given in this
field, no entry will be accepted except minimum Tk 2000 or above and
maximum Tk 11500 or below, and an error message will be shown.

e Datatable can be created by separating records from database by imposing
conditions in query.

e Arelation can be created to exchange data between two tables on the basis
of certain fields.

e Index is used to find out information from database. If any index is created
on a field, the value and the record-reference of the field is arranged in an
order. An index file can arrange the records in different ways without
changing the original datafile. One can easily find a topic, just seeing the
contant of a book. In the same way, it is possible to find information easily
even from a database.

e A link is possible to create among the files. So, when a piece of information
saved in other linked file is updated, it will be updated automatically in
other files too.

e The record structure of data in a database can be changed if necessary. When some
pieces of work need to be done repeatedly, a Macro can be created collectively
with these jobs, and transforming those into a single action, it can be used time
after time. It saves time and the users get rid of doing the same work repeatedly. S

g

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 117

The Concept of Database and Access

The work of a database is done in microcomputer mainly with Microsoft

Access software which is a popular database software created by Microsoft

corporation.

Preparation for Starting Work in Access Programme

Microsoft Office Access is required to instal in the computer for doing the

work of database with Access programme.

Opening Access Programme

To open Microsoft access programme:

1. Click the start button taking the mouse
pointer on it below the left corner of the New Blank Database
screen, and a menu will appear on the .
screen. .

2. When the mouse pointer will be placed
on All Programmes of this menu, another
menu will be visible. Blank Database

3. Clicking Microsoft Office, you will get a
list of programmes of Microsoft Office in
another menu. Blank Database

5. If you select Microsoft Office Access | Sistas csmunooee
command from this list, it will open. File tame:

6. Click on the icon of Blank Database on | "**“* _ al
the left side above Microsoft Office | “Y"" P|
Access window and put the file name of Greate] [Cancel |
in the blank dialogue box. Type ‘Practice
-1.

7. Click on the folder icon of the right comer of File Name edit bar,
‘Practice-1’ will remain as the new file name in the dialogue box. If it is
required to save in any folder, create that folder.

8. If you click on ‘OK’ button in the dialogue box, the previous dialogue box
will be restored.

9. If you click on ‘Create’ button in the dialogue box, a blank window will
come for creating table. ‘Practice-1: Database...’ will be written on the title

- bar of the window.
S
N

118 Information and Communieation Technology
Oa) | )e Table Tools Practice-1: Database (Access 2007) - Microsoft Access
ness Table ~ | * : (new) —

Creating Database Table

Creation of Database Table will be started from Practice -1 window. To do this:

1. Select ‘Design View’ from the drop-down menu of ‘View’, and ‘save as’
dialogue box will come. In the dialogue box of table name, “Table-1’ will
be written. The database table will be saved after this name. Click ‘Ok’
button to save the name of the table. Ce

2. The window of the fields of database
table will come. ween:

3. Press ‘Tab’ button after typing serial ; |
number in the cell of field name, the [06] [Cancel |
cursor will go to the cell of ‘Data ~—————________
Type’ .If you click in the drop-down arrow in this cell, a list of different
types of data will be viewed such as text, number, currency, date/time, etc.

- Select the requisite data type from ,...... ————— -
this list. If ‘number’ is selected, ps
calculation can be done with the data — a —
of this field. Age can be calculated —
either on the date or on time or on =
information of datafield. —4
Mathematical works like summation, ———
subtraction, multiplication, division, “Se
ete. can not be done with letter = ff
oriented datafield. meet

- With the selection of datatype, some other aspects of data in the cells below
field properties should be selected too, for example, in the right cell of
‘Field Size’, it must be mentioned how big will be the size of fields and
what the other aspects
will be. The field has an own standard. It can be changed if necessary. =

N

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 119
A Field size should be bigger than the requisite size so that data can not be
destroyed, but it should not be un necessarily big in size.

4. After completing typing the field names and clicking ‘View Icon’ or
selecting ‘Datasheet View’ from view drop-down on the left corner above,
a dialogue box will come for the saving command of the table.

5. If you click ‘Yes’ button in the dialogue box, ‘Datasheet View’ or ‘Table 1
View’ window will be visible, and data will be entered into this window.

Data Entry

The first field of ‘Datasheet View’ always remains selected. If it is not, select it

and complete data entry typing in the usual system of word processing.

Table Tools Practice-1 : Database (Access 2007) - Microsoft Access
mal Data Database Tools Datasheet [
HEA =y OF Ses #= a) |= New = Totals al wy “> Selection
ae = aBsave Wspeiting HL 4 Aavancec
Zo pase Rates sae pines
| J Tamer : _
SING < Name ¥. Age + |DateofBirtt+ Village ~ Union -_ Add New Fieh
1 Kasem a7 2/2/1960 Tepra Kanaihat
2 Malek 18 1/1/1990 Nanda Bhasantara
3 Kuddus Miah 35 2/4/1973 Basil Raukhali
4 Hamid Sheik 50 3/4/1957 Dhakpara Dishanchar
5 Habib Uddin Miah 30 2/5/1978 Dhakpara Dishanchar
6 Rahim Choudhury 28. 3/6/1981. Basil Raukhali
7 Abdul Karim Khar 40 6/5/1969 Nanda Bhasantara
8 Rahima Banu 25 3/5/1982 Tepra Kanaihat
3 MAKalam 16 2/6/1992 Basil Raukhali
10 Charubala Dasi 60 5/4/1948 Nanda Bhasantara
22 Khokon Molla is 8/9/1993 Tepra Kanaihat
12 MA Latif 22 2/5/1985 Basil Raukhali
13 HanifaBegam aL 5/6/1968 Nanda Bhasantara
14 Mimin Uddin Sheik 55 3/4/1953 Dhakpara Dishanchar
15 Kalman Nesa 33 2/3/1974 Tepra Kanaihat
16 Rahela Khatun 24 1/9/1983 Tepra Kanaihat
17 Narendra Halder 70 6/6/1936 Nanda Bhasantara

The font, font size, etc. will be selected before data entry, but this job can be

done anytime in the middle of the job. Press the ‘Tab’ button after the

completion of typing data of a field to take the cursor to the next field. After
typing the data of the last field, press the ‘Tab’ button of the keyboard, and the
cursor will go to the first field of next record. Creating a Table or Database will
be completed in the same process. Keep in mind that you have to save data at
regular intervals, and to do the job, click ‘save icon’ or give ‘save’ command
from the drop-down menu of office button, or press Ctrl S button of the
keyboard.

2 The above database table can be created according to the described process.

S

N

120 Information and Communication Technology

Changing Font Size

If you change the font size keeping the insertion pointer in any cell of the table,

the font size of the whole table will be changed. The font size of a single cell

can not be change separately.

Correction of spelling error

Take the insertion pointer and click it to the cell where the correction of

spelling error is required. Following the general rule, type the correct spelling

of the word to be corrected.

Closing and Opening of Database File

It is impossible to enter information, make correction and do the editing at a

time in a database file when the bulk is large. So, what is possible to do at a

time should be done, and the file will be saved and closed. The rest of the work

will be completed after opening again.

To open a closed file =) voor Lt _ Steet

1. Enter the folder in which the file is saved. aon

2. Select the file clicking on it. view |\_—“aiptaaea_—_5

3. Click the open button on the menu bar above, hs stickied —. anne
and the database file will be opened. SS ee

4. Click double on the ‘Table’ left, the table eA!
prepared as database will open. |

The works of the next phase will be started from here. —

Inserting New Field and Column to Table

To insert new fields to database table:

1. If You Click either ‘View’ icon or select ‘Design View’ from the list of
‘View Drop-down’, you will see ‘Design View’ window.

3. Click ‘Design’, and the ribbon of ‘Design Menu’ will be exposed. Click
‘Insert Rows’ and a new field will be inserted above the cell where the
insertion pointer stays.

4. Suppose that Male/Female will be typed as the name of the new field.

- Click ‘View’ icon or select ‘Datasheet View’ command from the list of
‘View Drop-down’, a message box for saving field will come. Click the
“Yes’ button of message box.

Getting back to datasheet window, you will find that a new field named
‘Male/Female’ has been inserted. You have filled the field. x
N

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 121

Delete Field or Column

To delete unnecessary field:

1. Select the field. Put the insertion pointer on the field and it will be
transformed into a downward arrow. Click and the whole column will be
selected.

2. Click either ‘Delete’ icon of the ‘Home’ menu or on the ribbon of datasheet
menu, the whole column with the entire field will be deleted.

A cautionary message box will come before the activation of deleting

command. Click ‘Yes’ button and the selected field will be permanently

deleted. Once deleted, it can not be undone.

Deleting Records or Rows

To delete records or rows:

1. Select the record or row. Taking the insertion pointer at the extreme left of
the row, click the mouse, and the whole row will be selected.

2. Click ‘Delete’ icon on the ribbon of Home menu and a cautionary message
box will come before the activation of deleting command.

3. Click “Yes’ button and the selected row will be permanently deleted. Once
deleted, it can not be undone.

Alphabetical and Cardinal Sorting of Data

The entire database can be sorted alphabetically and cardinally on the basis of

either a field or a column after preparing a table. Alphabetical and cardinal

sorting can be done in both the Ascending and Descending order. Ascending

Order means sorting from small to lagre order (A... B... C... Z, 1... 10... 50...

100) and Descending Order means sorting from large to small order (Z ...C ...B

.-A, 100 ...50 ...10 ...1).

The datafield of names, villages and | °- a a AN AAI A

unions can be sorted alphabetically uation ® “= ment Ra

and the datafield of serial number, re ei a

age and date of birth can be sorted Nala 2 eames eras

cardinally. oe

Put the insertion pointer in any cell of pearunn 3¢_MA/ES7 Teaes_juanatem

the field to sort the data of a table on iat i sie i

the basis of the age. Click the Shenton % Ws eae Soh

Ascending icon on the ribbon of Lisa ae a

Home menu, and the entire data will hl ner syne a

be sorted on Ascending Order | *""

122 Information and Communication Technology
according to the age. Similarly, if you click the Descending icon, all data will
be sorted as per age.
The complexion of the record will be changed after the sorting of data, but the
other information will remain unchanged, for example, after sorting in the
Ascending Order on the basis of age, the record of number 11 gets on the top
of the table as he is the youngest of all. If we notice, we will see that the other
information remain unchanged. If the change is done mistakenly, give undo
command immediately. They will restore to the previous state.
Searching Information
To find out the name of a particular person from a database containing a huge
bulk of data:
1. Click ‘Find’ icon on the ribbon of ‘Home’ menu, and you will get ‘Find and
Replace’ dialogue box.
2. Write the name or part of the name of the person to be searched out on
‘Find What’ edit bar of the dialogue box.
- Asapart of the name, either the title or surname can be typed.
3. Select name from the list of ‘Look in drop-down’ of the dialogue box.
- From the list of ‘Match drop-down’ select ‘Any Part of Field’.
4. Click ‘Find Next’ button of the dialogue box.
- As soon as you click, the
name, title or surname typed | 8
in the cell of ‘Find What’ Schau 53 ssn ite
will be selected. If the word as eo
is the title or part of many eau ? ee
names, click again the ‘Find tomas [tele
Next’ button. In this way, the once |||" al =
next name having the same ee os
part or title will be selected. aimaet
Clicking repeatedly ‘Find aetna ; a
Next’ button, all the names Stiraene | zac ciel
can be viewed. When the last aaa a
name is viewed, a uaiaihinionn a
conformation message about | +. ea
the completion of finding out
names will come. If there is no need to find out any more name, click the
cancel button of the dialogue box. =
N

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 123
Searching Conditional Information
It may require to find out either the information of the people of village
‘Nanda’, or the union of ‘Raukhali’, or people ages range from 30 to 60,
people below 18 years of age, ete. Besides, more conditional search out may be
tequired, and it is very easy. After inserting the conditions and giving
command to find out, instantly the information covering the conditions will be
viewed on screen, Searching conditional information are shown below:
Searching records of people whose ages range from 30 to 60.
To find out their records:
1. Put the insertion pointer in any cell of ‘Age’ field.
2. Click the ‘Filter’ icon on the ribbon, and the Filter dialogue box will be
viewed on the screen. —
Filters’ drop-down menu of the ‘ners $e Wittens Sahat
dialogue box, and ‘Between ot a
Numbers’ Dialogue box will 1 mn Becker ——
4. Typing 30 in the ‘Smallest’ cell saacoigad 1B —
and 60 in the largest cell in the | So: ie
5. The records of the people ages
from 30 to 60 will be viewed on [OS en a "
the screen. Between Numbers LB 38
To undo the conditional records, Smallest: 30
place mouse pointer on ‘Toggle Largest; 60
Filter’ icon of ribbon, and the icon a ee
will work as ‘Remove Filter’. If you ——— EE
click now, the conditional
records will restore to the po»
previous state and the osm: mane 5 Ae A oweotpn vilage 2) un
‘Toggle Filter’ icon will be rapa isaac eee
transformed into ‘Apply SES a a
Filter’ icon. Click the ‘Apply = fis a
Ny 1 Arzu Nah 56 3/4/2952 Nanda

124 Information and Communication Technology

Searching Information on the Basis of Village Name

There are names of four villages in sample database. Records of either any of

the villages or two or three villages may be viewed on the screen.

To view any one of the four villages :

1. The records of the village you want to view, clicking the mouse pointer, put
the insertion pointer in the cell of the village. Suppose that the insertion
pointer is put in any of the cells of the village of ‘Basail’.

2. You will get a menu —
by clicking _ the Fi sine theme o] ae sh a
‘Selection’ icon on |) érimcewnn a tists teat — oa
the ribbon. Select | 0 ois See
Equals *Basail’ and | ri ‘ach Abdul Halim Biswas 63 5/5/1947 Basail Raukhali
Contains “Basail’
from this menu, you will get only the records of the people of ‘Basail’.

- If you select Does not Equal Basail and Does not Contains Basail, the
records of other villages except ‘Basail’ will be viewed.

To undo or delete conditional records follow the instruction described above.

Viewing Records of More Villages

To view records of more villages at a time:

1. If you put the insertion pointer in any cell of ‘Village Field’, a dorp-down
arrow will be added to the ‘Village Field’ at the right side. Click the
drop-down arrow, a short dialogue box will come. Inside the dialogue box

2. Selecting ‘All’ and clicking ‘Blanks’
checkbox, remove the tick marks. ‘Millage = Union - Add NewField

3. The tick marks in the checkboxes |''°*" i‘ —
beside the names of the village the | js.) 9 7 nn.
record of which you would like to | 'P% scsi ;
view will be kept, and the other tick |/2"""" Ser]
marks in the checkboxes will be |) nonda mets
removed. It is viewed in the image at | |!**" Jj Dnakpara
the right side that keeping the tick |... nee:
marks in the checkboxes of |' ‘er
‘Dhakpara’ and ‘Tepra’, the rest of the [°°
tick marks will be removed. i Dhakpara =

yi f — OK Cancel 2
SS

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 125
4. Clicking the *Ok’ | “S) Tablet 3) Tablet Fitter
button of sortbox, SING © Name -| Age - DateofBirtt~| village -¥ Union -
view the records Ata soak = ope este acer
of the villages of ica 5 Habib Uddin Miah 30 2/5/1978 Dhakpara Dishanchar
8 Rahima Banu 25 3/5/1982 Tepra Kanaihat
‘Dhakpara’ and 11 Khokon Molla 15 8/9/1993 Tepra Kanaihat
To undo or delete the 16 Rahela Khatun 24 1/9/1983 Tepra Kanaihat
49 Nasreen Choudhury 47 2/5/1360 Dhakpara Dishanchar
shown records, follow 20 Mishu Mallik v7 2/6/1991 Tapra Kanalhat
the previous steps.
Searching Information on the Basis of Male/Female
There is a field in the database on the title of Male/Female. Only the records of
male and female can be viewed from this database. In the field, M stands for
male and F stands for Female.
To get the information of only the female from this database
1. Clicking the mouse | |S = rar
pointer, put the insertion |“ astm 9) sas ps tran
pointer in any field of ‘PF’, | 40 Charudaia Dest F 0 5/4/1348 Nanda Bhasantara
| 13 Hanife Began F a 5/6/1968 Nendo Bhasantars
2. Click the ‘Selection’ icon | ESS FS
on the ribbon, and a menu a 18 Nasreencrouehay—F a 25/1960 Dnakpara. —_—Dishancher
will be viewed. “
- If you select Equals ‘F’ and Contains ‘F’ from this menu, only the records
of the female of different villages will be viewed on the screen.
Query and Report
Collecting and viewing conditional information are possible in query system
except the methods described above, but for saving conditional records and
taking print out, viewed information should be saved as query. Even, it will be
transformed as report to take print or supply as a printed matter. In query,
information is presented in an attractive way.
Collecting and Saving Information in Query Method
Suppose that collection and saving of information will be in the query process
on the basis of created table. To proceed with the operation:
1. Open ‘Table 1’ of database. Only one table exists here.
2. Click ‘Query Design’ icon on the ribbon of ‘Create’ menu, a window of
s collecting information in query process will come on the screen. ‘Show
nN

126 Information and Communication Technology
Table’ dialogue box will Sm) a
come with this window too. (tee

3. If you select ‘Table 1’ in venom |
‘Show Table’ dialogue box vie
and click ‘Add’ button, all ae = =
the fields or headings of Table [rabie: Tobie Table! Tablet
table will be found included | wm) sesame 00 Z
in the fieldstring.

4. Now click the ‘Close’ button of ‘Show Table’ dialogue box to close it.

5. If you click double on a name of field of the fieldbox, it will come in the
first cell of fieldstring. In this way, all the fields can be gradually included
in the fieldstring or only the necessary fields can be included. In this
sample, the fields of name, age, village, and union have been included.

6. The field on the basis of which the information is required, add condition
in the cell of ‘Criteria’ below the field, for example, several conditions can
be imposed on age factors. The information of the people above, below and
within the certain age limit can be collected.

A. If >30 is typed, the information of the people aged above 30 will be
collected. If >=30 is typed, the records of people aged 30 and above
will be shown.

B. If <30 is typed, the information of the people aged below 30 will be
shown. If <=30 is typed, the information of the people aged 30 and below
will be viewed.

C. If>=30 and <=60 is typed, the records of the people aged 30 and above
and 60 and below will be shown.

7. After typing the conditions, click ||| mua) wn
‘Run’ icon on the ribbon of en ; ae —— , — :
‘Design’ menu, and the records Hamid sheik 50 Dhakpara __Dishanchar

- If you collect information on | 22:2" ——
query process, the title ‘Query Vie Mimin Uddin Sheik $5; Dhakpars ae
will be shown beside ‘Table 1’. — ci a

8. Click ‘Save’ icon, and ‘Save as’ dislogue box will come.

- After typing a name of query, for example, ‘Age Query’ in the dialogue box,
if you click OK button, ‘Query 1’ will be changed to ‘Age Query, andit will .
be enlisted in the database window. Query icon will be shown with the name §$

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 127
of query. Click double on the file of ‘Age Query’ in database window, the
file will be activated. As long as the file is active, prints can be taken,
preserved, supplied and distributed.

Collecting Information on the Basis of Villages and Unions in

Query Process

To collect information on the basis of villages and unions:

1. Select ‘Table 1’ from database window.

2. Click ‘Query Design’ icon on the ribbon of ‘Create’ menu, and get a
diagram for collecting information. ‘Show Table’ dialogue box will come
with this diagram.

3. Selecting ‘Table 1’ in ‘Show Table’ dialogue box if you click ‘Add’ button,
all the fields will be found included in the fieldstring.

4. Clicking ‘Close’ button of ‘Show Table’ dialogue box, close it.

5. If you click double on a name of a field of the fieldbox, it will come in the
first cell of fieldstring. In this way, all the fields can be gradually included
in the fieldstring or only the necessary fields can be included. In this
sample, the fields of name, age, village, and union have been included.

6. The field on the basis of which a
the information is required, add |) -—__
condition in the row of ‘Criteria’ sen *
below the field. nk |

7. Clicking in the row of ‘Criteria’ ete |
straight below the village field, ore =
put the insertion pointer. oe

8. Suppose that you have to collect el — — ——
the records of the village of | m=  ~ os .
Basail, Tepra and Nanda. To get || cae
the job done
A. Type ‘Basail’ in the cell of ‘Criteria’.

B. In the row below ‘Basail’, put the insertion pointer clicking the mouse
and type ‘Tepra’.

C. In the row below ‘Tepra’, put the insertion pointer clicking the mouse
and type ‘Nanda’.

- Quotation Marks will automatically be put around the names that will be

SI typed.
N

128 Information and Communication Technology
s © o£ 7 ‘ en — "
9. Click Run’ icon on the ribbon alee) on .
of ‘Design’ menu after typing | © eme —- —se 2S -SCilloge =~ Union
the conditions the records will # Kasem 27 Tepra Kanaihat
? Malek 18 Nanda Bhesantara
be shown on the screen as kuddus Miah 35 Basal Raukhali
‘ dhury 28 Basail Raukhali
required, nae = Khan 40 Nanda Bhasantara
10.Click ‘Save’ icon, and ‘Save as’ Rahima Banu 25 Tepra Kanaihat
2 : MA Kalam 16 Basail Raukhali
dislogue box will come. Charubala Dasi 60 Nanda ahasantara
- After typing a name of query, |” 7
for example, ‘Vill Que: * in Hanita Begam 41 Nanda Shesantara
2 P ©, Vi age ty . Kaiman Nesa 33 Tepra Kanaihat
the dialogue box, if you click Rahela Khatun 24 Tepra Kanathat
« ? 7 Narendra Halder 70 Nanda Ahasantara
OK button, Query 1’ will be Abdul Halim Biswas 63 Basail Raukhali
changed to ‘Village Query, and Mishu Mallik 17 Tepra Kanaihat
it will be enlisted in the database | , 7" ee
window. Query icon will be
shown with the name of query, Click double on the file of “Village Query’
in database window, and the file will be activated. As long as the file is
active, prints can be taken, preserved, supplied and distributed.
| 22) tablet 51. Age Query | 31. village Quen | [i Age Query | a
j ier Thursday, May 29, 2014:
SI | Age Query 4:13:25 PM’
“| Name Age Village Union
‘ Kuddus Miah j "35 Basail Raukhali ca
E Hamid Sheik 50 Dhakpara Dishanchar
Habib Uddin Miah 30 Dhakpara Dishanchar
Abdul Karim Khan 40 Nanda Bhasantara
Charubala Dasi 60 Nanda Bhasantara
Hanifa Begam 41 Nanda Bhasantara
Mimin Uddin Sheik 55 Dhakpara Dishanchar
Kaiman Nesa 33 Tepra Kanaihat
Nasreen Choudhury 47 Dhakpara Dishanchar
Arzu Miah 56 Nanda
10
Page lofi
Report
Usually information is supplied or distributed as report format. Report canbe
. ° . oT
prepared either on the basis of the entire database or on query file. A report &

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 129

based on age query can be prepared. The file on which the report will be

prepared must be selected. After the selection

1. Click ‘Report’ icon on the ribbon of [js sj accu) Sanaa) ll com
‘Create’ menu, and the window of

2. The fields of query files are kept in aimaadas Sear

3. The sideways extension of these | ooo... <a — wae
fields may be wider than it i8 | 0 ooisnou se aicidin | Weal
tequired. To bring the measurement Habib Udoin mah 30 Dhakpers —Dishanchar
in usual position: Abdul Karim Khan 40 Nanda Bhasantars

A. Select the field by clickmg the name — Dasi @® Nands Bhasantara
either the left or the right margin the | oo. yess cao | ee
measurement of the field can be Naween Choudhury 47 Ohekpers Oishancher
reduced or extended.

Besides, the page number below the ;

report, boxes of date and time at the | Ma)| =! ats

right side can be reduced and extended | 7 Pint Preview

in the sameway or placed in another) < == —

position by dragzing. if! Ay cy itl

Clicking double on the title of the report Print Sue Portrait| Landscape Margins

and after selecting, it is possible to write | =, anatayout

B. Click drop-down arrow of ‘View? ——— -
icon and select ‘Print Preview’ |“ " "TG ... F
be on the screen. sis ee cate

4. If the presentation is not in the || \Gccun 7 csr mun
expected order, click ‘Close Print Haris Shot 28 Dhakpars Dishanchar
Preview’ icon on the tibbon at the Habib Usdin Mish 20 Dhakpars — Dishanchar
right side, and the report will restore Abdul Karten Khar 40 Nanda Bhasantara
to the ‘Layout View’.

- If it is required to rearrange the size and shape of the field, do it trying
repeatedly.

130 Information and Communication Tachnolagy
on the ribbon, the measurement of page and margin should be adjusted aa
required. Then connect the printer toe the computer and click the ‘Print’

6. After the satisfactory editing work, click ‘Save’ icon, and ‘Save Ag’

7. In the ‘Save As’ dialogue box, type a name of the report, for example, ‘Age
Report’, and click Ok button.

- The report file will be saved as ‘Age Report’ and be listed in the databsse
window in the same nsme.

Adding Gridiines to Report GEE

vertical lines crossing each other on the recorda, | - 9000 7 ONE”

Usually gridlines stays under the field, but gridlines - ph Color~

can be added over and under the records and Gridlines

removed if necessary. To add and remove gridlines:

1. Click ‘Report Tab’ preasing the right button of the mouse, and a drop-down
mem will be viewed Select ‘Layout View’, and the report will be
transformed in a layout view.

2. Click inside the report, aaa

3. The tools of adding gridlines to the

4. Click the downward arrow below a aaa in
of different types of gridlines will muddus Miah 39 Sassi) fimatal
Cross Hatch, Top, Bottom, Outline pao uddin man 30 Ghakpara  Bichuncher
be selected. The sample of | Svom © oe sheen
gidlines which will be clicked, Rasen pen __ ier
will be id i on or below the Carrer) Utd ie Siri 33 — teouncar

5. Click ‘Width’ drop-down amow | ou us
from gridline toolbox, and the me
sample of narrow and thick lines ms
will be shown. =

The Importance of Information & Communication Technology 131
If comparatively thick line is clicked, the gridline will be thick and on the
other hand, if narrow line is clicked, the gridline will be thin.

6. Click ‘Style’ drop-down arrow from gridline toolbox to change the style of
gridline, the samples of different lines will be shown. The sample which
will be clicked, the gridline will be changed accordingly.

7. Click ‘Color’ drop-down arrow from the gridline toolbox to change the
color of gridline, and a palette will be shown. The color which will be
clicked, the gridline color will be changed accordingly.

8. Click downward arrow below the gridlines diagram from the toolbox to
remove gridline from the report, and samples of different gridlines will be
shown. Click ‘None’ at the bottom of the sample. The gridline imposed on
the report will be removed.

After making the gridline thick or thin, imposing color on the lines and doing

other requisite works, click outside the top margin, and the selection of gridline

will no more be viewed.
Exercise

1. Which of the following pieces of Software is used to find out a piece of

information out of masses?
A. Database Software B. Spreadsheet Software
C. Presentation Software D. Word Processing Software

2. Which one of the following is used to fix the shape of a Field Name?
A. Create B. Field name
C. Field Size D. Design View

3. By using Database Programme_

i. the annual account and the information of production can be preserved
easily.
ii. the presentation of information can be faster.
fo iii. the required records can be found easly.
3
Q

132 Information and Communication Technology
Which one is correct?
a i&ii b. i& iii
c. ii & iti d. i, ti & iii
Read the chapter below, and answer the question nos. 4 & 5:
Maleka Begum is the owner of a Garments Factory of Bangladesh. She wants
to use computer for the smooth management of her company.
4. Which piece of Software is suitable for Maleka Begum?
A. Database Software B. Spreadsheet Software
C. Presentation Software D. Word Processing Software
5. By using the software, Maleka Begum will be able to_
i. keep the information updated.
ii. add new information.
iii. reduce costing of office management.
Which one is correct?
a. i&ii b. i& iii
c. ii & iti d. i, ii & iii
6. Describe the process of inserting a new field in the above Database.
7. ‘Database Management can enhance speed in the official works of a
company.’ Analyze.
The End
S

sist @ Pe fetocrd Xba xbca afosis s eifocaicdd Gay ATMA CRSA OFOICA
Sop FRI-4 (GA BR, 28 VS AS) CHT SPA
wor
For free distribution from academic year 2015 by the Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh

