@
zucation
e
ine-Ten
Bor i Yard * el ~ o © aS Gr 28
840 oy ele Seika i Oy?
weer * * <a
wy N
é u J a AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH
Tree’

Prescribed by the National Curriculum & Textbook Board
as a Textbook for Class Nine-Ten from the academic year 2013
Islam and Moral Education
Classes Nine-Ten
Written by
Muhammad Abdul Malek
Dr. Muhammad Abdur Rashid
Dr. Mohammad Yousuf
Edited by
Dr. Md. Akhtaruzzaman
Translated by
Dr. Mohammad Ibrahim
M. A. Kuddus
NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH.

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70 Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka.
[All rights reserved by the Publisher]
First Edition: December, 2012
Revised Edition: November, 2014
Reprint: 2016

Co-ordinators

Rabeka Sultana Lipy

Md. Anisur Rahman
Cover Design

Sudarshan Bachar
Sujaul Abedeen
Illustration
Arifur Rahman Tapu
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
Computer Compose
Laser Scan Ltd.
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Government of Bangladesh
Printed by:

Preface
Education is the pre-requisite for holistic development in our national life. To cope with the
challenges of the fast changing world and to lead Bangladesh to the doorstep of development
and prosperity, a well educated and skilled population is needed. In order to build up a nation
imbued with the spirit of the Language Movement and our Liberation War, the secondary
education aims at flourishing the talents and prospects inherent in the learners. Besides, the
other aims also include expansion and consolidation of the basic knowledge and skills of the
learners acquired at the primary level in order to make them fit for entry into higher education.
The aims of secondary education further emphasise developing these learners as skilled
and competent citizens of the country through the process of acquiring knowledge at the
backdrop of socio-economic, cultural and environmental settings.
Keeping the aims and objectives of National Education Policy 2010in mind, the curriculum at
the secondary level has been revised. In the revised curriculum the national aims, objectives
and contemporary needs have been reflected. Along with these expected learning outcomes
have been determined based on the learner's age, merit and level of acquisition. Besides,
efforts have been made to raise, starting from the level of moral and humanistic values down
to awareness of history and tradition, the spirit of the Liberation War, passion for art-culture
and literature, patriotism, feelings for nature and equal dignity to all irrespective of religions,
caste, creed and sex. Efforts have also been made to apply science in all spheres of our life in
order to build a nation advanced in science. Attempts are also there to make the learner
capable of implementing the goals envisioned in Digital Bangladesh-2021.
In the light of the present curriculum almost all the textbooks at the secondary level have
been introduced. While introducing the textbooks, the capacity, aptitude and prior knowledge
of the learners have been taken into utmost consideration. While selecting the contexts and
their presentation special attention has been given to the expansion of the learner's creative
faculty. Adding learning outcomes at the beginning of each chapter and hints about the
achievable knowledge of the learners have been given. By adding a variety of activities,
creative and other questions, evaluation has also been made creative.
The fundamental laws of Islam are eteranl and immutable. At the inception of the twenty first
century these eternal laws of Islam demand due emphasis for application in the life and
activities of the students who have experienced tremendous changes in terms of aspirations and
humanitarian philosophy of life, which Islam advocates so that they acquire such values as
patriotism, honesty, justice, tolerance, liberalism, dignity of labour, duties towards family and
society, democratie spirit, non-communal ideal of life and the sense of equality of all citizens.
This book entitled Islam and Moral Education has been written with this objective in view.
Considering the challenges and commitments of 21st century and following the revised
curriculum the textbook has been written. Recently, the rational evaluation and tryout
program has been completed to make correction and revision of the textbook. I hope the
outcomes of the programe will be reflected in this revised edition. Any constructive suggestion
for the improvement of the textbook will be welcomed and incorporated in future editions.
We appreciate the endeavours of those who assisted very sincerely with their merit and hard
work in the process of writing, editing, translating, revision, illustration and printing of the
book. We hope the book will ensure joyful reading and achievement of expected skills from
the learners.
Prof. Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh.

CONTENTS
Chapter - 1 : Aqaid and Moral Life 1-36 Characteristics of Learner 101
Islam 2 Qualities of Teacher 102
Iman 4 Student-Teacher Relationship 103
Importance of Iman in Fostering Human Values 6 Education and Morality 104
Tawhid 8 Jihad 106
The Identiy of Allah, the Most High 9 Jihad and Terrorism 107
Kofr 10 Chapter - 4 : Akhlaq 111-153
Shirk 12 Akhlag-i-Hamidah 112
Nifaq 14 Taqwa 114
Risalat 15 Keeping Promise 115
Risalat and Nabuwwat for Expanding of Moral 19 Truthfulness 117
Values Courtesy 118
The Revealed Books 20 Amanat 120
Role of Revealed Books in Moulding Moral Life] 24 Service to Humanity 122
Akhirat 25 Fraternity and Communal Harmony 123
Some Stages of life in Akhirat 26 Respect for Woman 126
Role of belief in Akhirat in Forming Pious and 32 Patriotism 129
Moral Life Dutifulness 131
Chapter - 2 : Sources of Akhirat 37-86 | Cleanliness 132
Shariat 37 Frugality 134
First source of Shariat : Al-Quran 39 Self-Purification 136
Preservation and Compilation of Al-Quran 41 Commanding Good Deeds and Forbidding 138
Makki and Madani Suras 44 Womg Deeds
Tilawat : Its Importance and Excellence 46 Akhlaq-i-Zamimah 140
Sura Ash-Shams 48 Fraud 141
Sura Ad-Doha 51 Ghibat (Back-Biting) 142
Sura Al-Inshirah 53 Jealousy 144
Sura At-Tin 56 Fitna and Fasad 145
Sura Al-Maun 58 Indolence 147
Second Source of Shariat : Sunnah 59 Riba and Bribery 148
Hadith - 1 (Relating to Niyyat or Motive) 63 Chapter - 5 : Model Lives 154-178
Hadith - 2 (Concerning Foundation of Islam) 65 Socio-Cultural Conditions of Pre-Islamic Arabia| 155
Hadith - 3 (Concerning Charity) 66 The Holy Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.): 156
Hadith - 4 (On Plantation) 67 Birth, Childhood and Adolescence
Hadith - 5 (On the best among the mankind) 69 Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) : His Youth, 157
Hadith - 6 (On Philanthropy and Service to the 70 Prophethood and Preaching of Islam
Created beings) Madani Career of Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) 159
Hadith - 7 (Concerning Public Service) 71 Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) Conquest of Makkah 160
Hadith - 8 (On Honesty in Business) 2 and Fare-well Pilgrimage
Hadith - 9 (On Patience and Forbearance) 73 Ideal Lives of Khulafa-i-Rashidun 162
Hadith - 10 (Concerning Zikr) 74 Hazrat Umar (R.) 163
The Third Source of the Shariat : Al-Ijma 15 Hazrat Uthman (R.) 164
The Fourth Source of Shariat : Al-Qiyas 71 Hazrat Ali (R.) 166
Terminology Concerning Rules of Shariat 19 Muslim Scholars 167
Chapter - 3 : Ibadat 87-110 | Imam Abu Hanifa (R.) 168
Tbadat 87 Imam Ghazzali (R.), Ibn Jabir At-Tabari 170
Salat 90 Muslim Contribution to Learning, Science and 171
Sawm 91 Technology: Medicine
Zakat 93 Chemistry 172
Hajj 95 Geography 173
Employer-Employee-Relationship 98 Mathematics 174
Tim 99

2G 126 2
BPS Fahl cy
In the holy name of Allah, the Most Merciful, the Most Compassionate.
Islam denotes a complete code of life. It delineates clearly and impressively the
creation and ultimate destruction of the universe, all necessary mundane
matters, death, and life after death, etc. Islam leaves no area of human life
untouched. A detailed study of Islam will enable us to be conversant with all
these matters. This makes the study of Islam mandatory. The jurisdiction of
Islam being so extensive, a single volume or a certain classroom study is not at
all adequate for this purpose. These beautiful and essential teachings of Islam
have been depicted here under five chapters entitled 'Aqaid and Moral life’,
‘Sources of Shariat’, 'Tbadat', 'Akhlaq' and 'Model lives'.
CHAPTER ONE
AQAID AND MORAL LIFE
INTRODUCTION
"Aqaid' 65286) is the plural form of ‘Aqida’. It denotes a set of beliefs; firm belief
in all basic elements of Islam is regarded as Aqaid. Islam is the only Deen or
code of life as chosen by Allah, the Most High. It consists of two aspects. While
one is related to belief, another to practical conduct or application. The aspect
related to belief is Aqaid and it includes Allah, Prophets, Angels, Revealed
Scriptures, Life after Death, Paradise and Hell. These are established and proved
by Al-Quran and Al-Hadith. To become a Muslim one must repose faith on them
all. This is to be followed by the practical aspects such as prayer, fasting, Hajj
and Zakat. In fact, it is through the elements of Aqaid that one enters into the fold
of Islam. This naturally precedes any discussion on Islam.
After reading this chapter, we will be able to :-
= get an introduction to Islam and interpret the importance of Islamic studies;
= explain the relationship between Iman and Islam, and the seven basic
concepts of Iman;
= repose faith on the basic matters in relation to Iman and practise;
= describe the impact on Towhid and the manifestation of Allah, the Most
Exalted;
= explain the significance of Tawhid;
Forma-l1 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

2 Islam and Moral Education

= explain the concepts of Kufr @isbelief), Shirk (partnership with Allah)
and Nifaq (hipocrisy), their consequences and also describe the way
of avoiding them;

= avoid Kufr disbelief), Shirk (partnership with Allah) and Nifaq (hypocrisy
in practical life);

= describe the importance of Iman (belief) in developing human values;

= describe the concept of Risalat and Nabuwwat and the objective of
sending Nabi and Rasul.

= acquainte with the attributes of Nabi-Rasul, the chain of their arrival,
belief in Nabi-Rasul and explain the need to follow them;

= describe the concept of the of Prophethood and the importance of reposing
faith in the last and great Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.);

» exlain the necessity of Messengership and Prophethood in the growth of
moral values;

= realize the significance of faith in Prophethood and feel inspired to practise
the teachings of Prophethood in their own lives;

= describe the importance of the Revealed Books and the importance of
faith in them;

= explain the importance of the Revealed Books in building up a moral
lifestyles;

» explain the role of Al-Quran to formulate the principles of communal
harmony, tolerance towards the opinion of others and a liberal outlook;

= know about the Revealed Scriptures including Al-Quran and feel encouraged
to read the Quran by realizing its specialities and lead their lives on the
principles of communal harmony, tolerance and liberal outlook;

= describe the importance of the concept of life after death and faith therein;

= describe the various stages of life after death, viz, death, grave, resurrection,
assemblage, judgment, balance, bridge of test, intercession or recommendation;

= describe the nature and identity of paradise and hell, their specific names
and categories, how to win paradise and how to avoid hell;

= explain the significance of life after death in moulding a moral life-pattern;

= feel inspired to form a moral character being imbued with a sin-free,
virtuous, ethical and philanthropic norm of life.

Agaid and Moral Life 3
LESSON 1
ISLAM

Introduction
Islam (Alay) is an Arabic word. Its literal meaning is to obey, surrender and
tread the path of peace, etc. In usual practise it means obedience to the
commands of Allah and His Rasul (Sm.).
In the terminology of the Islamic Shariat, Islam means sincere belief in Allah the
Most High, complete surrender to Him, spontaneous allegiance to His
commands and prohibitions and lead one's life according to His commandments
as a practised and demonstrated by Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.).
The holy Prophet (Sm.) beautifully depicts Islam in this tradition: He says-

5 25Re So 22-5716 2 45 91 608 Bios ance aa 2k a) ant onl

Asis 5355) GBS LB) o2ais atl Jets Siu Ma giigdigl ALayi
Lepcatlcatisrore rd aes oles
Meaning: "Islam is -you will testify that there is none worthy of worship besides
Allah and Muhammad (Sm.) is Allah's Messenger. Then you will perform
prayers, offer alms, fast during Ramadan and perform Hajj at the House of Allah
if your means support." (Bukhari and Muslim)
Allah, the Most High has sent many commands - positive and negative,
numerous rules and regulations in all ages. These were provided as code of con-
duct (Shariat). The final and perfect shape of Shariat is Islam. It is the final and
best prescription for mankind. Allah, the Most High says-
4 ALM she ANS!

Meaning: "Surely, to Allah the only code of life for mankind is Islam."
(Sura Al-i-Imran, Verse 19)
So, Islam is the religion acceptable to Allah the Most High and one who leads
his life according to Islam is called a Muslim or Musalman.
The Role of Islam
Islam is the revealed religion or life commanded by Allah the Most High. It is a
special bounty of Allah the Most High for mankind. It is a complete code of life.
The perfect solutions of all matters and problems pertaining to man's life on
earth have been provided in it. Allah the Most High says:

4 Islam and Moral Education
Meaning: "Today have we perfected for you your religion and completed our
bounty upon you and have chosen for you Islam as a code of conduct." (Sura
Al-Maida, Verse: 3)

The full guidance on all matters from man from his birth to death is present in
Islam. All the personal, family, social, cultural, economic, political and
international issues have been accurately described in Islam. Even the
description of the life after death or Hereafter is provided in Islam. So, for a
disciplined and graceful life there is no alternative to Islam.

The word 'Islam' is derived from the verb root 'Silmun' (tbs) which means peace.
Islam leads man to the road to peace. Man may enjoy a perfect and peaceful life
both here and the hereafter by following the laws and regulations of Islam. So,
Islam is called the 'Religion of Peace."

Islam is a universal religion. It is not confined to any particular age, region or
place. Most other religions have been named after their founder or preacher or
follower or nation. But being a universal religion Islam has not been so named.
Rather it has been named Islam so that mankind may peacefully lead their lives
with allegiance to Allah and His Messenger (Sm.).

IMPORTANCE OF ISLAMIC LEARNING

Learning about Islam means knowing about Islam. The materialization of
anything presupposes its foreknowledge. For example, to learn swimming one
has got to know what swimming is, how to swim, etc. Driving a vehicle
presupposes the knowledge about that vehicle itself and the technique of
driving. Similarly to lead life according to Islam presupposes the knowledge of
Islam. And this can be acquired through Islamic learning.

By knowing Islam we learn how to worship and obey Allah the Most High. We
can know how to conduct our day-to day affairs. We can practice such virtues as
honesty, justice, mercy, forgiveness, humility, gentleness, etc. We can attain
noble character through forsaking vices like greed, hatred, falsehood, and pride,
back-biting. We can acquire necessary knowledge for building up the society on
the principles of equality, friendship, fraternity, tolerance, patience, fortitude,
mutual co-operation, sympathy, etc. We can also learn how to attain paradise
and redemption from hell in our next life.

Aqaid and Moral Life 5
Task: Students will show to the teacher 15 sentences written at home on the
introduction of Islam, its role and the importance of Islamic studies.
LESSON 2
IMAN (FAITH)

Introduction

The word Iman( §(@1) is derived from the verb root Amnun ( @,4 ), which means
to believe, to repose faith, to recognize, to rely, to accept, etc. In the Islamic
parlance, Iman denotes belief in the laws and regulations of Islamic Shariat at
heart, to confess in words and to demonstrate in practice. Introducing Iman
Prophet (Sm.) says-

use, 2% aa o. age ‘ 2 Ve IS ada sd ot
spgu iS aL osds sy siclsalissa gs s4SDa5ablh e235!

Meaning: "Iman is-Belief in Allah, His Angels, Scriptures, Prophets, life after
death, fate (good and evil both follow from Allah)." (Sahih Muslim Sharif)
In fact, absolute faith in the fundamentals of Islam is called Iman. The
elementary issues of faith are described in detail in the divine scripture Al-Quran
and the traditions of the Messenger of Allah (Sm.).
The basic issues of faith have been comprehensively laid down in the formula of
Iman Mufassal thus-

24 ee w el 1 2 4 om ot
sp Shai dalls Maiatl ges shan Ks ils eV sicligatsea 2 saSplegath cca
Meaning: "I repose faith in Allah, His angels, His Books, His Messengers, the
Hereafter, good and evil of fate which are from Allah the Most High and
Resurrection after death."

It is not possible to become a Mumin or Imandar without firm belief and
confidence in the above- mentioned issues. One who has full faith in them is
called a Mumin.

Relationship between Iman and Islam

Iman and Islam are two very important terminologies. Iman means belief,
sincere faith in the basic issues of Islam and testimony, and to practise them
accordingly is termed as Iman. On the other hand, Islam means self-surrender,
allegiance etc. Total self-surrender to Allah in obedience to His commands and
prohibitions is termed as Islam.

6 Islam and Moral Education
Avery close and inseparable relationship exists between Iman and Islam. One is
not even imaginable without reference to the other. Both are deeply
interdependent. Iman and Islam are closely related as roots and branches in a
tree. Iman is the root while Islam represents its branches. Branches do not grow
without roots. Again, roots are of no value unless it grows branches. Likewise
Iman and Islam, neither is complete without the other. Iman creates in man's
heart faith in and love for Allah and also a desire to win His pleasure.
Consequently Islam blooms with full glow and freshness through worship and
servitude in the heart. Islam is related to the external conduct and deeds. For
Example, Iman consists in belief in Allah, the Messengers, the Angels etc. And
the observance of Salat, Zakat and Hajj etc. are Islam as its externalities.

In fact, Iman and Islam are mutually complimentary. In order to attain success in
worldly life as well as in the hereafter, both Iman and Islam have got to be
implemented in one's life.

Seven Fundamental Aspects of Iman (Faith)

Iman means faith. A Muslim has got to believe in some fundamental issues.
These are conclusively established by the Quranic and the hadith. One cannot
become a Muslim without this set of beliefs. Such issues are seven. These
are-

1. Faith in Allah

The first and the most vital issue of Iman is faith in Allah, the Most High. Allah
is one and without a rival. There is no Ilah or Mabud ( object of worship) except
Him. He is the Creator, Nourisher and Sustainer of all and everything. He is the
embodiment of all qualities. His Being and attributes are incomparable. All
praise and worship (servitude) are due to Him alone. To repose such faith in
Allah is the most important issue of faith.

2. Belief in the Angels

The Angels are a unique creation of Allah the Most Exalted. They are created
with light. They are engaged in worshipping Allah and carrying out His
commands. They are innumerable. They are neither male nor female. They are
free from needs unlike all other living beings. To have such faith in them is
included in Iman.

Aqaid and Moral Life 7
3. Belief in the Revealed Scriptures

The revealed Scriptures are the words of Allah the Most High. He has revealed
His own identity through these. Various commands and prohibitions, rules and
regulations, good tidings, warnings, etc. have descended with them. Allah the
Most High has sent these Books to His messengers. A total of 104 Revealed
Books have been sent down on earth. It is essential to believe in all these Books.
4. Belief in the Nabi-Rasul (Prophets and Messengers)

Allah the Most High has sent many Prophets and Messengers in all ages to guide
man to the path of good. They were the chosen servants of Allah the Most High.
Among all creatures they possess the highest degree of honour. They were
sinless. In obedience to divine command they called mankind to the right path of
truth and justice and provided directions for peace and salvation both in this
world and hereafter. Belief in the Prophets and Messengers is one of the
important issues of faith (Iman).

5. Belief in Akhirat (life after death)

Akhirat is the next life after death. The life of Akhirat is ever-lasting. It has a
beginning but no end. In that life man will have to furnish an account of all his
earthly deeds. The grave, the resurrection, the balance, the Bridge (path), the
Heaven and the Hell, etc. are successive stages of the life after death. Those who
do good deeds on earth will get paradise and those not having faith and doing
evil deeds will find their place in the hell. It is essential to have faith in the
hereafter.

6. Belief in Taqdir (Fate)

Fate means a measured amount, destiny, etc. Allah the Most High is the regulator
of human destiny. It is He Who determines good and evil of fate. Man cannot do
all that he desires. Man can rather strive for his aims. After that he will not
despair even if he does not get the return after striving. Again if he gains
something, he shall not indulge in extreme joy. Rather he will adopt patience and
express gratitude as the case may be. Allah the Most High disposes both good
and bad. Such a belief is very important.

7. Belief in Resurrection

Human life does not terminate with death. Life rather consists of two parts,
mundane life and the hereafter. The former is life on earth and the latter is life
after death. Allah the Most High shall revive man after death. On that occasion

8 Islam and Moral Education
all men will assemble on the field of resurrection. On that day Allah the Most
High shall receive the accounts of all the activities of man. This being done man
will be admitted into the paradise for good deeds and into the hell for bad deeds.
So, it is an integral part of faith to believe that we shall again come to life after
death.
Task: The students will write five sentences in their scripts in the classroom
on issues of Iman and Islam.
LESSON 3
IMPORTANCE OF IMAN IN FOSTERING HUMAN VALUES
‘Iman’ means faith. Generally Iman includes faith in the fundamental issues of
Islam. The phrase ‘human values' means values related to man in society. That
means human values imply only those features and qualities which go to adorn
man. In other words, those activities, thoughts and ideas constitute human values
which are compatible with man and human civilization.
Man is 'Asraful Makhlugat' or the best of creation. From this point of
consideration man's character, features and activities - all should be excellent
and best. Beastly conduct, greed and lust are not human ideals. If any man
deviates from this ideal and behaves like beasts, then he destroys the human
values. In order to uphold human dignity and superiority, human values may be
protected by cultivating noble qualities and ideals.
The role of Iman is very important for the growth of human values. Iman fosters
the growth of human values in a number of ways. The basic implication of Iman
is - _
aul Spescsdasiany
(La Ilaha Ilallahu Muhammadur Rasulullah [Sallallahu Alaihee Wasallam]).
Meaning: "There is no entity but Allah worthy of worship. Muhammad (Sm.) is
His Messenger."
The significance of this creed is that Allah the Most High is the only Creator,
Nourisher and worthy of worship. There is none except Him worthy of praise
and worship. There cannot be prostration before anyone except Him. This creed
renders man self-respectful. A person believing in this creed bows down only
before Allah the Most High. He does not bend his head or surrender to anyone
else. As a result the dignity of man is elevated and human values are developed.

Aqaid and Moral Life 9
Faith leads man to the path of truth and beauty and inspires them for leading a
moral life. A person who is Mumin always upholds humanity and morality.
Injustice, oppression and immoral activities are opposed to Iman. A perfect
Muslim can never do anything incompatible with humanitarianism and
humanity. Rather a Muslim always follows the ideals of morality and
humanitarianism. He rather cultivates noble qualities such as equality, amity,
co-operation, sympathy, etc.
Disbelief, hypocrisy and polytheism are entirely contrary to Iman. All these
elements boost up evil deeds in man. Under the influence of them ingratitude,
distrust, breach of promise, quarrels, rebellion, etc. raise their heads. As Allah
the Most High says about the hypocrites -
Meaning: "And Allah testifies that certainly the hypocrites are liars."
(Sura: Al-Munafiqun, Ayat : 01)
Iman inspires man to acquire moral values. It restrains him from bad habits and
obscene activities. Iman warns man about his responsibility and accountability.
A Mumin always keeps in mind that one day he will have to appear before Allah
the Most High. On that day Allah the Most High will ask for an account of all his
deeds. So, in fear of this accountability a Mumin keeps himself aloof from all
kinds of inhuman and immoral actions. Allah the Most High says -

OSA PRP GG0 Gils nhl F595 sks SE gaily
Meaning: "And one who is afraid of standing before his Lord and abstains from
following his instincts, certainly paradise is his abode." (Sura: An-Naziat, Ayat:
40-41)
Both human values and Iman are deeply interrelated. A person becomes a
Mumin by his belief in the fundamental issues of Islam. He follows the divine
instructions in preference to his whims and caprices in his life's journey. As a
result he abandons all types of illegalities, injustice and immoralities and adopts
nice and excellent ideals.
Thus Iman develops humanitarianism and humanity in man.
Forma-2 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

10 Islam and Moral Education
Task: Students in the classroom will select three among themselves. They will
speak on what they have learnt about the importance of Iman in the
development of human values. All the rest of the students will listen to them.
The teacher will play his role as the chairman and moderator. All will congratulate
the best speaker.

LESSON 4
TAWHID

Introduction

'Tawhid' means monotheism. To accept and believe in Allah the Most High as

One and Second to none is called Tawhid.

The basic point of Tawhid is - Allah the Most High is one and single. He is single

in His entity and attributes. He is the only owner worthy of praise and servitude.

There is none like unto Him. Allah the Most High declares -

Meaning: "There is nothing that resembles Him." (Sura Ash-Shura, Verse 11)

Tawhid is the belief in Allah the Most High as the Creator, Nourisher, Sustainer

and the only One worthy of servitude.

Importance of Tawhid

Tawhid is the first and the most dominant aspect of Iman. That means, it is

obligatory to believe in the oneness of Allah in order to become a Mumin or

Muslim. Without belief in Tawhid no one can enter the fold of Iman or Islam. All

the teachings of Islam have their base on Tawhid. All the Prophets and

Messengers who were raised on earth extended the invitation to Tawhid. The

gist of the invitation of them all was- ai! Sra ‘y La Taha Illallah)

there is no Ilah (God) but Allah. The Prophets and Messengers struggled all
through their lives to establish the teachings of Tawhid. Hazrat Ibrahim (on him
be peace) was cast into the fire-well. Our beloved Prophet (Sm.) migrated to

Madinah. In fact, it is Tawhid which constitutes the root of Iman. Its importance

in Islam is unbounded.

Agaid and Moral Life 11
Impact of Tawhid
Tawhid is belief in the oneness of Allah the Most High. Its impact on man's life
is very wide. Belief in Tawhid furnishes man the scope to tender gratitude,
because Allah the Most High is our only Creator and Nourisher. With faith in
Tawhid man admits this truth. Man thereby pays thanks to Allah the Most High.
Faith in Tawhid renders man self-conscious and self-respectful. Man does not
bow down before anyone else. Consequently man's superiority over all other
creatures is confirmed. Man attains respect as the best of all other creations
(Ashraful Makhluqat).
The impact of Tawhid on human life is limitless on the question of attainment of
a noble character. Man becomes familiar with the identity and attributes of
Allah the
Most High and practises them for self-enrichment. Tawhid also plays a role in
establishing unity and fraternity in human society. For, faith in Tawhid
establishes the idea in society that all men are servants of Allah and are entitled
to the same status. Thus the realization of unity is aroused.
Belief in Tawhid encourages man towards servitude to Allah and good deeds.
Man engages himself to good deeds for attaining divine pleasure. He abstains
from dishonest and obscene activities. As a result, peace and discipline prevail.
Faith in Tawhid brings man success in his next life. None shall enter paradise
without faith in Tawhid. In fact, faith in Tawhid opens the gateway to liberation
and success in all spheres of life.

Task: Students will orally place before the teacher their ideas acquired on the

issue of Tawhid, its importance and impact. The teacher will evaluate the

performance.

LESSON 5
The Identity of Allah, the Most High

Allah the Most High is the Lord and owner of the universe. He is one and
without any rival. He does not have any partner. He is unique and incomparable.
His incomparable feature is explicit in His very name Allah. The word Allah
(4h) ) is Arabic. No language of the world contains its exact synonyms. It has got
no plural form, no male-female form. This word is both unique and

12 Islam and Moral Education
incomparable. So Allah is the Most High. He is one and only in his essence and
attributes. There is nothing as His rival or equivalent. Allah the Most High
declares -

. & TX 2% > fc 9 Ve oF 3

SSG hh slob ie als Ad slo cchuatlocsla 3
Meaning: "Speak, (0 Prophet) He is Allah, one and only. He is not dependent on
anyone, all are dependent on Him. He begets none, nor is He begotten. And there
is none like unto Him." (Sura: Al-Ikhlas, Ayat: 1-4)
Allah is a self-sufficient entity. He is without a beginning and without an end. He
is everlasting and omnipresent. He is absolutely free from such needs as food,
drink, sleep, drowsiness, fatigue, etc. Allah the Most High says:
402 22 Awa fEnzoe de 1e0t >
© BALE BE CE sh5° eblalls jolts 32 a SS 3h
Meaning: "He is the first. He is the last. He is Manifest. He is concealed and
He is well-conversant in all matters." (Sura: Al-Hadid, Ayat: 3)
In another place Allah the Most High declares -
< . ” aera vee Be ra Pmed 992% wi wh otes
(PMGUen MN GUS: s5 VGA ALE 258s dies Nan atl

Meaning: "He is Allah, there in none except Him worthy of worship. He is ever
living and sustains all other things. Sleep or drowsiness can never touch him.
Everything in heaven and on earth is subservient to Him." (Sura: Al-Baqara,
Ayat: 255)
Allah the Most High is the repository of all virtues. All dwell in Him in the
fullest measure. He is the Creator. The universe with all its properties is His
creation. He is the sustainer. All creatures are dependent on him for sustenance.
He is omnipotent and all-pervasive. All things are nicely and orderly operating
under His direction. In a word, He is the one possessing all attributes. His
attributes are boundless. All the beautiful and sacred names are reserved for
Him. Some such attribute names of His are ---Rahim, (the Most Merciful),
Jabbar (the Compeller), Ghaffar (the extreme Forgiver), Basir (the All-seeing),
Samiu (the All-hearing), Aliyu (the Most High/great), Hafeez (the best
Preserver/Protector).
In fact, Allah the Most High is one and unique in His essence and attributes. He
has got no partners, All praises are due to Him. The only entity worthy of wor-
ship is He.

Aqaid and Moral Life 13
LESSON 6
KUFR (DISBELIEF)

Introduction

Disbelief (a5) literally means to reject, disbelieve, cover, conceal, to show

ungratefulness, to be disobedient, etc. In the Islamic parlance 'Kufr' means

rejection or disbelief in any of the fundamental issues of the religion of Islam.

Kuff is the contrast of Iman. Belief in the basic issues of Islam is called Iman.

And disbelief in any of them is Kufr.

Kafir (unbeliever)

One who indulges in disbelief is a Kafir. In other words, if a man disbelieves in

any of the basic issues of Islam he is then termed as a kafir. 'Kafir' means

unbeliever, a rejecter. Man may become akafir in a number of ways, for exam-
ple:

a. By disbelieving or rejecting the existence of Allah. It means that if a man
says 'Allah does not exist,' he will become a kafir.

b. By rejecting the attributes of Allah. For example, not considering Allah the
Most High as the Creator or Sustainer.

c. By disbelieving in the seven basic issues of faith, these being - the Angels,
the Prophets and Messengers, the Revealed Scriptures, the Life after death,
fate, etc.

d. By rejecting the basic forms of worships such as Salat, Zakat, Swam and
Hajj.

By rejecting permitted things as forbidden such as permitted food, drink,

e. etc.

By taking forbidden things as permitted. For example, drinking wine,

f. gambling, taking interest, indulging in bribery, etc.

By imitating the unbelievers out of own choice, such as using their

g. _ religious symbols, etc.

By mocking at Islamic issues, such as talking ill of the holy Prophet (Sm.)

h. _ or ridiculing Al-Quran.

14 Islam and Moral Education
By doing the above things one turns into a Kafir. Under such circumstances one
has to reaffirm his Iman and repent with a sincere heart and also vow not to
commit them again.

Consequence and Demerits of Kufr

The consequence of kufr in human life is very grave. One will have to suffer dire
consequences for kufr not only in this life but also in the next life. Some of such
demerits are mentioned below -

a. Disobedience and Ingratitude

Kufr fosters disobedience and ingratitude in man. Allah the Most High is our
Creator. He nourishes us. All the worldly amenities are His gifts. A Kafir
disbelieves in Allah, and rejects Allah as the Giver of these bounties. He
becomes ungrateful to Allah the Most High. He disobeys the divine ordinances;
consequently, he is regarded as disobedient and ungrateful in the society.

b. Rise of sinfulness

Akafir rejects the issues of faith, such as Allah the Most High, life after death,
resurrection, balance, paradise, hell, etc. He rejects such idea that man will have
to account for his deeds in his next life. This worldly life is his dominant
concern. So, he indulges in dishonest and obscene practices by the lure of wealth
and pleasures of the world. He becomes accustomed to theft, dacoity, hijacking,
terrorism, usury, bribery, gambling, etc. As a result the society increasingly
suffers from sinfulness.

c. Formation of despair

By nature man likes to cherish hope. Without such hopes and aspirations, man
cannot survive with gracefulness. A kafir disbelieves in Allah the Most High and
fate. He becomes impatient in any danger and calamity. He cannot adopt
patience by relying on Allah the Most High. On the other hand, as he does not
have faith in fate, he utterly despairs in the face of any failure. As a result, his life
passes through extreme despondency.

d. Spread of immorality

Kufr promotes immorality in the human society. A kafir cannot realise the
importance of morality because of his lack of faith in the next life, heaven, and
hell and can desperately adopt falsehood, corruption, rape, etc. for worldly
gains. He does not follow the moral character and teachings of the Prophets and

Aqgaid and Moral Life 15
messengers because of his absence of faith in them. Thus immorality spreads in
the society through disbelief.
e. Displeasure of Allah the Most High
Disbelief in Allah and ungratefulness and disobedience to Him grow from kufr.
An unbeliever does not care for the rules and regulations, commands and
prohibitions of Allah the Most High. He rather rebels against and opposes Allah
the Most High, Islam and the Muslims. As a result, Allah the Most High
becomes displeased with him. And one is doomed to perdition notwithstanding
his high power and huge wealth, only because of displeasure of Allah the Most
High.
f. Eternal punishment
The unbelievers will suffer painful punishment in the next life. They will abide
in the hell for ever. Allah the Most High Says-
1 17 OF 1? Ge. oa? G
Meaning: "Those who disbelieve and reject our signs will surely abide in the
hell. They will remain there forever." (Sura: Al-Bagara, Ayat: 39)
Disbelieving is a deadly sin. So, all should abstain from it.
Task: Students will write 10 sentences in their script about the evil
consequences and demerits of kufr and show it to his teacher.
LESSON 7
Shirk (Partnership with Allah or Polytheism)
Introduction
‘Shirk' (J Al ) literally means to believe in a partner, to believe in a plurality
of creators or gods. In the Islamic terminology it means to associate somebody
or something with Allah or to regard them as His rival or equivalent. One who
does so, is called a Mushrik or polytheist. Shirk is the opposite of Tawhid. Allah
the Most High Himself refutes the idea of Shirk. He says - sf4j) Ji
Meaning: "Say (Oh Prophet), He is Allah, One and Single." (Sura: Ikhlas, Ayat:1)
In another place Allah the Most High says- © g7542,/ os

16 Islam and Moral Education
Meaning: "There is nothing like or comparable to Him.” (Sura: Shura, Ayat : 11)
a re Oe tad Pr

In Al-Quran it is also said: area Hagiisaé 3

Meaning: "If there were any other god in the heavens and the earth, both would

have collapsed." (Sura: Al-Ambiya, Ayat : 22)

The issue of the incomparability of Allah the Most High as well as His attributes

can be clearly realized from such Ayats of Al-Quran. So, it is undoubtedly Shirk

and a heinous sin to associate anyone with Allah the Most High.

Shirk or partnership with Allah may assume four forms: For example-

1. To associate partnership in the entity and existence of Allah the Most
High. Such as regarding Prophet Isa (Jesus) (on him be peace) as God's
son.

2. To assign a partner or a rival in the attributes of Allah the Most High,
such as regarding anyone else as the Creator or the Sustainer.

35 To take some other entity for Allah's partner in the management of the
universe, such as the Angels as managers.

4. To raise a parallel in matters of worship, such as prostrating before
anybody or anything, to sacrifice an animal in anyone's .name other than
Allah's,

Evils of Shirk and its Remedies

Shirk is a grave sin. Of all sins on earth, shirk is the most heinous. Allah the Most

High says- 290 F;

Meaning: " Verily, shirk is the extreme tyranny." (Sura Luqman, Ayat: 13)

In fact, it is Allah the Most High Who is our Creator and Nourisher. It is His gifts

that we enjoy. Beyond this, what can be greater oppression on the part of one

than raising a partner with Allah?

Allah the Most High is very displeased with the polytheists. In spite of being

extremely forgiving and unboundedly merciful, He will not forgive the sin of

Shirk. Allah the Most High says -

4 ab 28s glee z at, 200%,
© BL) I GUS G35 be $4875 4 Ths SI 3885 abl!

Aqaid and Moral Life 17
Meaning: "Surely, Allah will not forgive the sin of Shirk. Besides Shirk, He may
forgive any other sin of whom He so desires." (Sura: An-Nisa, Ayat: 48)
In fact, in no way is it possible to obtain good both here and the hereafter without
the mercy and forgiveness of Allah, the Most High. The polytheists are destined
to painful punishment in the next life. In Al-Quran, it is explicitly stated -
SEs slag id gale abl o§s Jebel dh ga
Meaning: "Allah will certainly make paradise forbidden for the polytheists. In
fact his abode is the hell." (Sura: Al-Maida, Ayat: 72)
As a matter of fact, Shirk is an unforgivable sin. All have to beware of it. If one
commits Shirk even by mistake, one must restore Iman immediately. Then he
must repent with a sincere heart and solicit Allah's forgiveness. At the same time
he must take a vow not to commit it again afterwards. Only then Allah the Most
High may forgive the sin out of His mercy and compassion.
We must necessarily avoid Shirk and become dear to Allah with a firm faith in
Him. Only then one's worldly and next life will be blissful.
Task: Students will prepare a posters containing 10 sentences about the
nature and form of Shirk, its bad consequences and remedies.
LESSON 8
NIFAQ (Hypocrisy)
Introduction
"Nifaq! literally means a false appearance, hypocrisy, duplicity, deceit, fraud etc.
In its practical sense, it signifies a false reflexion of the mind outwardly. In other
words, Nifaq is showing outward allegiance by hiding the opposition of the
mind. In the Islamic shariat usage, it means an oral admission of Islam in
contrast to the kufr or disobedience at heart. One who does so is called a
Munafiq (hypocrite). The Munafiqs are unbelievers at heart. But outwardly they
profess Islam and Iman and perform worship as Muslims.
Rasul (Sm.) describes the symbols of a Munafig thus -
Forma-3 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

18 Islam and Moral Education
Meaning : "A Munafigq has three distinctive marks. When he speaks he tells a lie,
when he promises he breaks it and when something is kept in his custody he
grabs it." (Sahih Al-Bukhari)
Bad effects of Nifaq and its remedy
Nifaq is a deadly sin. It destroys a man's character and morality. It leads man to
lies, Allah the Most High says - OSs WN odsasn St jg 85 abl
Meaning: "And Allah testifies that the hypocrites are undoubtedly liars." (Sura:
Al-Munafiqun, Ayat: 01)
Alongside telling lies, the hypocrites attach themselves with evil and immoral
activities. They do not lag behind doing harm to others for worldly gains and
protecting self-interests. They take to slander and back-biting. Consequently
suspicion and disorder grip the society. People do not trust the hypocrites for
their duplicity. Rather they are looked down upon with suspicion and hatred.
They spend their life in humiliation and disrespect in society.
The hypocrites are very harmful for Islam and the Muslims. For they help the
enemies of Islam in the guise of Muslims. They inform the enemies of the secrets
and weakness of the Muslims. In the days of Rasul (Sm) the hypocrites used to
conspire against the Muslims.
Even while staying with Islam and the Muslims, they used to disobey Allah the
Most High. The consequences of the hypocrites will be very lamentable in the
next life.
Allah the Most High says: © Wigs JLaM ehU gots §!
Meaning: "Surely the hypocrites will remain in the lowest layer of hell." (Sura
An-Nisa, Ayat : 145)
We shall save ourselves from Nifaq. We shall propagate the bad effects and
consequences of Nifaq among our kith and kin, friends and Neighbours and
warn them against it. We shall surely secure ourselves against these signs of
Nifaq as pointed out by Rasul (Sm) and build up an excellent character.

Task: Students will prepare a posters depicting the signs of a Munafiq.

Aqaid and Moral Life 19
LESSON 9
RISALAT
Introduction
The literal meaning of the word Risalat is message, to carry a letter, news, or to
discharge the responsibility of any noble task. In Islamic terminology, Risalat
denotes the conveying of the holy words of Allah the Most High to mankind.
And the person who performs this duty is termed as Rasul or Messenger. Rusul
is the plural form of Rasul.
The importance of belief in Risalat (Messengership)
It is obligatory in the Islamic view of life to believe in Risalat. Every Mumin and
Muslim has to belief in Risalat along with believe in Tawhid. This has been
nicely depicted in the Kalima-i-Tayyeba. In the first part of this Kalima
a4pyiaipy (La Ilaha Illallah; meaning- there is no god but Allah) Tawhid has
been established. Alongside this in the second part sttJ323%¢ (Muhammadur
Rasulullah; meaning: Muhammad (Sm.) is the Messenger of Allah) Risalat has
been proclaimed. So, parallel with declaring faith in Tawhid, Risalat too has to
be professed.
In fact none can become a Muslim without belief in Risalat, because man's
knowledge is limited. It is not possible to acquire the full acquaintance of
limitless and unbounded Allah the Most High. So, the Prophets and Messengers
(As.) have presented the introduction of Allah the Most High to mankind. They
have described His complete authority and attributes. They have brought the
code of life and the directives given by Allah the Most High for the welfare of
this life and the next life. Had the Prophet and Messenger Muhammad (Sm.) not
appeared we would not have known anything of this. Even we could not have
known the essence and attributes of Allah the Most High. Basically it is because
of messages and descriptions brought forth by the Prophets and Messengers
(As.) that man have been able to know it. Therefore, it is extremely important to
believe in these messages or Risalat. For rejection of Risalat is tantamount to
rejection of Allah. So, it is obligatory for man to believe in Risalat as an
important aspect of faith.

20 Islam and Moral Education
PURPOSE OF SENDING NABI-RASUL (PROPHETS AND MESSENGERS)
Allah the Most High has sent innumerable Prophets and Messengers throughout
the ages. They were not sent without a purpose. Rather they carried out the
obligation of Prophethood (Nabuwwat) and messengership (Risalat). For doing
so they had to perform a huge amount of work. Among them mention may be
made of:
= They would introduce Allah the Most High before man. That means they
would reveal to man essence, attributes, authority, bounties, etc. of Allah the
Most High.
= They would call upon man to the life of truth and beauty.
= They would instruct man in the servitude of Allah and other religious rites
and rituals.
= They would inform about the next life.
= They would offer practical instructions for the implementation of the
commands and prohibitions and rules and regulations of Allah the Most
High.
QUALITIES OF PROPHETS AND MESSENGERS
The Prophets and Messengers were the chosen persons of Allah the Most High.
Allah the Most High Himself selected them to perform the responsibilities of
Nabuwwat and Risalat. Allah the Most High says -
iy Pad a 2 oe
6 Heal ahah St ABN Ge aN gs pple
Meaning: "Allah the Most High chooses Messengers from among both the
Angels and Mankind. Allah is All-Hearing and All-Seeing." (Sura: Al-Hajj,
Ayat: 75)
So, as chosen servants, the Prophets and Messengers possessed special
characteristics. Firstly, they were intensely faithful to Allah the Most High. They
would follow the divine directions in all types of sayings and doings. Absolute
allegiance to Allah the Most High was their dominant feature.
The Prophets and Messengers were extremely wise, intelligent, judicious and
sagacious. They were free from sins. They were immune from all kinds of sins
and pollutions. Allah the Most High Himself would guard them against all sorts

Aqaid and Moral Life 21
of wrongs and obscenities. Hazrat Yusuf (As) was a famous Prophet. Allah the
Most High says about him, “Thus I showed him signs to restrain him from
wrong deeds and obscenity. He was among my servants of pure heart." (Sura:
Yusuf, Ayat: 24)

The Prophets and Messengers possessed him best of characters. They would
practise all noble qualities. They were extremely honest, truthful and just. They
were characterized by all such qualities as mercy, forgiveness, patience. Such
bad habits as falsehood, deceit, back-biting, hatred and envy were never
noticeable in their lives. Rather they were the best models of noble characters
before mankind.

The Prophets and Messengers were peerless in dutifulness and commitment to
their mission. They never showed an iota of idleness and indifference in
discharging the duties of Nabuwwat and Risalat. Rather they patiently suffered
much oppression and torture inflicted by the unbelievers. But still they properly
conveyed the divine message to mankind. They were free from greed and
self-interest. They never deviated from their duties in the lure of any mundane
benefit. The unbelievers would often tempt them to stop their invitation to
Islam. But they never yielded to worldly gains.

In the propagation of Islam, the Prophets and Messengers were the living
symbols of self-sacrifice. Under divine direction they would unhesitatingly
forgo worldly comforts, enjoyments, luxuries, wealth and riches. Our beloved
Prophet (Sm.) migrated to Madinah leaving behind his hearth and home, kith
and kin and native city of Makkah for the sake of the propagation of the Deen.
Many such instances of sacrifice are noticeable in the lives of the Prophets and
messengers (As.).

THE CHAIN OF PROPHETHOOD

Allah the Most High sent many Prophets throughout the ages. The first Prophet
was Hazrat Adam (As.) and the last Prophet and Messenger is Hazrat
Muhammad (Sm.). In between them Allah the Most High sent many other
Prophets and Messengers. This usual course of the advent of the Prophets and
Messengers is called the chain of prophethood. Allah the Most High sent
Prophets and Messengers as guides to the right path to all communities and
nations of the world.

Allah the Most High says: Oslbs 5085

22 Islam and Moral Education
Meaning: " There were guides for all the communities.” (Sura : Al-Raad, Ayat : 7)
They called upon men to Allah the Most High. They guided them to follow the
true and clean code, that is, the religion of Allah.
From the inception of creation till today Shariat or the rules and regulations of
the Deen have not been the same. Rather various types of Shariat were sent in
consonance with the environment, condition, culture, civilization, etc. of the
human race. The Prophets and Messengers used to materialize them in human
societies. But the structure of the Deen remained constant with all Prophets and
Messengers. The basic point with them all was, Tawhid or oneness of Allah the
Most High. Right from Hazrat Adam (As.) all the Prophets and Messengers that
appeared propagated this same Deen. Hazrat Nuh (As.) Hazrat Ibrahim (As.),
Hazrat Musa (As.), Hazrat Daud (As.), Hazrat Isa (As.)---all preached this same
Deen and its teaching. Our beloved Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) has been
the last in the chain of Prophethood. No prophet has come or will come after
him. So, Allah the Most High has vouchsafed perfection of Deen (religion)
through him. Allah the Most High says -
Meaning: "This day have I perfected for you your Deen, and completed my
favours upon you and have chosen for you Islam as the Deen." (Sura: Al-Maida,
Ayat: 3)
Thus the rules and regulations of the Deen having been perfected, the chain of
the advent of Prophets and Messengers also ceases obviously. As a result, the
chain of prophethood too reached its perfection. All these prophets and
messengers that came were the select servants of Allah the Most High. It is
indispensable to believe in all of them. Allah the Most High says -

quay ee uae | gy Sb nod tee yeh a gaolh (el (me 12 28N 2.5
HEB alesse Ssh losaih ot B otek aiorss Js Ge hagies

Alagus!

Meaning: "The Messenger has believed in whatever has been revealed to him, so
also have the believers. They all have believed in Allah, His Angels, His Books
and His Prophets. They say, we do not differentiate among His Prophets." (Sura:
Al-Bagara, Ayat: 285)

Aqaid and Moral Life 23
It is an indispensible condition of Iman to repose faith in all the prophets
belonging to the chain of Prophethood. To believe in some and reject others is
not permitted. Rather all of them have to be believed in as Prophets and
Messengers of Allah the Most High. They must be given proper respect and
status as prophets and Messengers. Nobody should laugh or jeered at.
THE FINAL AND THE GREATEST PROPHET
Our beloved prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) is the final and the greatest in the
line of prophethood. He possessed unique characteristics. All preceding
prophets were commissioned to preach to their respective clans, lands and times.
But Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) is the prophet of all mankind of the world for all
times to come. He is the only world prophet. Allah the Most High says -
2% 4 Soya 72
Ceeg a Hhatl Saad MOET 8
Meaning: "(O Prophet!) You tell, 0 Mankind, I have been sent as the Messenger
of Allah for all of you." (Sura: Al-Araf, Ayat: 158)
Rasulullah (Sm.) was the prophet for all times. It is he who is the Prophet for all
men to come till the doomsday. All must follow his teachings, ideal and Al-Qu-
ran which he received. He is the Prophet of divine favour (Rahmat). He is a
special bounty and favour of Allah for mankind. Allah the Most High says-
ogiglallae ssh alas Gs
Meaning: "(O Prophet!) We have not sent you but as the gift/favour to all the
worlds." (Sura: Al-Ambiya, Ayat : 107)
So, our beloved Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) has been the last and the
greatest Prophet. It is the duty demanded by Iman that every Muslim must
follow him as the last and the greatest prophet.
Meaning of Finality of Prophethood (Khatamun Nabuwwat and
Importance of Belief in It)
Prophet Muhammad (Sm.) is the last Prophet. It is through him that perfection
of religion has been declared and the chain of prophethood is closed. He has
appeared as the last in the line of prophets and messengers. Allah the Most High
has called him the Seal of the Prophets or Khatamun Nabiyyin.
The word 'Khatam' means the end, termination. And 'Nabuwwat' means the
divinely assigned responsibility of the prophets. So, 'Khatm-i-Nabuwwat' means

24 Islam and Moral Education
the end of prophethood. And the Prophet, through whom the line of prophethood
ceases, is the 'Khatamun Nabiyyin' or the Seal of the Prophets meaning also the
last of the Prophets.
Allah the Most High says-
bow Sy este chy 12 9b Cle oC ie woe oily M68 LT
Gib Hest 345.305 NE SS aysI Poe Le
Meaning: "He is not the father of any of your males, rather is the Messenger of
Allah and the last Prophet." (Sura: Al-Ahzab, Ayat: 40)
The word 'Khatamun' means seal or stamp. A thing is sealed when it is complete.
After putting the seal, nothing can be inserted into it. The seal of Prophethood
likewise means the declaration of the closing of prophethood. It means that no
one can then claim himself as a new Prophet nor can he enter the chain of
Prophethood. This is the basic point of 'Khatamun Nabuwwat'.
Our beloved Prophet is the Khatamun Nabiyyin. He is the last Prophet. There is
not and cannot be any more Prophet after him. No true prophet has ever come so
far after him. Nor will any come till the Doomsday. Those who have claimed
Prophethood after him are false, liars and fraud. For, the great Prophet (Sm.)
says - 4 ,
mw 2eg emt ow BN 94S
GHB Ges EL
Meaning: "I am the seal of the Prophets and after me there is no Prophet." (Sahih
Muslim)
In another Hadith the holy Prophet says- "Very soon there will arise among my
followers false Prophets. Each of them will claim to be the Prophet. But I am the
last Prophet. After me no Prophet will be raised." (Abu Daud)
It is one of the organs of Iman to believe in Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) as the last
of the Prophets. All those who claimed Prophethood are liars. We must not
believe in them as Prophets. Rather we shall reject their teachings and ideals. We
shall follow the ideals and teachings of the holy Prophet Hazrat Muhammad
(Sm.) in all situations of our life.
Task: a) Students will write 10 sentences in their script about the importance
of Risalat.
b) They will prepare a poster with 10 sentences about the qualifications
of the Prophets and Messengers.

Aqaid and Moral Life 25
LESSON 10
Risalat and Nabuwwat for Expanding of Moral Values
a religion of morality. All the issues of belief, rules and regulations, teachings
and ideals of Islam play an important role in promoting morality and human
values. Risalat and Nabuwwat are indispensable issues in the Islamic
philosophy of life. Nabuwwat and Risalat imply the responsibilities of the
Prophets and Messengers. The conveyance of the words and instructions of
Allah the Most High to mankind is called Nabuwwat and Risalat. Nabuwwat
and Risalat can mainly play a two-fold role in the propagation and spreading of
moral values in human life.
Firstly, the purpose ofNabuwwat and Risalat is to impart to mankind the knowl-
edge about the existence, introduction and attributes of Allah the Most High, to
direct man to truth and beauty. Over and above, these give direction towards the
welfare and success of this life and the next. The teachings of Nabuwwat and
Risalat lead mankind to peace and discipline. These help man to guide all his
activities to the path indicated by Allah the Most High. Thus, it is found that a
person who leads his life according to the teaching of N abuwwat and Risalat is
a perfect man. Such a person acquires all human qualities. He abandons beastly
habit and cultivates those of a human being. The consciousness of Nabuwwat
and Risalat removes all bad habits, obscenity and evil deeds. Man becomes
inspired to lead honest and decent life. He feels encouraged to adopt noble habits
and moral conduct. Thus man gets inspired for moral and human values under
the influence of Nabuwwat and Risalat.
Secondly, Nabuwwat and Risalat imbibe man to the ideals of the Prophets and
Messengers (As.). The Prophets and Messengers (As.) are sinless. They
possessed all noble qualities. Their life-stories furnished specimen of excellent
character. No wrong, immoral and obscene activities were ever found in their
character. Rather it was one of their responsibilities to preserve the ideals of
noble principle and morality in all circumstances. Allah the Most High says -
9, 9 °F «WE nw ot
dLcsizclabl Jgesd obi
Meaning: "There is for you the best ideal in the life of the Prophet." (Sura :
Al-Ahzab, Ayat: 21)
Forma-4 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

26 Islam and Moral Education
In fact, the Prophets and Messengers possessed excellent character. Their
life-story and teachings are models for us. Rasulullah (Sm.) says-- "I have been
sent as a teacher." (Ibn Majah)
Rasulullah (Sm.) was a great teacher of humanity. He has instructed man
humanity and moral values. He has provided directions for unity, brotherhood,
help co-operation, etc. among men. He has spoken of truth, justice and humanity
in place of oppression, injustice and immorality. He instructed man to build up
excellent character. He has taught man how to uphold morality by openly
practising moral and human values in his own life. He himself says -
7202 (oe ouhd > otf,
SEI 4,62 LI!

Meaning: "Surely I have been sent to give perfection to noble qualities."
(Baihaki)
In fact, all Prophets and Messengers were specimen of excellent character. And
of them all, our beloved Prophet (Sm.) was the best. All human qualities existed
in his character in the fullest measure.
We enter the Islamic vision of life through belief in Nabuwwat and Risalat. Thus
we solicit welfare in this life and the next by following the lives and ideals of the
Prophets and Messengers. Thus our life and character become decent. Our moral
and human values develop. Humanity prevails upon brutality in human society.

Task : Learners will write 15 sentences at home on the importance of Nabuwwat

and Risalat in promoting moral values in his note book and show it to the class

teacher.

LESSON 11
THE REVEALED BOOKS

Introduction
The word 'Kitab' means a written matter. Other synonyms of it are book,
pamphlet, scripture, etc. A revealed book is one sent down from Allah the Most
High. In the Islamic terminology a book sent down by Allah the Most High for
the instruction of mankind is called a Revealed Book. So, a revealed book is the
combination of the words of Allah. Allah the Most High sent His words to the
Messengers through Jibrail (As.). Then the Prophets and Messengers conveyed
them to mankind.

Agaid and Moral Life 27
CONTENTS OF REVEALED BOOKS

Allah the Most High has presented discussion on many matters. For instance -
a. Introduction of Allah the Most High, relating to His entity ;

b. Description of His attributes ;

c. Description of His Prophets and Messengers ;

d. Description of the foregoing nations ;

e. Description of the tragic end of the rebels and unbelievers ;

f. Description of what are permitted and what are forbidden ;

g. Catalogue of rules and regulations ;

h. Discussions on punishment and warnings;

i. Description of advice and good tidings ;

j. Description of the issues relating to belief ;

k. Description of the issues pertaining to the next life.

RENOWNED REVEALED BOOKS

Allah the Most High has revealed a total of 104 scriptures. Among them 4 (four)
are major and massive, and the rest 100 (one hundred) are booklets. The
booklets are called Sahifa. The major 4 books were revealed to 4 prominent
Messengers. These are -

1. Tawrat - revealed to Hazrat Musa (As);

2. Zabur- revealed to Hazrat Daud (As);

3. Injil - revealed to Hazrat Isa (As);

4. Quran - revealed to Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.);

The rest 100 booklets were revealed to 4 Prophets. They are —

1. Hazrat Adam (As). 10 Sahifas were revealed to him;

2. Hazrat Shish (As,). 50 Sahifas were revealed to him;

3. Hazrat Ibrahim (As.).10 Sahifas were revealed to him;

4. Hazrat Idris (As). 30 Sahifas were revealed to him.

IMPORTANCE OF BELIEF IN REVEALED BOOKS

It is one of the important matters to believe in the Revealed books. Without
belief in the revealed books, the main issue of Iman becomes shaky, because

28 Islam and Moral Education
man has come to know about Allah the Most High, the Prophets and the
Messengers, the Angels, life after death, etc. from the revealed books. We have
come to know about these matters from the Holy Quran. If anyone disbelieves
in the revealed books and the issues mentioned in them, he naturally rejects the
other issues of Iman. So, it is indispensable to believe in the revealed books.
Otherwise, it is not possible to become a perfect believer.

The revealed books are the most reliable sources for all types knowledge and
wisdom (science). We can know about the universe, creation of man, the next
life, etc. through them. The right direction and guidance for leading human life
are available in the revealed books. Belief in the revealed books inspires us to
practise these matters in our practical life.

AL-QURAN, THE LAST REVEALED BOOK

Al-Quran is the word of Allah the Most High. Allah the Most High has revealed
it to Prophet Muhammad (Sm.), the last and the greatest Prophet through Jibrail
(As.) for the guidance of mankind. It is Al-Quran which is the last and the
greatest revealed book.

The first 5 Ayats of Sura Alaq were revealed to Prophet Muhammad (Sm.) at the
age of 40 when he was absorbed in meditation in the cave of Hira. Thus began
the revelation of Al-Quran. Then the rest of Al-Quran was revealed in piecemeal
during the 23 years of the Prophethood of Rasul (Sm.) as and when necessities
arose.

Al-Quran is divided into 30 parts. Each part is termed as Para. The number of
Suras is 114 and that of Ruku (section) is 558.

NOMENCLATURE OF AL-QURAN

‘Quran’ means that what is recited. Al-Quran is the most widely read book in the
world. Al-Quran is recited compulsorily in the 5 times prescribed prayers. This
great book is called Quran from this angle of view.

The other meaning of Quran is to collect or assemble. The teachings and basic
principles of all the previous revealed books have been gathered in it. Hence it is
called Quran.

Al-Quran has got a good number of other names. The more prominent among
them are-

Aqaid and Moral Life 29
1.Al-Kitab (2aSJf) - the book.
2. Al-Furgan (6G 5a ) - the denominator of truth and falsehood.
3. Al-Hikma (&:S£{) - the knowledge, wisdom.
4, Al-Burhan ( $43) - the manifest proof.
5.Al-Haqq (Gzi)  - the truth.
6.An-Noor (3321)  - the light.
7. Al-huda ( Goat) - the guidance.
8.Al-Zikr ( Ss 5p) - the command, warning.
9. Al-Shifa (gl2éJ1) - the cure.
10. Al-Majyid (Jaga ) - the honoured, majestic.
11. Al-Mauiza ( die z;if) - the good or excellent advice.
12. Al-Rahmat (gi ) - the favour, blessing, mercy, etc.
CHARACTERISTICS AND GREATNESS OF AL-QURAN
Al-Quran is the best and most prestigious book. It is endowed with exceptional
features as distinct from other books and even from other revealed scriptures.
There is no other book parallel to it.
Al-Quran is a complete and perfect book. This book is the repository of all
knowledge and science. The basic principles of all matters are contained in it.
Allah the Most High says -

Fos AGEL
Meaning: "We have not left anything unmentioned in it." (Sura: Al-Anam, Ayat
:38) So, Al-Quran is a complete book. The proper directions in matters relevant
to human life are available in this book.
Al-Quran is the final revealed book. Allah the Most High has declared Islam as
a complete code of life. Consequently, no other Prophet or Messenger will arise.
Nor will any other book be revealed. It is the teachings of Al- Quran that shall
remain valid till the Last Day. Besides, all the gist of the former revealed books
is extant in Al-Quran. So, it is the final and the best revealed book.

30 Islam and Moral Education
Al-Quran is a book free from any doubt. No book on earth is absolutely faultless
or irrefutable but Al-Quran is faultless and it is above suspicions as well. It does
not contain any matter that may arouse suspicions. Allah the Most High says -
tring Wed ltd
“sebeds TEaSteys
Meaning: "This (Al-Quran) is that book in which there is no doubt." (Sura:
Al-Baqara, Ayat: 2)
As a universal Book too, the status of Al-Quran is unique. It is not confined to
any country, age or race. Rather it is an admonition and guidance for all men of
all ages. So, it is a universal book. Al-Quran is the only undistorted book. Not a
single harkat (vowel sign) or nuqta (dot/point) of it has been changed from the
time of revelation till this day. Allah the Most High is its Custodian (Protector).
He says-
Pare baad Day ote Pd
ossialetis FNS 6
Meaning: "It is We that have revealed Al-Quran and We are surely its preserver."
(Sura: Al-Hijr, Ayat: 9)
In fact, Al-Quran is an undistorted and unaltered book. No addition, correction,
revision, extension or contraction has occurred in it till today.
Al-Quran is the greatest book and a prestigious scripture. The best of Arabic
literature, history, prophecy, science, mystery of creation, etc. are neatly written
in it. As this is the word of Allah, its dignity is also as matchless as His. Allah the
Most High says -
& 2h 2 9, 4045828 Ve
6 bike $60 d28 S135 855
Meaning: "Indeed it is the holy Quran which has been inscribed on the protected
plate." (Sura: Al-Buruj, Ayats: 21-22)
Al-Quran is the word of Allah the greatest. It is conspicuous for its unique
features and magnificence. It is sacred and free from change, distortion, addition
and subtraction. It is this that is the greatest and final revealed book.
We shall understand the Greatness of the holy Al-Quran. We shall read Al-Quran
with devotion and veneration, acquire proper knowledge of its teachings and
implement them in our practical life. It is Al-Quran that will be our guide in life.
Task: a) Student will prepare a list about the subject-matter of Al-Quran.
b) Student will prepare a list of 10 names of Al-Quran.

Aqgaid and Moral Life 31
LESSON 12
Role of Revealed Books in Moulding Moral Life
The books that Allah the Most High revealed to the prophets and messengers for
the guidance of those who went astray are the revealed scriptures. The revealed
books are the words of Allah the Most High and contain His commands and
prohibitions. The revealed books play a very important role in human life
guiding man to the path of morality and ideals.
The revealed books furnish to man the idea about the essence, attributes and the
power of Allah the Most High. Besides, man can learn from Al-Quran about the
next life, heaven, hell, etc. The knowledge of such matters inspires man to build
up a true and beautiful life.
Allah the Most High describes the life-story of the prophets and messengers in
the revealed books. Alongside, He also revealed there the stories of success of
their pious and faithful followers. Man can know these stories and events
through these revealed books. He can understand the importance of morality as
the key to success. As a result, man is inspired to build up a moral life. Side by
side with events connected with Prophets and Messengers, events related with
the unbelievers, polytheists and sinners are also narrated. The purpose behind
this is that man may derive instructions from those events. Allah the Most High
has narrated the events of Firauns, Namrud, Karun, etc. in Al-Quran the last and
the greatest revealed book. The stories of such sinful races as the Aad, the
Samud, etc. have also been narrated. We come to know of their tragic end
resulting from their ingratitude, disobedience, pride and vanity, sin, lies, immor-
al and indecent activities. All these events restrain us from immoral and unjust
deeds and inspire us to lead an honest and noble life.
Knowledge or instruction is a kind of light. It opens the inner sight of man. An
educated man is aware of the causes of failure and the steps to success. A
well-educated man is possessed of a moral and elevated character and gets peace
and success in both this and the next life. The revealed book is the best source of
knowledge. The revealed book guides man to all kinds of good. Allah the Most
High says about Al-Quran-
6 oD sors sessSeoSeys
Meaning: "This is that Book in which there is no doubt. It is a guide for the
pious.” (Sura: Al-Bagara, Ayat: 02)

32 Islam and Moral Education
Al-Quran is the store-house of all knowledge. All the basic principles and gist of
knowledge and science are correctly described in this book. Thus the teachings
of Al-Quran make man properly educated and help them to develop his
morality.
Man has been commanded in the revealed books to follow the ideals of morality.
High ideals and noble qualities have been nicely narrated in them. Alongside,
such deeds and habits that violate moral conduct have been warned about and
prohibited. Many instances of humanism are found in the revealed books like the
Tawrat, the Zabur, the Injil, etc. The validity of all other revealed books has been
revoked. Above all, Al-Quran contains the complete guidance to morality.
Human life becomes bedecked with morality, beauty and peace by following this
book.

Task: Students will show the teacher 10 sentences written by him on the

role of the revealed books in moulding a moral life.

LESSON 13
AKHIRAT

Introduction
‘Akhirat' means the 'After-Life'. The life to come after man's death is called
‘Akhirat'. There are two phases in man's life. These are this life here and the
hereafter. This life here is the worldly life. And the new life that begins
immediately after man's death is called the hereafter or Akhirat.
Akhirat is the unending life. It has a beginning but no end. It is man's eternal
abode. In Akhirat man will be asked to account for his worldly deeds. These
good deeds will be rewarded with paradise and the bad deeds will bring
punishment in hell.
IMPORTANCE OF BELIEF IN AKHIRAT
Akhirat is one of the important issues of Iman. In the Islamic view of life, belief
in Akhirat is indispensable. The importance of this belief is also immense.
Without belief in Akhirat, it is not possible to become a Mumin (believer) or
Muttaqi (Allah-fearing).
Allah the Most High says- 66333 2 ab i55 Gs

Aqaid and Moral Life 33
Meaning: 11And they (the Allah-fearing) hold firm belief in Akhirat." (Sura :
Al-Bagara, Ayat : 4)

In addition to belief in Tawhid and Risalat, belief in Akhirat also is very
essential. No one can become a Mumin or Muslim without belief in Akhirat. For
the success in the next life and getting paradise, one must believe in Akhirat.
Without faith in Akhirat, man deviates from the true path and goes astray. Allah
the Most High says -

‘ALs be 2e2 2h i 930, 8b eee 245,

OW US SIE si osdisalcsoagds sesKLesabl a4
Meaning: “And if one disbelieves in Allah, His Angels, His Scriptures, His
Prophets and the Last Day, one will deplorably go astray." (Sura: An-Nisa, Ayat:
136)

Belief in Akhirat restrains man from sin and inspires him to virtuous deeds. For,
the man believing in Akhirat knows that he will have to stand before Allah in
Akhirat and account for all his deeds on earth. As a result a man believing in
Akhirat is inspired towards good deeds and refrains himself from evil deeds.
Thus man shuns bad conduct and acquires good manners. On the other hand, he
who disbelieves in Akhirat indulges in sin and indecent activities in the first
chance available. For he does not have faith in accountability in the next life.
Thus disbelief in Akhirat leads to spread of oppression and sinfulness on earth.
A man believing in Akhirat cannot ever indulge in sinful and obscene acts.
On the other hand, belief in Akhirat is very important for human life. It renders
a man's life responsible, clean, pure and graceful.
Therefore, we shall develop firm faith in Akhirat and for salvation in the Akhirat
we shall perform honest and nice deeds and lead our life by following Islamic
tules and regulations.
LESSON 14

SOME STAGES OF LIFE IN AKHIRAT
Akhirat is the next life. The life after death is termed as Akhirat. That life is
ever-lasting and un-ending. That life has no end. Akhirat or the next life has a
good number of stages. We shall briefly know about the different levels or
phases of Akhirat.
Forma-5 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

34 Islam and Moral Education
a. Death
Akhirat or the next life starts with death. So, death is the gate to next life. Allah
the Most High has determined the death of all living creatures. He says -
2 oe. bt 26 ye

eplldegs BY
Meaning: "Every living being must experience the taste of death." (Sura :
Al-e-Imran, Ayat : 185)
No living creature will escape death. Small and big, rich and poor, healthy and
sick, ruler and the ruled - none will be able to avert death. All shall die at the
fixed hour not withstanding possessing immense power and living in a
well-protected residence. Besides this, the death of other animals is also
inevitable. Allah the Most High says -

ogee . ok 4 2 Dyan oo Pere an
Bihiag 53d AS Sots ST Miss GG
Meaning: "Wherever you, stay death shall catch hold of you, even if you take
your place in high and strong towers." (Sura: An-Nisa, Ayat: 78)
Life of Akhirat starts right after death. A virtuous man embraces death with
Allah's mercy and the death of sinners is painful.
b. Qabr (Grave)
The time from death till resurrection is called the life of the grave. It is also
called 'Barzakh'. Allah the Most High alludes to it---
OGRE 2H SIC 55 Beli eres

Meaning: "And they will head towards the Barzakh till the Day of
Resurrection." (Sura: Al-Muminun, Ayat: 100)
After the earthly life ends, man is placed in the grave. Then two angels of the
name of Munkar and Naqir visit the grave. They will ask three questions to the
buried man. These are -
1. $ 5g -Who is your Lord?
2. $4345 - What is your faith?
3. sda Seas -Who is your Prophet? or s Jean ha gs -Who is this man?
(Pointing to the Messenger (Sm.)

Aqgaid and Moral Life 35
Those who were not buried will also be asked three questions. Those who have
led their earthy life according to Islam will be able to give correct answers to
these questions. For them the life in grave will be peaceful. And those who have
not followed Islam will not be able to give proper answer to all these questions.
They will say. "Alas! We do not know." They will suffer punishment their life in
grave.
c. Qiyamat (The Doomsday)
The discipline of Aqaid denotes two situations.
First, 'Qiyamat' means the Doomsday’ (absolute destruction). Allah the Most
High has created this universe for man. And He has created man for His
servitude. But a time shall come when not a single person will remain to worship
Allah. Even none will be found to remember or take His name. All men will
indulge in wrong path and disobedience. At that time Allah the Most High will
destroy this universe. Hazrat Israfil (As.) will blow his trumpet at the command
of Allah. As a result, the Sun, the Moon, and the stars will drop down, hills and
mountains will be scattered like cotton, all that lie inside the surface of the earth
will come out. All creatures will die and the entire universe will be destroyed.
Then it is only Allah that will remain. No one else will survive. This total
destruction of the universe is called Qiyamat.
Secondly, Qiyamat means to stand up. Allah the Most High will revive all
creatures after a long time. At the command of Allah, Angel Israfil (As.)
will again blow his trumpet. Then man will come to life again to assemble at the
field of Hashr to account for his activities. Coming out from the grave at that
time is called Qiyamat. This is also called the Day of Reckoning (Yawmul
Baas).
About these two states of Qiyamat Allah the Most High says-

if ere aig) oa 202 Chaat reo wk ee Gh be eo oe ? $2 fe
OG 33H Se BT gi dlazs eas Sai Lage ENidgrenNidar gal bid auds
Meaning: "And the trumpet will be blown. As a result all in the heavens and the
earth will suffer a swoon except those whom Allah does not desire. Then the
trumpet will be blown again. Instantly they will come to life and gaze while
standing." (Sura : Zumr, Ayat : 68)

36 Islam and Moral Education
d. Hashr (Grand Assembly)

Hashr is the grand Assembly. All men and animals will come to life after death
at the command of Allah. All will assemble on the field of Hashr at the call of an
angel. This field is vast and well ordered. All men from the first to the last one
that lived on earth will assemble in this field. This grand assembly of men is
called Hashr.

The day of Hashr is the day for accounts and accountability. On this day, Allah
the Most High will be the only Judge. Allah the Most High says -

Meaning: "He (Allah) is the Lord of the Day of Judgment." (Sura : Al-Fatiha,
Ayat : 3) On that day the accounts of man's entire activities will be taken. In the
field of Hashr man will be given his record of deeds (Amal Nama). Those who
are virtuous will get the record of deeds in the right hand. And the sinners will
get their record of deeds in the left hand.

The field of Hashr is a place of horrible hardships. On that day the sun will take
its place very close above the head. Man will be sweating under intense heat. On
that day there will be no shade except that of his Throne. (Aarsh)

Seven classes of men will find their place under the Aarsh. One class will consist
of those who worshipped Allah in youth. There will be no arrangement of drink-
ing water in the field of Hashr. The only water will be of the house of Kawthar.
Our beloved Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) will offer water from the pond of
Kawthar to his true followers. On the other side, the sinners will suffer terrible
hardship from thirst.

In fact, the virtuous will get various facilities in the field. On the contrary, the
sinners will suffer terrible punishment in the field of Hashr.

e. Mizan (The Balance)

"Mizan' means an instrument or balance for measurement. The Balance that
Allah the Most High will install in the field of Hashr for measuring the deeds of
man is called the Mizan. Allah the Most High says - aslcall 4 3a) kaa 3! Fal bis
Meaning: "And on the Day of resurrection we shall install the Mizan of Justice."
(Sura: Al-Ambiya, Ayat: 47)

Aqaid and Moral Life 37
The sins and virtues of man will be weighed on the balance. He that will find the
right hand of balance heavier will enter paradise. And he that will find the left
hand of Mizan heavier will find his place in the hell.

f. Sirat (The Bridge)

Sirat literally means path, way, bridge, method, etc. In the terminology of Islam-
ic Sharia (t), Sirat means a dark bridge installed over the hell. A virtuous servant
(of Allah) will enter the paradise after crossing this bridge. In the next life all
men will have to pass through this bridge. In the holy Quran, Allah the Most
Great says about Sirat -"And every one of you will have to pass over it, it is an
inevitable decision of your Lord." (Sura: Maryam, Ayat :71)

The holy Prophet (Sm.) says, 13g 648 ahi Bisallabs

Meaning: "The Bridge will be placed over the hell." (Musnadi Ahmad)

Allah the Most Great will permit His virtuous servants to go to heaven. The
virtuous will cross the bridge to enter the paradise. The bridge will widen in
proportion to their virtues. The believers will cross the bridge with ease as enti-
tled by virtue of their good deeds. Some will cross in lighting rapidity, some in
the speed of a storm, some in that of a horse, some running, some walking and
‘still others crawling,

The Sirat is a dark bridge. A Mumin and virtuous man will find light there. But
those who are not Mumin and those who are sinners will not find light arranged
for them. So, he who has firm faith and done good deeds at their command the
Sirat will be more lighted for him. He will pass the bridge easily in the light of
Iman.

On the contrary those who are not Mumin and are sinners, Allah will order them
to go to hell. The Sirat is a very frightful place for the inmates of hell. For them
the Sirat will be narrower than a string of hair and sharper than a sword. Under
such conditions they will not be able to cross the bridge by any means. Rather
they will fall into the hell in a very pitiable manner.

So, we shall believe in Sirat. To cross the bridge with ease we shall become real
Mumin and do more and more good deeds and abandon sinful acts. We shall lead
our daily life according to the orders and prohibitions of Allah and His
Messengers.

38 Islam and Moral Education
g. Shafaat (Intercession)

‘Shafaat' means to recommend, to request, etc. In the terminology of the Islamic
Sharia (t) the recommendation of the Prophets and Messengers and other
favourite servants of Allah for the welfare and forgiveness from Allah is called
Shafaat.

On the day of Qiyamat Allah the Most High will take the account of activities of
man. Then He will fix up paradise or hell for everyone according to his deeds.
Then Allah the Most Great will order the virtuous to go to heaven and sinners to
go to hell. The Prophets and Messengers and other favourite persons of Allah
will approach Him with recommendations. As a result many sinful persons will
be pardoned. After this they will be permitted to leave the hell and enter the
heaven.

Again, recommendations will be offered this day for many virtuous persons as
well. As a result their status will be elevated.

On the Day of Resurrection all men will be gathered on a vast field. On that day
the sun will be very near. Men will find themselves in unbearable sorrow and
distress. At this critical time they will approach Hazrat Adam (As.), Hazrat Nuh
(As.), Hazrat Ibrahim (As.), Hazrat Musa (As.) and Hazrat Isa (As.) with request
to intercede with Allah to start the process of judgement. All of them will
express their inability. Under such circumstances, all men will approach the holy
Prophet Muhammad (Sm.) with the same request. Then the holy Prophet
Muhammad (Sm.) with intercede with Allah the Most High.

On the other hand, on the Day of Resurrection recommendations will be made
for seeking pardon for the sinners and elevating the status of the virtuous. The
Prophets and Messengers, the Angels, the Martyrs, the Ulama, the memorizers
of Al-Quran will have this privilege. That Al-Quran and Siyam/ Roza (Fasting)
will intercede on the Day of Resurrection is mentioned in the Hadith as well.
On the Day of Qiyamat the Messengers and Prophets and the virtuous servants
of Allah will make recommendation to Him. Allah the Most High will accept
these recommendations and bless many men with paradise. However, the
highest power of recommendation will be held by our beloved Prophet Hazrat
Muhammad (Sm.). He himself has said S23 22b2f

Meaning: "I have been granted the right to make recommendations." (Sahih
Al-Bukhari and Sahih Muslim)

Aqgaid and Moral Life 39
In another Hadith Rasul (Sm.) has said- "I shall recommend for men
outnumbering the bricks and stones on the earth." (Musnad Ahmad)
Shafaat is a vast favour. It will not be possible to achieve success, well-being
and paradise on the Day of Qiyamat without the recommendation of the great
Prophet Muhammad (Sm.).
So, we shall believe in Shafaat. We shall love Allah and His Messenger (Sm.).
We shall lead our life by following the directions-both positive and negative of
Allah and His Messenger (Sm.). Thus we shall be able to enter paradise on the
recommendation of our beloved Prophet (Sm.).
h. Jannat (Heaven)
Jannat means Park, Garden, a bedecked grove. In the Islamic parlance, the
comfortable place that has been prepared for the righteous persons in the next
life is called Jannat (Heaven). All kinds of amenities exist in heaven. The
faithful will abide there forever. They will meet their virtuous parents, wives and
children, friends and allies, kith and kin there. They will instantly get whatever
they will desire. Allah the Most High says - "There (in jannat) all things that you
wish for are stored up as well as such other things that you may place order for.
This hospitality is from Allah the Most Merciful." (Sura: Ha-mim Ash-Sajda,
Ayats : 31-32)
In fact, the happiness and peace of Jannat are unbound. It cannot be exhausted
by description. In a Hadith-i-Qudsi, Allah the Most High Himself says - "We
have prepared for our virtuous servants such bounties as no eyes have ever seen,
no ears have ever heard and no human heart has ever imagined." (Sahih
Al-Bukhari)
Allah the Most High has kept ready eight heavens for the faithful. These are- 1)
Jannatul Firdous, 2) Daarul Maqam, 3) Daarul Qarar, 4) Daarus Salam, 5)
Jannatul Mawa, 6) Jannatul Adn, 7) Daarun Naim and 8) Daarul Khuld.
Jannat is the abode of extreme happiness. Those that will follow Islam
completely will get the Jannat in the afterlife. It will be possible to gain Jannat
by following the commands of Allah the Most High and the Sunnah (practices)
of Rasulullah (Sm.).
Allah the Most High says -

Ocal eEL SECS osgh Fb pki Gi5as sks SE galls

40 Islam and Moral Education
Meaning: "A man who cherishes the fear of appearing before his Nourisher and
keeps himself aloof from evil inclinations, Jannat will be his abode." (Sura :
An-Naziat, Ayats : 40-41)
So, to get Jannat we also shall always fear Allah, follow His orders and
prohibitions, and build up excellent character by saving ourselves from unjust
and sinful acts. Allah the Most Great will be pleased with us and we shall gain
Jannat in the next life.
i. Jahannam (Hell)
Jahannam is the place of punishment. As there is provision for Jannat for the
Mumins, likewise there is place of punishment for the sinners. And Jahannam is
that place of punishment. Jhannam is also called 45 (Naar) meaning fire.
Jahannam is the place for eternal punishment. Its punishment is horrible. The
measure of punishment for man will be determined in conformity with the
volume of his sin. The fire of jahannam is very hot. Rasulullah (Sm.) has said-
AG Boies Aelightyy 956
Meaning: "The fire of your world is 1170th (one seventieth) part of the fire of
Jahannam." (Sahih Bukhari)
Everything of the human body including the bone, skin, flesh will be burnt. But
this will not cause his death. Rather his body will return to its original position
at the command of Allah the Most High. It will again be burnt. Thus the process
shall continue.
Jahannam is the habitat of snakes and scorpions. The food there is big thorny
trees. The drink of the dwellers of jahannam will be blood and pus. To sum up,
Jahannam is a very painful place. Allah the Most High says- "Those who
disbelieve will find garments of fire ready for them, hot water will be poured
over their heads. Consequently whatever there is in their bellies as well as their
skin will melt down and there are iron hammers for them. Whenever they will
want to get out of Jahannam, they will be led back there. And they will be told,
get the taste of the pain of burning." (Sura: Hajj, Ayats: 19-22)
Allah the Most High has kept ready seven hells for the punishment of the
sinners. These are 1) Jahannam, 2) Habiya, 3) Jahim, 4) Saqar, 5) Sayir, 6)
Hutama, 7) Laza.
Jahannam is the place for eternal punishment. Allah the Most High says-
Soa seAIGUS DEA Hsd sabes UU

Aqaid and Moral Life 41
Meaning: "Then he who transgresses limits and gives prominennce to the
worldy life, for him Jahannam is the abode." (Sura: An-Naziat, Ayats: 37-39)
Those that have Iman but their sins are excess, such Mumins also will suffer the
punishment of hell. However, they will get redemption from hell after the end of
punishment for their sins.
We shall remain free from all types of sins. We shall become true Mumin. We
shall pay allegiance to Allah and His Messenger (Sm.). Only thus we shall
escape the fire and punishment of hell.
Task: The student will make a list of the various stages of life in Akhirat.
LESSON 15
Role of Belief in Akhirat in Forming Pious and Moral Life
Akhirat is the next life. The life after death is called Akhirat. Akhirat is the
unending life for man. It is everlasting. On the contrary earthly life is temporary.
In fact, the earthly life is ground for preparation for the Akhirat. It has been
said -
wo ee a 2t-
SIL aSS ACA
Meaning: "The world is the harvesting field of the Akhirat." (Proverb)
As man cultivates the land of crops, sows seeds and nourishes it, so does he get
the harvest. If a farmer does not take proper care of his farmland, he does not get
good harvest. Likewise the return for the worldly acts will be given in Akhirat.
If man does good deeds in this world, he will be rewarded in Akhirat. And if he
does evil deeds, he will suffer punishment.
The Qabr (grave), the Hasr ( congregation), Mizan (balance), the Sirat (bridge),
Jannat (paradise), Jahannam (hell) etc. each one is a step or stage of the life of
Akhirat. Accordingly to the Islamic belief, one who believes and does good
deeds, will enjoy a peaceful life in Akhirat. Starting from the grave, he will get
happiness, peace and success in every stage of Akhirat. On the other side, a
person who will be disobedient in this life and indulge in sinful acts will suffer
pain in all the phases of Akhirat. His abode will be Jahannam (hell).
Belief in Akhirat is very important for building up the earthly life. For belief in
Akhirat compels man to lead this life by following morality and ideals. A
Forma-6 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

42 Islam and Moral Education
person who believes in Akhirat himself takes stock of his own activities daily.
Thus by rectifying his faults through self-criticism everyday he becomes
possessed of a moral character.
In Akhirat the virtuous man will be admitted into jannat (heaven). Jannat is the
place of eternal peace. The hope of jannat renders man virtuous in his earthly
life. Man performs good deeds and feels inspired towards good deeds from the
hope of getting Jannat and the amenities contained therein. For Jannat cannot be
gained without faith in and love for Allah as well as good acts. Allah the Most
High says -
“% Pateraay penre-t 2% Ob, 59% ‘1h 4a. Gol oo os
ORS SSG * SANG eG Feds aT cleat LPs igial auiS)
Meaning: "Surely those who have reposed faith and done good works, there is
for them jannat beneath which flow rivers. It is the greatest success." (Sura:
Al-Buruj, Ayat: 11)
Thus the hope of gaining Jannat in the next life helps man to become virtuous.
Jahannam is a place of intense suffering. There is painful punishment of snakes,
scorpions and fire. The sinners, the disobedient and evil doers of this earthly life
will be punished in Jahannam in the next life. Allah the Most High says -
OSA azod1GUS BUS ZI is0 gb eAEE
Meaning: "Then he who transgresses and gives preference to the earthly life, it
is Jahannam that his adobe will be." (Sura: An-Naziat, Ayats: 37-39)
The fear of punishment in Jahannam helps man to restrain from injustice and sin.
It is the act of the dwellers of Jahannam to disobey the commands of Allah the
Most High and to indulge in unjust and immoral activities with the instincts of
worldly greed and avarice. So, men safeguard themselves from these deeds for
fear of jahannam and show fealty to Allah the Most High.
Alongside major injustice and immoral acts, belief in Akhirat also restrain from
petty sins and dishonest practices. Allah the Most High says -
£6 ft eewnt We? ee te cott Tez 1-244
O85 FASS Nhe Jost obs RS ESS Ne Mesh?
Meaning: "If anybody performs an atom of good deed he will see it. And if
anybody performs an atom size of evil deed he will see it." (Sura: Al-Zilzal,
Ayats: 7-8)

Aqaid and Moral Life 43
Allah the Most High will inspect all acts of man, good or bad, however little it
be. Then these will be either rewarded or punished. So, belief in Akhirat
restrains human beings from all forms of wrongs, big or small, manifest or
hidden and inspires them to lead sin-free, virtuous and morally sound life.
We shall have firm faith in Akhirat, and keep our worldly life free from sin. We
shall be virtuous and accustomed to a life of morality.
Task: Students will write 10 sentences on the role of belief in Akhirat in
forming noble and moral life and place it in the classroom.
EXERCISE

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS :
1. Complete faith in the basic issues of Islam is called -

a) Iman b) Islam

c) Ihsan d) Insaf
2. The meaning of the word ‘Al-Hikmatu’ is -

a) Advice b) Wisdom

c) Light d) Favour
3. The Hypocrites will stay at the lowest layer of hell, because they -

i) are identified persons in society

ii) conceal unbelief in the heart

iii) are more harmful than the unbelievers
Which one of the following is correct?

a) i and ii b) i and iii

c) ii and iii d) i, ii and iii

44 Islam and Moral Education
Read the Following Passage and Answer Questions 4 and 5
The system of rising and setting of the sun has remained the same from the
beginning of the creation of the earth. Having seen this Mr. Sultan thinks that the
earth will not be destroyed.
4. Which of the following does Mr. Sultan disbelieve ?

a) Qabr b) Hashr

c) Qiyamat d) Mizan
5. On the basis of Mr. Sultan's conception, he may be called a -

a) Kafir b) Mushrik

c) Fasiq (Transgressor) d) Munafiq
CREATIVE QUESTIONS :
1. Farid and Salim are class mates. Both of them promise to come to school at
9.00 o'clock tomorrow. Though next day Salim was present at school, Farid did
not come at the right time. When they met at 11 a. m. he told Salim that he had
made a fun only. After that both went to eat in the canteen. After they finished,
they saw a certain man taking some liquid substance. As Farid wanted to forbid
him Salim stopped him and said, "There is nothing wrong in it."

a. What is the term used for rejection of the basic worships of Islam?

b. Why is it indispensable to believe in Akhirat ?

c. What is revealed in Farid’s behaviour ? Explain.

d. Analyse Salim’s statement from the Islamic view-point.

Aqaid and Moral Life 45
2.
PERSPECTIVE -1
No officer of the institution name of which begins with the letter 'S' does not
have
professional training, not even any diploma certificate. Still they are carrying on
sensitive experiments and vaccinating the people in the guise of physicians and
nurses. Taking advantage of this situation they are earning has amounts of
money. (Abridged: The ProthomAlo, 05 July, 2012)
PERSPECTIVE -2
If the misuse of antibiotic keeps on increasing at this rate, very soon the human
race will face defeat in the war of saving life against germs. There has been
unbridled use of antibiotic for more production in less time by keeping livestock
immune from diseases. Many farmers use antibiotic as growth promoter to
increase poultry production, that is, physical growth of the poultry. 300 mg. of
cholesterol is found in an egg in which antibiotic has been applied and it is very
dangerous for a heart patient. (Jugantar, 12 September, 2012, abridged)

a. Which is the only code of life before Allah?

b. Explain the nature of Tawhid.

c. Which matter has been exposed in perspective '1'? Explain in the light

of the textbook.
d. Analyze the matter revealed in perspective '2' in the light of the role of
belief in Akhirat in forming a righteous and moral life.

CHAPTER TWO
SOURCES OF SHARIAT
Islam is not a mere religion. Rather it is a complete code of life. It is the
aggregate of the universal and eternal rules and regulations. Side by side with the
issue of faith, all the behavioral aspects also have been discussed in Islam. Allah
the Most High has provided various rules and regulations and directions of
mutual conduct for the utmost welfare of mankind. These rules and regulations
vouchsafed by Allah the Most Great are called the Shariat. One of the
obligations of Shariat is to obey the commands and prohibitions of Allah the
Most High and the Holy Prophet (Sm.) and to owe allegiance to them in all
matters. Total success in this world and the Akhirat can be achieved by complete
obedience to these and by following them. In this chapter, we shall know about
the introduction and importance of the Islamic Shariat, side by side, we shall get
a brief idea about the sources of Shariat.
After reading this chapter, we will be able to -
e describe the conception of Shariat and its sources and the importance
of Shariat;
e narrate the brief history of the preservation and compilation of the Quran
and Hadith;
e explain the number of Makki and Madani suras and narrate their features;
e narrate the importance and excellence of the recitation of Al-Quran;
e recite from memory the selected suras correctly;
e narrate the teachings of the selected suras alongwith their meaning and
background (Shan-i-Nuzul);
© inspire to implement the teachings of the selected Suras in their own life;
e narrate the meaning and teachings of ten selected Hadith;
e explain the importance of Hadith in acquiring such virtues as patience and
tolerance;
e practise to build up a life characterized by human and moral values in the
light of the teachings of the selected Hadith;
e narrate the introduction and origin of Ijma;
e narrate the nature/type of Qiyas;
e discuss the various terminologies of the Shariat.

Sources of Shariat 47
LESSON 1
SHARIAT (453 8)
Introduction
Shariat is an Arabic word. It means way, path, etc. It is also used in the sense of
a way of life, laws, rules and regulations, etc. In a wider sense Shariat is such a
clear and distinct path by following which man can safely and gracefully reach
his own destination. In the Islamic terminology, the Islamic working principle or
the Islamic way of life is called Shariat. In other words, the Islamic laws, rules
and regulations are aggregately called Shariat. That means whatever commands
and prohibitions and guidance Allah the Most High and His Messenger (Sm.)
have provided for the regulation of man's life are called the Shariat.
About Shariat Allah the Most-High says -
foeu 3 eT e21 2 Baatetes ST 26% 2 enee gle afer of
Oops Vodwiaissl £55 Ys GSU Zvi osaas pb fe cules 55
Meaning: "Then we have established you on the Shariat by Our command. So
you follow it and you shall not follow the whims of the ignorant." (Sura : Al-Ja-
sia, Ayat : 18)
Subject-Matter and Scope of Shariat
The subject-matter of Shariat is very wide. It is the comprehensive and complete
code of life. It contains the rules, regulations and directions about all matters
relating to man's life. Allah the Most-High says -
Meaning: "This day have I have for you your religion, completed my favours
upon you and chosen Islam for you as religion." (Sura: Al-Maida, Ayat: 3)
So, it has been understood that the subject-matter and scope of the Islamic
Shariat are very wide. The Muslim scholars have divided the subject-matters of
Shariat into three main heads, such as -
a. Aqida or the issues of faith;
b. Rules and principles of morality and conduct;
c. Laws and rules relating to practical life.
In fact, all kinds of conduct and behaviour, thoughts and spirit are included in the
three categories as mentioned above. There is no act or deed whatsoever outside
the purview of Shariat.

48 Islam and Moral Education
Importance of Shariat

The importance of Shariat in human life is immense. Shariat is the aggregate of
the commands, prohibitions, rules and regulations offered by Allah the Most
Great and His Messenger (Sm.) So, the observance of Shariat by man pleases
Allah the Most High and His Messenger (Sm.) On the contrary, rejection of the
Shariat is tantamount to rejection of Allah the Most High and His messenger
(Sm.) No Muslim can do such an act. Even observance of a certain part and
rejection of another are also a major sin (Kufr). A person guilty of this offence is
punishable by law. Allah the Most High says - "Do you then believe in a certain
portion of the Book and reject another? Those among you who do this there are
for them insult and reproach. And on the Day of Resurrection they will be cast
into hell for severe punishment." (Sura:Al-Baqara, Ayat: 85)

Shariat is the guidance and direction for human life. The Islamic rules and
prohibitions can be known through it.

One can also know from it what is halal (lawful) and what haram (prohibited),
etc. The knowledge of Farz, (practices), wazib (Necessary practices), Sunnat
(emulation of practices of the prophet), Nafal (practices) and other matters are
also available through the teachings of Shariat. The various teachings about
excellent character and morality too have been described in Shariat. So for a
smooth and nice conduct of life Shariat is indispensable.

Besides that, Shariat also teaches us the methods, rules and regulations of
worship. The knowledge of Salat (Prayer), Sawm (Fasting during the month of
Ramadan), Hajj (Pilgrimage to Makkah), etc. along with such details as to how,
where and when these have to be performed can also be known through the
descriptions of Shariat. The ways of attaining personal purity, family and social
amity, etc. are included in the Shariat. Obviously the role of Shariat in the total
conduct of a man’s life is very important.

Sources of Shariat

Shariat is the Islamic way of life. It is the sumtotal of the commands and
prohibitions and directives as given by Allah the Most High and His Messenger
(Sm.). Subsequently two more sources of Shariat were determined on the
support and indications from Al-Quran and the Sunnah. These are Ijma and
Qiyas. So, we can say that the sources of Shariat are four. These are -

Sources of Shariat 49

1. Al-Quran (é\33i1)

2. Sunnah (44.25 )

3. Ijma (Eley)

4. Qiyas (Gail)
We shall gradually learn about these four sources.

Task: Students will write at home 10 sentences about the introduction and
importance of Shariat and present it in the class.
LESSON 2
FIRST SOURCE OF SHARIAT: AL-QURAN
The first and the most prominent source of Shariat is Al-Quran. The original
source of all the rules and regulations of the Islamic Shariat is Al-Quran. It is on
this base and structure that Islamic Shariat is founded. Al-Quran is the
irrefutable and authentic document of Shariat. The basic principles and
indication of all matters necessary for human life are available in Al-Quran.
Allah the Most High says-
iPM haLeys
Meaning: "We have revealed upon you the Book as a clear explanation of every
matter." (Sura: An-Nahl, Ayat: 89)
Al-Quran is the sacred word of Allah, the Most High. It is the final and the great-
est revealed Book. Allah the Most High revealed this book to the holy Prophet
Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) through the mediation of Hazrat Jibrail (As.). This
book has been revealed in Arabic language. The clear basic principles and direc-
tion for guidance of man's life are contained in Al-Quran as the main source of
the Islamic Shariat. Allah the Most High says-
5 SUB Sry tad ALG sodtls

Meaning: "And for (the benefit of) man I have extensively used various exam-
ples, parables and metaphors in this Quran." (Sura : Bani Israil, Ayat : 89)
Forma-7 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

50 Islam and Moral Education
The majestic Quran is revealed in simple and easy language. There is no
ambiguity, terseness or complication in it. Rather, many matters have been
described in it in a very decent and simple language. A very ordinary man also
can take lessons from it. Allah the Most High says-
s io \ fe
Meaning: "Then we have made it (Al-Quran) easy (to understand) in your
language so that they can derive advice (from it.)." (Sura: Dukhan, Ayat: 58)
REVELATION
Al-Quran is the word of Allah, the Most High. It is inscribed in the ‘Loa-hi-
Mahfuz' or the protected tablet. Allah the Most High says about this -
298 3475 b 928 9408 28 [x
SSBC IE OuPS I AS
Meaning: "Indeed it is the holy Quran which has been inscribed on the protected
plate." (Sura: Al-Buruj, Ayats: 21-22)
Allah the Most High sent down the entire Al-Quran from the Lao-hi-Mahfuz to
the place called 'Bayt Al-Izzah' first in the Night of Qadr (Night of Power). The
Bayt Al-Izzah is a special place in the first sky (of the earth).
When the holy Prophet (Sm) was absorbed in meditation in the cave of Hira, the
Angel Jibrail (As.) came down there with the first five Ayats of the sura Alaq of
Al-Quran on express command of Allah, the Most High. This was the first
incident of the revelation of Al-Quran on earth. From then onwards Al-Quran
was revealed to the holy Prophet (Sm.) at different times when required under
the special circumstances.
Thus the complete Quran was revealed to the holy Prophet (Sm.) in a span of 23
years during his life-time. It has not been revealed all at once. Rather it used to
be revealed piecemeal as per requirement. At times 5 verses, at other times 10
Ayats, sometimes a fragment of an Ayat, again sometimes a sura at a time used
to be revealed. In this context Allah the Most High says -
ONG 5 SSS Se de si Jedd 51 385
Meaning: "And we have sent the Quran in fragments so that you can recite it to
mankind by stages and we have sent it gradually." (Sura: Bani Israil, Ayat: 106)

Sources of Shariat 51
Al-Quran has not been sent down in a single stroke as other revealed scriptures.
Taurat, Zabur, Injil, etc. were revealed all at once. But Al-Quran is an exception
to it. It is an indication of special status of Al-Quran. As the Kafirs of Makkah
asked the holy Prophet (Sm.) about this, Allah the Most High says-"The kafirs
say- why has not the entire Quran been revealed to him in a lump? This way we
have sent it in order to strengthen your heart by it and had it recited it gradually
and distinctly." (Sura: Al-Furgan, Ayat: 32)
Al-Quran is the word of Allah, the Most High. Allah, the Most High revealed it
bit by bit to the holy Prophet (Sm.) through Gabriel (As.) and it was completed
in his Prophetic era of 23 years.
LESSON 3
Preservation and Compilation of Al-Quran
Al-Quran is the greatest and final revealed book. The complete code of life and
direction for all men to come till the Qiyamat are available in it. So, its
preservation is necessary. Allah the Most Great has assumed the responsibility
of its protection. He announces thus -
oG bales SWS, z6h
Meaning: "It is we to have revealed the Quran and surely we are its protector."
(Sura: Al-Hijr, Ayat: 9)
Allah the Most High Himself is the protector of Al-Quran, He protects this book
under His direct supervision.
This is why not even a single letter, vowel-mark or dot has changed till today. It
is exactly the same today as it was when revealed. And so shall it remain
undistorted till Qiyamat.
Preservation of Al-Quran
Al-Quran was revealed to the holy Prophet (Sm.) in Arabia. At this time he used
to memorize the revealed Ayats instantly. After that he used to recite them
repeatedly for retaining it in memory. In view of the rapid recitation and anxiety
on the part of the Rasul (Sm.) Allah the Most High consoled him. Allah the Most
High says -

52 Islam and Moral Education
Meaning: "You will not move your tongue quickly parallelly with the revelation
in order to master it. It is our responsibility to preserve it and to have it recited."
(Sura: Al-Qiyamah, Ayat: 16-17)

After this the anxiety of Rasulullah (Sm.) was removed and he continued to
preserve them early by memorizing them.

Whenever an Ayat was revealed Rasulullah (Sm.) called upon his companions to
memorize it. The companions used to memorize it and used to recite it day and
night, while offering Salat and also they would see to it that the members of their
family, wives and children, friends, and companions memorize it alike. The
murmuring sound of recitation of the Quran could be heard from their houses at
the dead of night. Most often Rasulullah (Sm.) himself would hear their
recitation from a close distance of their houses.

The honoured Prophet (Sm.) used to send his companions (Ra.) to different
places to teach people the recitation of Al-Quran. For instance, he had sent to
Madina before his migration there Hazrat Musab Ibn Umair (Ra.) and Hazrat
Abdullah Ibn Ummi Maqtum (Ra.) to teach the people Quran there.

Thus Al-Quran was preserved initially by way of memorizing. It is to be
mentioned that the-then Arabs possessed very sharp memory. They would never
forget once a thing was heard/ learnt. As a result due to such uncommon memory
of the Arabs Al-Quran was easily preserved in their memory.

Besides this, arrangement was also made to preserve it in writing. Very few
people among the Arabs were literate. Besides that, the writing materials too
were rarely available. For this, Al-Quran could not be preserved at that time in a
single volume. However, whenever a part or Ayat of Al-Quran was revealed it
used to be written down. The branches of all trees, the hide and bones of animals,
stone, and leaves of trees were the writing materials in those days. The
companions (Ra.) would write down the Quranic Ayat on these materials and
preserve it.

Those companions who were literate, most of them earned the prestige of
writing down the Quran. The companions that wrote down Al-Quran are called
'Katiban-i-Wahi' or the scribe’s of Wahi. They numbered 42. The most leading
among them was Hazrat Zaid Ibn Thabit (Ra.). Besides him, also mentionable
are- Hazrat Abu Bakr Siddiq (Ra.), Hazrat Umar Faruq (Ra.), Hazrat Uthman
(Ra.), Hazrat Ali (Ra.), Hazrat Muawiyah (Ra.), Hazrat Ubay Ibn Kaab (Ra.),
Hazrat Mughira Ibn Shuba (Ra.), Hazrat Amr Ibn Aas (Ra.), Hazrat Zubayr Ibn

Sources of Shariat 53
Awwam (Ra.), Hazrat Abdullah Ibn Arkam (Ra.), Hazrat Abdullah Ibn Rawaha
(Ra.), etc. One or the other from among them always used to keep company with
Rasulullah (Sm.). And they would instantly write down the part or Ayat that was
revealed. Thus Al-Quran was preserved in written form.

Compilation of Al-Quran

Al-Quran was preserved entirely in both oral and written manners during the
prophet's life-time. But it was not collected together in a book form. Rather the
fragments written down under his supervision were preserved in the custody of
several persons. It was Hazrat Abu Bakr (Ra.) who first took the initiative to
compile Al-Quran.

Hazrat Abu Bakr (Ra.) was the first Khalifa of Islam. During his time there arose
some false claimants of prophethood called the ‘False Prophets’ as there were
also some protestors against Zakat. He waged war against them. One such battle
was the ‘Battle of Yamama'. It was directed against a false prophet named
Musailama Kazzab. A good number of companions (Ra.) who were Huffaz or
memorizers of Al-Quran embraced martyrdom in this battle. At this Hazrat
Umar (Ra.) became worried. He thought that if the Huffaz companions (Ra.)
keep on becoming martyrs, a time might come when no mesmerizer of Al-Quran
would remain among the survivors. As a result there would arise the possibility
of the extinction of Al-Quran. So, he advised Hazrat Abu Bakr (Ra.) to have
Al-Quran compiled in a book form. On hearing the advice Hazrat Abu Bakr
(Ra.) said," O Omar! How come that you want a thing done which Rasulullah
(Sm.) did not do it himself?" Hazrat Umar (Ra.) said," By Allah! There is good
in this." As Hazrat Umar (Ra.) repeatedly kept on telling this, Hazrat Abu Bakr
(Ra.) took the initiative of compiling Al-Quran. He entrusted this heavy
responsibility on Hazrat Zaid Ibn Thabit (Ra.) who was the principal scribe of
wahi. Hazrat Zaid (Ra.) adopted four spedific ways in compiling Al-Quran
which follow:

a. To determine the accuracy and correctness of every Ayat by having them recit-
ed by the Huffaz companions (Ra.);

b. To determine the accuracy by comparing them with the memorization of
Hazrat Umar (Ra.);

c. To collect the testimony of at least two witnesses as to the point that the
written fragments were of the Prophet's time;

54 Islam and Moral Education
d. The finalized written Ayat were to be compared and verified with the help of
the manuscripts preserved by other companions (Ra.).

Thus Hazrat Zaid Ibn Thabit (Ra.) compiled the holy Quran in book form for the
first time by adopting utmost caution. This was the first compilation of Al-Quran
in the form of a book. This copy of Al-Quran was preserved with Hazrat Abu
Bakr (Ra.). After Hazrat Abu Bakr's (Ra.) demise it was in Hazrat Umar's (Ra.)
custody. After Hazrat Umar's martyrdom it was lying safe with Ummul
Muminin Hazrat Hafsa (Ra.), the widow of the holy Prophet and daughter
ofHazrat Umar (Ra.).

There arose some differences in recitation of Al-Quran during the Khilafat of
Hazrat Uthman (Ra.), the third Khalifah. The basic reason for this was recitation
of Al-Quran by following the different tribal styles. In order to simplify the
matter the holy Prophet (Sm.) had approved as many as 7 styles of reciting
Al-Quran. There was no problem at the initial phase as the Arabs were aware of
these 7 permitted styles of recitation. But in consequence of the vast expansion
of the Islamic Khilafat the non-Arabs were becoming Muslim. They were not
conversant with all these variant regional styles of the Arabic language. So, there
arose much confusion among them regarding the various styles of reciting
Al-Quran. One such event took place during the Jihad in the Armenia~Azarbyz-
an region. The recitation of Al-Quran in different styles led to the outbreak of
quarrel among the Muslims. Hazrat Huzaifa Ibn Yaman (Ra.) informed Khalifah
Hazrat Uthman (Ra.) about the incident.

Under such circumstances Hazrat Uthman (Ra.) formed a board consisting of
four companions (Ra.) at the advice of the leading companions (Ra.). They were
Hazrat Zaid Ibn Thabit (Ra.), Abdullah Ibn Zubayr (Ra.), Sayid Ibn Aas (Ra.)
and Abdur Rahman Ibn Harith (Ra.). The leadership of this board was reposed
on Zaid Ibn Thabit (R.).

Hazrat Zaid Ibn Thabit (Ra.) first of all had the first manuscript of Al-Quran
brought from Hazrat Hafsa (Ra.) and prepared seven more copies from it. In
preparing the copies the companions (Ra.) verified the accuracy by comparing
the recitation of the Haffiz again. Then the original copy was returned to Hazrat
Hafsa (Ra.) and of the seven new copies one was preserved at the centre with the
Khalifah and the rest six were dispatched to the various administrative centres.
As a result, Al-Quran escaped the risk of distortion and incompatibilities. This
was followed by the destruction of the scattered copies by burning after
collecting them. Thus Al-Quran was compiled under the direct supervision of

Sources of Shariat 55
Hazrat Uthman (Ra.). For this great and noble contribution he is called the
‘Jamiul Quran’, or 'Gatherer' or ‘Compiler’ of Al-Quran.

No change whatever so of the directions of Rasulullah (Sm.) was brought to
these compilations. Rather the task of compilation was performed in pursuance
of the succession of Ayats established and left behind by Rasulullah (Sm.).
Likewise, the same arrangement of the suras as done by Rasulullah (Sm.) was
retained. In fact, such succession ( of Ayats and suras) was taught to the holy
Prophets (Sm.) by Allah the Most High Himself. Whenever the Angel Gabriel
brought any Ayat, right at that time he would mention which Ayat to be posted or
inserted in which position or place of which Sura. Accordingly, Rasulullah (Sm.)
also got them written down by the companions (Ra.). This point is considered
with utmost importance in preparing the manuscripts of Al-Quran exactly
identical with that inscribed in Lao-hi-Mahfuz.
The manuscripts of Al-Quran prepared during the time of Hazrat Uthman (Ra.)
did not have the harkats or vowel marks. As a result, the non-Arab Muslims
faced much disadvantage in reciting Al-Quran. Hajjaj Ibn Yousuf, the Umayyad
Governor of Iraq removed this difficulty by adding harkat to Al-Quran. In fact,
it is no novel addition to Al-Quran. Rather the harkats were not used in writing
previously although they were applied while reciting. For the Arabs could
understand them unaided. Hajjaj Ibn Yusuf merely demonstrated the pronounced
harkats by putting them (the vowel signs) in writing. As a result, the difficulty of
recitation of Al-Quran faced by the non-Arabs was removed.
It is to be mentioned that Al-Quran was subsequently compiled in a newer and
simple method. Before the invention of the printing machine, Al-Quran used to
be compiled by copying by hand. After the invention of the printing machine,
lacs of copies of Al-Quran were printed with much caution. Even it has been
translated and its commentaries too have been published in almost every
language of the world.

compilation of Al-Quran and present it to the class.

56 Islam and Moral Education
LESSON 4
MAKKI AND MADANI SURAS

Al-Quran is divided into 30 parts in total. These parts are styled the 'Paras'. There

are 114 Suras (chapters) and 6236 Ayats, vriantly 6666 Ayats. Considering the

time of revelation the Suras of Al-Quran are divided into 2 groups- Makki and

Madani. An account of these two categories is given below -

MAKKI SURAS

Generally speaking, those Suras that were revealed at the city of Makkah are

called Makki Suras. According to the famous opinion, those Suras are called the

Makki Suras, which were revealed to the Prophet's (Sm.) Hijrat (migration) to

Madinah.

In this context, Yahya Ibn Salam says that whatever was revealed to the holy

Prophet (Sm.) on his way to Madinah till he reached there are also included in

the Makki Sura category.

The total number of Makki Suras in Al-Quran is 86.

CHARACTERISTICS OF MAKKI SURAS

1. An invitation to Tawhid and Risalat has been made;

2. The life after Qiyamat, Jannat and Jahannam, that is, a description of Akhirat
has found prominence in these suras;

3. The futility of shirk and kufr has been established with their description;

4. Answers to various questions of the Mushriks and Kafirs have been offered;

5. They contain accounts of the evil practices and wrongs such as kill spree
of the previous ages, grabbing the wealth of orphans, burning alive female
children, etc;

6. The success of the preceding Prophets and tragic end of their opponents
are described in them;

7. These Suras contain the general principles of the Shariat;

8. The characteristic of excellent and noble conduct are described in them;

9. These Suras are short and the Ayats too are small;

10. The dictions of them are forceful, serious and exciting;

11. Major issues have been presented in them accompanied by oaths and pledges.

Sources of Shariat 57

MADANI SURA

Generally speaking, the suras revealed at Madinah are the Madani Suras.

However, accordingly to a leading opinion, all the suras revealed at Madinah

after the Prophet's (Sm.) hijrat there are called the Madani Suras.

Yahya Ibn Salam says that those suras revealed to the holy Prophet (Sm.) after

his Hijrat and during his journeys outside Madinah are also included in the

Madani Suras. That means, all such Suras as were revealed after Hijrat are the

Madani Suras. They form a total of 28 Suras.

CHARACTERISTICS OF MADANI SURAS

1. The invitation to Islam has been extended to ‘Ahl-i-Kitab’ (people of the
Book) in these Suras; i.e Jews and Christians

2. The going astray of ‘Ahl-i-Kitab’ and the distortion of their books are narrated in
them;

3. The introduction of Nifaq (hypocrisy) and conspiracies of the Munafiqs
(hypocrites) are mentioned in these Suras;

4. Personal, domestic, social, national, internal, educational and cultural
principles have been described in these Suras;

5. The laws and regulations in respect of family transactions, inheritance, commerce
and business, buying and selling and such other economic activities are described
there;

6. Judicial matters, penal code, Jihad, code of laws, diplomatic policy etc. have
been discussed in them;

7. The principles of Ibadat (worship of Allah), Salat, Sawm, Zakat, Hajj etc.
have been described in them;

8. The rules and regulations of Shariat-Farz, Wajib, Halal-Haram etc. are
clearly mentioned in them;

9. These Suras and their Ayats are relatively lengthy.

Task : Students will prepare a large poster writing on it the characteristics of
the Makki and Madani Suras and exhibit it in the classroom.
LESSON 5
TILAWAT: ITS IMPORTANCE AND EXCELLENCE

The meaning of the word Tilawat is to read, recite, follow, etc. The recitation or

reading of Al-Quran is called Tilawat in Islamic terminology.

Forma-8 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

38 Islam and Moral Education
The majestic Quran may be read or recited from memory; again it may be recited
visually. The visual recitation of Al-Quran is called Tilawat-i-Nazira.
At the start of the learning process, Al-Quran has got to be read visually. Then
harkat, letters, etc. should be identified for recitation with Tazbid. Many of us
have not been able to memorize the entire Al-Quran. So, we shall regularly recite
the Quran with Tazbid. It is also very commendable to recite Al-Quran in this
visual method. Much virtue or merit may be gained by it.
Al-Quran is the word of Allah the Most Great. It is a very special gift to man
from Allah the Most High. It is a complete store-house of knowledge. As it
contains descriptions of Tawhid, Risalat, Akhirat, Ibadat, etc, so also there are
clear indications and directions about the multifaceted sciences and knowledge
essential for mundane life. Considering this a certain French scholar has rightly
said-- "Quran is an institute of science for the scientists, a glossary for the
linguists, a grammar for the grammarians and an encyclopedia for regulations."
So, mere superficial reading of Al-Quran will be of no avail. Rather it has got to
be studied with adequate seriousness. Its spirit and significance must be realized.
The topics addressed in it have got to be thought about and researched on. In that
case we shall be able to acquire knowledge and teachings. Allah the Most High
likewise has commanded to study Al-Quran with reflection and research. He
says, "Then do they not ponder over Al-Quran, or are their hearts locked up?"
(Sura: Muhammad, Ayat: 24)
In another Ayat Allah the Most High says, "This is a book full of good things;
this we have sent to you so that many understands its (Ayats) and the sensible
persons get advice from it.” (Sura Saad, Ayat 29)
Allah the Most High further says,-

0 fbhenSS Sul eyes
Meaning: "Surely we have rendered Al-Quran easy to understand. So, are there
any solicitors of advice?" (Sura Al-Qamar, Ayat 22)
Therefore, Al-Quran should be studied with understanding, reflection and
research. Such a study will help to realize the teachings and advice of Al-Quran.
Alongside reflection and research, it is very necessary to read the Quran correct-
ly and nicely. An incorrect and unimpressive recitation of Al-Quran brings sin
with it. Prayer cannot be faultless if the Tilawat is incorrect and

Sources of Shariat 59
indecent. The method of correct and nice recitation of Al-Quran is termed as
Tazbid. We learnt the various rules of Tazbid in the previous classes. Allah the
Most High has commanded the recitation of Al-Quran with Tazbid. He says -
# eee (ter
ONG FSI 3H $355
Meaning: "Recite the Quran slowly and clearly." (Sura: Al-Muzammil, Ayat: 4)
About reciting Al-Quran rhythmically, Rasulullah (Sm.) has said-
Moo eter i 4 27
- hill gis algalbe oi)
Meaning: "One who does not recite Al-Quran in a sweet tone or voice, he is not
of us." This means that such a person is not set on the principle of Rasulullah
(Sm.). (Bukhari)
In fact, Rasulullah (Sm.) used to recite Al-Quran with Tazbid in a sweet voice.
We too shall try to recite Al-Quran correctly and nicely.
The merit of the recitation of Al-Quran is very high. The recitation of each of its
words brings reward. Our extremely kind Prophet (Sm.) says -
— Qleal a Acciacca Alb LW oils hgs
Meaning: "A man reciting even a single letter of the book of Allah will earn a
reward. And this reward is ten-fold." (Tirmizi)
In fact, recitation of Al-Quran is an excellent worship. Rasulullah (Sm.) says -
Meaning: "The best worship for my followers is the recitation of Al-Quran."
(Baihaqi)
Al-Quran is Noor or Light. It elevates the rank of its reciter. A servant of Allah
gets His pleasure and intimacy. The heart of man becomes pure by it. Man
becomes illumined with moral and human qualities. Rasulullah (Sm.) says-
These hearts ( of men) become rusted as iron rusts with water. He was asked
thus: - "0 the Messenger of Allah! what is its purifier?" He replied Constant
remembrance of death and profuse recitation of Al-Quran." ( Baihaqi)
In fact, a man succeeds in both here and the hereafter by reciting Al-Quran
befittingly. Man becomes highly honoured and dignified by correct and nice
recitation of Al-Quran and translating its spirit in his deeds. Al-Hadith contains

60 Islam and Moral Education
it thus - "A person who recites Al-Quran and acts accordingly, his parents will
bedecked with crowns brighter than the sun." (Ahmad and Abu Daud).
Therefore, we shall be attentive to Tilawat-i-Quran.
BACKGROUND OF REVELATION
‘Shan’ literally means condition, status, cause, event, background. So
'Shan-i-Nuzul' means the cause or background of revelation. In the Islamic
parlance, the cause or background of the revelation of the Sura or Ayat of Al-Qu-
ran is called 'Shan-i-Nuzul’. It is also called 'Sabal-i-Nuzul.'
Al-Quran was not revealed to holy Prophet (Sm.) in a lump. Rather it had been
revealed in response to the demands bit by bit over a period of 23 years. These
fragments used to be revealed to provide a legal direction of some incident or to
solve a specific problem. The incident or situation which called for the
revelation of an Ayat or Sura is called the 'Shan-i-Nuzul' of that Ayat or Sura. For
instance, when the infant son of Rasulullah (Sm.) died, the unbelievers took to
bantering and ridiculing him as Abtar meaning ‘without heir’. Under this
circumstance Allah the Most High revealed sura Al-Kawthar to console him. So,
the incident of ridicule of the unbelievers toward the holy Prophet (Sm.) is
known as the 'Shan-i-Nuzul' of sura 'Al-Kauthar'.
The benefits of knowing the Shan-i-Nuzul are many. Mentionable among these
are-
a. The mystery of the introduction of the Shariat can be known by it;
b. The meaning, purpose and right spirit of an Ayat can be known.
Task: Students will write 10 sentences on the importance and excellence
of the recitation of Al-Quran and show it to the teacher.
Some Suras of Al-Quran With Meaning and Background
LESSON-6 ;
&2.,?
Sura Ash-Shams ((44!353+)
INTRODUCTION
Sura Ash Shams is included in the Makki suras category. The number of Ayats
here is 15. Its name is based on the first word 'Shams' of this sura. This is the 91
st sura of Al-Quran.

Sources of Shariat 61
WORDS AND THEIR MEANING
3 - Oath gi - purifies himself
etal - the sun CE - will fail
(ga - its rays (gs - pollutes himself
ys! - the moon 293 - falsified or rejected
als - comes after it 3 38 - the nation Samud
Bes - day ike, - by their disobedience
tle - exposes or reveals it §) - when
itd 2
Gu! - night &3Z3l - becomes busy, alert
(g483 - covers it, hides it (gif - the most unfortunate man among them
Ate-i - sky, heaven SU - then said
l -he, what sth Seas - Messenger of Allah
Uz - has built 55 - camel
2391 - the earth, world kh - to give it water to drink
(ge - has expended it 853855 L then they cut it.
935 - life, soul, man a,
vy L Ajai - then Allah destroyed them
lets 7 has made him stout or] | 5 : ;
2“ well proportioned Ay - for their own sins
2 rena
(4332 - his sins and evil deeds | Sl) - he does not fear
(6585 - his good deeds. (g.é - it or his ultimate end
cai - will succeed, will be
successful

62 Islam and Moral Education
TRANSLATION
os abl ts In the name of Allah the Most Merciful,
the Most Compassionate.
3 oun 5, eattls 1. By the sun and its brightness.
545 3) 3815 2. And the moon when it follows the sun.
orarays) yi@ilg «= 3. And the day when it reveals it.
SALI es 4. And the night when it covers it.
OU AGG BS 1g 5. And the heaven and Him who built it.
Swabs o3N5 6. And the earth and Him who spread it.
See 13 7. Anda soul and Him who perfected it.
Sy pHi sla jgeslgcgils 8. And inspired it (with conscience of) what
is wrong for it and (what is) right for it.
5S aleiis 9. He indeed is successful who causes it to
grow.
OKA sie Nate 333 10. And he indeed is a failure who pollutes it.
Sip flo 5,45255F 11. The tribe of Samud disbelieved in their
vanity.
é padi e xe) 31 12. When the basest of them broke forth.
abl 236 ait 3 rs) 2B Ms 13, Then the Messenger of Allah said, “It is
b ids os the she- camel of Allah; so, be careful to
Olena 5 let her drink.”
Agile #555576 3482525553 14. But they disbelieved in him and cut her.
° ies ted «ond > wey So, Allah destroyed them for their sins
Ole sbiee dy 25 and also their houses.
Olgié SEZs 15. And He (Allah the Most High) does not
, . fear its consequences.
EXPLANATION
The Ayats of sura Ash-Shams may be classified into three groups. The first
group consists of the first seven Ayats. In these Ayats Allah the Most High takes

Sources of Shariat 63
oath of some of his creations, their state and about their creator. He takes oath by
man. By the oath of these things, Allah the Most High stresses on the issues of
the Ayats that follow. In the second group Allah the Most High states the
condition of man. Allah the Most High has created man. Then He has granted
him the knowledge of good and evil deeds. Inspite of this if a man pollutes
himself by sin, his doom is inevitable. On the contrary, a man who purifies
himself and performs good deeds will attain success.

At the end of the sura Allah the Most High has narrated the case of human failure

by citing the incident of the Thamud tribe. The Thamud tribe was a very

advanced nation. But they disbelieved the Messenger sent by Allah and
disobeyed his orders. Allah the Most High punished them for their insolence.

TEACHINGS

1. It is Allah the Most High, Who is the Creator of the heavens, the earth and
man.

2. It is He who causes the rotation of the sun, the moon, day and night.

3. It is He who grants man the knowledge of right and wrong, and good and
evil deeds.

4. One who will perform noble deed will gain total success.

5. And he who indulges himself in sins and filths will be unsuccessful and
destroyed.

6. Those among our preceding nations who were disobedient, Allah the Most
High punished them on this very earth. In fact, the punishment of Allah the
Most High is extremely severe.

Therefore, we shall be careful about the punishment of Allah the Most High. We

shall obey His commands and prohibitions. We shall keep ourselves honest and

pure through honest and meritorious deeds. Thus we shall gain success both in
this world and the next life.
Task : Students will make a poster by writing on it the lessons of sura Ash-
Shams.

64 Islam and Moral Education
LESSON 7
s+
Sura Ad-Doha (7218532)
INTRODUCTION
Sura Ad-Doha is the 93rd sura of Al-Quran. The number of its Ayat is 11. It was
revealed in the holy city of Makkah. It has been so named from the first word of
it i,e, Doha.
SHAN-I-NUZUL
It has been narrated in the noble tradition that once during his illness the holy
Prophet (Sm.) could not perform the Tahajjud prayers. During this time Jibrail
(As.) did not bring Wahi from Allah the Most High. At this the Kafirs and
Mushriqs of Makkah were spreading a rumour that Muhammad's Lord had
forsaken him and turned His back on him.
On the other hand, Umm-i-Jamilah, wife of Abu Lahab be took herself to
Muhammad (Sm.) and started telling him thus, "0 Muhammad!, I thinks the
devil that used to come to you has forsaken you forever. I have not been seeing
him coming to you for the last two or three days." The holy Prophet (Sm.) was
shocked at heart by such taunting and mockery. Then Allah the Most High sent
this Wahi (revelation) for his consolation. A protest as well was registered by
this sura against the rumours of the Kafirs.
WORDS AND THEIR MEANINGS
3 - Oath A3é alt - Did He not find you?
puta) Ef - the forenoon, first half of the Day | (3 - orphan, without a protector, shelterless
Se no ed
Ags! - night (Gal8._ - Then he granted you shelter
18] - when 0S3 - He found
og
Pa - becomes dark and silent NCE _ anaware of path
dESsls - He has not forsaken you, not left you. Goes - Then he guided you to right
le ath
ao lé - He is not displeased or annoyed GE . moor destitute
3S \>8 a s " oe ,
By) - next life, Akhirat, hereafter. a (3 -Then he turned you rich,
removed your want or poverty

Sources of Shariat 65
SS - good, excellent
ey - for you 3G - So be you not harsh
oot a os a
svt - this life, early life, time gone by ili - solicitor, needy, a seeker, petitioner
3 5% « Sean inode EY - rebuff you not, do not scold
Sad % .
{225 - will rewarded you OES) - favour, blessing, wealth
. - : 2,35 - you inform, preach, propagate
(ses - you will be pleased ce annonce, «after
TRANSLATION
743 Sy iy > In the name of Allah, the Most
Osea ; ae
“ Gracious, Most Merciful.
d Lg N5 1. By the morning hours.
tee B49 2. And by the night when it is still.
bo ncy--4- le _ L 3. Your Master has not forsaken you, nor
O G55 ELS AES 56 does He hate you.
KW Ajo, ci aoe de. Ue 4. And surely coming days will be better
OSS SS y 8 cay
BSN OPE ie aa than those gone by.
L 1 oP weed Be ws
O 52795 EB 5 EU 3355 5. Surely your Lord shall grant you favour
IRA NS and you shall be pleased.
Beal \ pet at oa FI 6. Did He not find you an orphan and then
a “ provided you with shelter?
v 4 bre pppoe :
Ossey 6.50855 7. He found you strayed and then guided
you to right path.
OGLE WE i255 8. He found you poor of means; then He
removed your wants.
bs 2261s one IF
O eB V9 BSI Gls 9. So, be you not harsh to the orphan.
d 5S NE UNS 10. And scold not the petitioner.
z
Forma-9 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

66 Islam and Moral Education
64, NEES py Pe abr] 11. And you announce the bounties/ favours
aa of your Master.
EXPLANATION
In this Sura Allah the Most High has narrated numerous favours given to the
Holy Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.). The Prophets and Messengers are the
chosen persons of Allah the Most High. They are the favourite slaves of Allah
the Most High. Allah the Most Great showered upon them innumerable favours
and amenities. He saved them from dangers and calamities. Our beloved Prophet
(Sm.) was the greatest and final Prophet and Messenger. He was the closest
friend of Allah the Most High. He was His Habib meaning dearest friend and
servant. Allah the Most Great granted him succour and favour under all
circumstances.
As we know, before the birth of Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) his father had passed
away. Then at the age of six his mother followed his father to the grave. But
Allah the Most High had him nurtured decently out of His unbound mercy.
Rasulullah (Sm.) used to keep himself absorbed in deep meditation thinking
painstakingly for the removal of sorrows and sufferings of man and his salvation
in Akhirat. Allah the Most High offered him guidance and direction to the path
of truth and beauty. The Great Prophet (Sm.) was poor. It is Allah the Most High
Who tured him free from all wants. He gave him solvency. Thus Allah the Most
High granted him immense blessings in his worldly life.
Side by side, in this Sura Allah the Most High has given Rasul (Sm.) good
tidings of granting him many favours in the next world. Allah the Most High
announces that his next life will be better many times more than his mundane
life. He will get the most excellent rewards there and he will remain pleased with
Allah the Most High.
Reminding him of all these amenities, Allah the Most High commands Rasul
(Sm.) to express his gratitude. He ordered him not to be harsh with petitioners
and orphans. At last He assigns him the responsibility of expressing his gratitude
to Him and propagating His bounties.
TEACHINGS
From this Sura we can derive important lessons about a variety of matters. For
instance:
1. Allah never forsakes his dear slaves;

Sources of Shariat 67

2. It is He Who saves them from all dangers;

3. In the next life He will grant them blissful life ;

4. The rich should do good for the poor and distressed people, orphans and
beggars;

5. No harsh treatment with the needy, petitioners and orphans is allowed. They
must not be rebuked, scolded, beaten or threatened. Rather they should be
well-treated ;

6. All good things and bounties are gifts from Allah. All feel obliged to express
gratitude for these gifts. For instance, Allah the Most High has granted us
Iman, Al-Quran, wealth and assets, knowledge and intelligence etc. So, for all
these gifts due gratitude must be expressed. The truth about all this must be
propagated among men.

Task: Students will write the Shan-i-Nuzul of sura Ad-Duha from memory
and show it to the teacher.
LESSON 8
Sura Al-Inshirah (¢'3s5918334)

INTRODUCTION

Sura Al-Inshirah is one of the Makki Suras. The total number of its Ayats is 8.

This is the 94th Sura of Al-Quran. In view of the verb root Nashrah (¢ 745) in

the first Ayat of this Sura it has been titled as 'Al-Inshirah’.

SHAN-I-NUZUL

Even before receiving Prophethood the great prophet Muhammad (Sm.) was a

highly respected man. Men from the whole of Arabia loved and respected him.

They called Him Al-Ameen. They entrusted to him their valuable things without

any hesitation. Above all, Muhammad (Sm.) was favourite to them and a man of

high honour. But after receiving the prophethood, as Rasulullah (Sm.) was
inviting all to Islam, the Makkans began to oppose him. They continued to
ridicule and harass him in a number of ways. They caused him pain by branding
him as a poet, fortune-teller, magician, insane, etc. They continued their
oppression and torture against the holy Prophet (Sm.) and those companions
who were newly converted to Islam. Even they cast the intestine of dead camel
on him when he was in prayer, strew thorns on his path, put their fingers into

68 Islam and Moral Education
their ears as a sign of avoiding his message. Thus the unbelievers were causing
him untold sufferings. At such taunting and ridicule, unjust manners and
oppression the Holy Prophet (Sm.) became worried and disappointed. In such
circumstances Allah the Most High revealed this sura to console the Holy Proph-
et (Sm.).
WORDS AND THEIR MEANINGS
) . what JS 3 - your fame
2 2% 21 1
Cia - we have not opened, expanded oh - surely
Iie - your chest & - with
tabs - we have removed Sab - pain, danger, evil
bj, - your burden \ ies - ease, peace
Su - that, what Eb55 _ When you retire, relax
cab - broke, bent wails - Then put in your efforts,
teat express your submission,
A ~ your back worship, prayer
(i883 - we have elevated 2b 3G - Pay attention, be inclined
TRANSLATION
Ome Sees] abl ot In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most
merciful.
} 5i6E5 ‘a 543331 1. Have we not expanded your chest?
dss 55.9 EL.S55 2. And we have removed your burden.
ered poses sites 3. Whatever was pressing your back to break or
bend it by causing pain.
p oe, 2 oe :
O4S320G55 4. And we have heightened your fame.
di. pel 5. Surely, with hardship goes ease and comfort.
OS ll BH! 6. Certainly with hardship goes comfort.
d ele Eds (38 7. So, as you find leisure, you do worship your
. ° Lord.

Sources of Shariat 69
SOM TIE, 8. And concentrate on your Nourisher (Lord).
EXPLANATION
In this sura Allah the Most High has briefly described His favours on the holy
Prophet (Sm.). Our beloved Prophet (Sm.) was born at the city of Makkah. At
that time the condition of the Arabs was horrible. They were immersed in
various unjust and nasty practises. They disbelieved in Allah, did not obey Him
and indulged in idolatry. Rasulullah (Sm.) did not like all this. Their feuds and
bloodshed caused him pain. He would always think for their salvation from such
wrongs and oppressions. He kept himself busy in meditation in the cave of Hira.
Allah the Most High granted him release from this pain. He vouchsafed him
Prophethood. He guided him to the right path. He provided him direction for the
salvation of man in this world and the hereafter. He proclaimed him as the
greatest and final Prophet. He elevated his status by granting him prophethood.
On becoming Prophet Rasulullah (Sm.) began to preach Islam among the Arabs.
At this the Kafirs of Makkah started to oppose him. They tried in a number of
ways to resist him. They continued to oppress and torture the Holy Prophet
(Sm.) and the newly converted Muslims. As a result, the Muslims became
extremely irritated by their oppression and torture. At this hour Allah the Most
High consoled the Holy Prophet (Sm.). He says that sorrow is followed by
comfort. Such oppression and torture of the Kafirs will not last for long. Rather,
He would soon favour the Muslims with victory. After such pains and sufferings
they will enjoy peace and ease. After that by a special directive Allah the Most
High tells the Prophet (Sm.) that whenever he is at rest after discharging all other
responsibilities such as preaching the Deen (Islam), training his companions,
caring for his family then he is to engage himself in worship of his Master
(Allah).
TEACHINGS
1. He who strives for truth and justice, Allah the Most High expands his heart
and shows him the path of truth.
2. It is Allah the Most High Who removes the sufferings of man.
3. Man's name and fame, honour and prestige all are at the disposal of Allah the
Most High. He bestows honour and status on whomsoever He desires.

70 Islam and Moral Education
4. Sorrow and pain are inevitably linked up with man's life. So, to despair at
sorrows and sufferings is of no avail. Rather, all this must be faced with
fortitude.

5. Each moment of life is valuable. So, this valuable time must be utilized.
Duties and obligations must be justly discharged.

6. After the preoccupations with mundane matters, man must engage himself in
servitude to and worship of Allah, the Most High. It is the differentiation of His
favourite slave to focus his attention on Allah, the Most High.

Task: Students will say 5 sentences on the teaching of sura Al-Inshirah in

the class in standing poster.
LESSON 9
ges
Sura At-Tin (4318534)

INTRODUCTION

Sura At-Tin is the 95th sura of Al-Quran and it contains 8 Ayats. This sura
derives its name from the first word 'Tin' of the firstAyat.

SHAN-I-NUZUL
This sura was not sent down in contact of any event or situation. Rather Allah the
Most High has revealed it as a direction for man for achieving total success in
this life and to remind him of his accountability in next life. After recounting
some of His favours to man Allah the Most High remind him about His creation
(man) and his ultimate eventuality.

WORDS AND THEIR MEANINGS

3 - oath 23355 - we have reduced him
isl - fig fruit cfaal - lowest
92h Bs t
oii - olive fruit YI - except, however
338 - mount Tur ol - those who
Chshw - sinai t shal - they have accepted Iman

Sources of Shariat 71
Pan : dy
la - this \,Lf — - they performed
wail - town, city eobbii - good deeds
gh! - secure i“ - reward, return
UeBiz - we have created y 327 42 _ unending, unbound
GléS'y! - man, mankind aajs 34 - what turns you to unbelief?
Grid! - extremely beautiful al - the Day of Judgement
aig - form, structure, design hal - the best of all judges
gS - then, again, after that Ae! Ss { - the judges.
TRANSLATION
cs 12% 4) >. In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most
> ls pa Vahl py . ? ,
Ore * Merciful.
L . vetald pum tire : :
Oss Slschelly 1. By the Fig and the Olive.
3 apes wo.
OS ae 9 923 02. By mount Tur and tract of Sinai.
Oca wide 3. And by this secure city (Makkah).
fea’ 95 . 28] 3 Oui ge 433 4. Surely we have created man in the best
ar ° ° form.

d Oaben (e27 a3 335 «¢ & 5. Then we reduced him as the meanest.
ee ner \sial EASY) 6 There being such exceptions, those who
ore _ have faith and do good deeds and they shall

Oy gee tie Sol nals enjoy unending favours.

OS - Asas LISKS 7. So, O Man! What distracts you from

~* remembering the Day of Judgement?

OSS SSL Ai us! 8. Don’t you take Allah for the best of all judges?

72 Islam and Moral Education
EXPLANATION
In the first three Ayats Allah the Most High takes oath by four things. Of them
the first and second are the Fig and the Olive. Fig is a delicious fruit while Olive
is very auspicious and its oil is very useful. These two trees grow in abundance
in Syria and Palestine. Innumerable Prophets and Messengers (As.) had
appeared in Syria and Palestine. In the second Ayat Allah the Most High pledges
by the mount Tur. This is a very highly blessed place or spot. It was here that
Prophet Hazrat Musa (As.) engaged himself in a dialogue with Allah, and the
Taurat was revealed here. In the third Ayat the pledge is of the secure city. And
this implies the city of Makkah. Prophet Muhammad (Sm.) was born in this city.
The sacred house of Allah called the noble Kaba is located here. Bloodshed and
use of force are forbidden there.
Alluding to various important matters for pledge in the first three Ayats Allah the
Most High describes the form and nature of man. He proclaims to have created
man in the beat of shapes. The shape of man is the most excellent among all
created things and beings. But if man does not perform good acts and indulges
in evil deeds, Allah the Most High shall humiliate him both here and in the
hereafter and subject him to severe punishment.
In the last part of this sura, Allah the Most High warns man about the next life.
There is in this sura promise of paradise for those who do good deeds and are
pious. It has been said that in the next life all men will be gathered together in
order to ask for the explanation of their record of deeds. This will be the Day of
Recompense or Last Day of Judgement. Allah the Most High will appear as the
only judge. He is the best of all judges. He will either give reward or punishment
as befitting a man's performance in his earthly life.
TEACHINGS
1. Man is the best and the most beautiful among all created beings.
2. Man’s honour and dignity are relative to his good deeds. Evil deeds lower
man to a level lower than that of (wild) beasts.
3. The good doers shall enjoy unending favours and amenities in the next life.
4. Allah the Most High is the greatest of all judgement. On the last Day of
Judgment He shall call for the accountability of man’s deeds.
5. Allah the Most Great has fully warned us about Akhirat. So, no sound
and conscientious man should disbelieve in it.

Sources of Shariat B
Task: Students will write down the translation of sura At-Tin and show it
to the teacher.
LESSON 10
SURA AL-MAUN (y#i8532)
INTRODUCTION
Sura Al-Maun is the 107th sura of Al-Quran. It contains 7 Ayats and belongs to
the Makki sura category. It takes such name from the last word 'Maun' of the last
ayat of the sura.
WORDS AND THEIR MEANINGS
Baas - Have you seen? ihe - needy, destitute
be
Gd! - that & ‘) - then destruction, loss, fire of
5 tes ‘ects. tells a li * hell
ms Xj rejects, tells a lie silazi) - prayer offerers, worshippers
Ao - the Day of Recompense, yudgment ete. gghls, ~ careless, inattentive, callous
ae. —
Cog eases OlZg - they demonstrate
iid | ~ aguas 322% - they do not offer or give
® 9.4 . . . .
fo ‘y - does not encourage or inspire 4 Z Lif - petty things or articles of
alaés - food, sustenance. daily or domestic use.
TRANSLATION
Bersih Sh a ~ In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the
i . Most Merciful.
Supa y 235 cod ege5i 1, Have you seen him who falsifies religion?
opi Pao cosSleyss 2. Such is he that he does not entertain an orphan.
joAT La pal Seobstivts 3. And does not encourage offering food to the
° ° needy.
Forma-10 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

74 Islam and Moral Education
Moot 2h} 42-4 :
OGdae\) ch 98 4. Then woe to the prayer offerers (worshippers).

d6 yale aVsjé 24643) 5. For they are inattentive to it.
d O54 B08 53) 6. Who make a show of their salat.
O622U5 63425 r 7. They do not extend help even with trifles,
a “(petty articles of daily use).

EXPLANATION
This sura furnishes an account of the nature and actrvrties of kafirs and the
hypocrites. Allah the Most High mentioned the rejecters of the Doomsday and
the day of Resurrection and Judgment. And it is the Kafirs and Munafiqs who
deny the day of final judgment. They deny Tawhid , Risalat and Akhirat.
Then till the end of the sura Allah the Most High mentions some of their
symptoms. For instance, they are harsh to the orphans. They grab their
properties even forcefully if so needed. Not to speak of helping and co-operating
with the orphans, they even ward them off with cruelty. They not only abstain
from helping the orphans, distressed, poor, needy, rather they do not even inspire
others in this act.

Another special feature of the Munafigq is that they do not offer prayers properly.

Rather, they are indifferent to Salat. They only make a show of their Salat to the

Muslims. They do not even care to be informed about the importance and merits

of Salat. However, the fact is that there awaits for them perdition both in this life

and in the Akhirat for negligence to Salat.

TEACHINGS

1. It is a very vile act not to believe in the Day of Judgment. Only Kafirs
and Munafigs can do it.

2. The orphans and distressed are not to be warded off; rather, they
should be helped and supported as far as possible.

3. The members of one’s family, kith and kin, friends and comrades, neighbours -
all should be encouraged to help and co-operative with the orphans
and the distressed.

4. Salat must not be neglected on any pretext. Salat should not be intended
for making a show. Rather salat should be performed with the purest
intention only for the pleasure of Allah the Most High.

5. For a person showing indifference to Salat, there awaits perdition.

Sources of Shariat 75
Task: Students will prepare a poster by using the teachings of Sura Maun
on it and present it in the class.
LESSON 11
SECOND SOURCE OF SHARIAT: SUNNAH
The second source of Shariat is the Sunnah. Sunnah means traditions or
practices. In the Islamic terminology the sayings, deeds, practices, traditions, as
well as conventions approved by the holy Prophet (Sm.) are called the Sunnah.
Sunnah is also called the Hadith. Sunnah is the commentary and explanation of
Al-Quran. Allah the Most High has described many matters briefly in the
majestic Al-Quran. And the holy Prophet (Sm.) explained and analyzed them in
his Sunnah. Allah the Most High says -
si Erg s Msgs
Meaning: "And we have revealed the Quran to you to explain to them (mankind)
clearly what we have revealed to them." (Sura: An-Nahl, Ayat: 44)
An example may clarify the matter. For instance, it has been said in Al-Quran.
Meaning: “Establish (you) Salat (prayer).” (Sura : Al-Anaam, Ayat : 72)
But there is no complete description available in Al-Quran as to where, how and
when Salat is to be offered. Rather it is Rasulullah (Sm.) who has explained it.
He has analyzed all the rules and regulations of Salat through his Hadith or
Sunnah. Thus Salat has been established by the direction of Al-Quran and the
descriptions of Sunnah.
Basically Sunnah and Hadith are complementary to Al-Quran. It has been
introduced as the evidence of Islam. Allah Says-
cl gpstbase 2X42 Los8338 Ig gi Ges
"You accept that what the Rasul (Sm.) gives you and abstain from what he
forbids." (Sura: An-Hashr, Ayat: 7)
So, it is proved that Sunnah or Hadith is the evidence and source of Islam. Its
place is next to Al-Quran.

76 Islam and Moral Education
AL-HADITH

Hadith means 'saying' or 'Message.' Generally, the sayings, messages, deeds and
silent consent of the Holy Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) are, taken and
understood as Hadith. Hadith consists of two parts: one is Sanad ( Ui4), other
is Matan( été ).The (unbroken) chain of the narrators is called 'Sanad'. One who
narrates a Hadith is called a 'Rawi' or ‘Narrator’. In the narration of a Hadith the
successive mention or pointing out the names of their narrators in an arranged
manner is called Sanad (rater ). And the main content or part (theme, message)
is called the Matan ( ons). In the Hadith literature both Sanad and Matan are
very important.

CATEGORIES

Depending on the way or nature or manner of presentation by the Prophet (Sm.)
of the Matan or main message. Hadiths (plural of Hadith) are mainly divided
into three groups. These are -

A. Qawili (oral), B. Fili (deeds, acts, actions), C. Takriri (consent).

A. Qawli Hadith ; The Hadith orally presented by Rasulullah (Sm.) are called
‘Hadith-i-Qawli'. In other words the Hadith coming in words from the mouth of
the holy Prophet (Sm.) are called 'Qawli Hadith’ or 'sayings'.

B. Fili Hadith : Fili means related to deeds or acts or actions. The Hadith which
describes or presents an action or deed of the Holy Prophet (SmJ is called 'Had-
ith-i-Fili' or 'Hadith of Deed’.

C. Takriri Hadith: 'Takriri' means that what indicates silent consent. Those
sayings and acts of others which received the approval of Prophet (Sm.) are the
'Takriri Hadith’. In other words, the companions (Ra.) of Rasulullah (Sm.) said
something or did a certain thing in his presence. But he did not do it himself and
he did not oppose it either; rather, he gave his consent or approved it by
remaining silent. This type of Hadith containing such situation or a description
of event is called 'Takriri' or ‘consent based Hadith’.

Again, in view of Sanad or the chain of succession of the narraators, Hadith has
been classified into these categories. These are -A. Marfu, B. Mauquf, C. Maktu.
A. Marfu Hadith: The Hadith of which the Sanad or chain of narrators reached
up to Rasulullah (Sm.) is called 'Marfu Hadith’.

Sources of Shariat 77
B. Mauquf Hadith: The Hadith of which the Sanad reaches up to the Sahabi
(Ra.), but not up to the Prophet (Sm.) is called the "Mauquf Hadith’.

C. Maktu Hadith: The Hadith, of which the Sanad reaches up to the Tabii, is
called the 'Maktu Hadith’. In other words, the Hadith in which the saying or deed
or silent approval of a Tabii has been narrated is called 'Maktu Hadith’.

In fact, there are many other types of Hadith in Shariat. We shall know about
them later. Another important category of Hadith is there. It is known as Had-
ith-i-Qudsi. Qudsi means sacred. Such type of Hadith is directly related by Allah
the Most High to His beloved Prophet (Sm.). In the Islamic terminology, the
Hadith in which the word or language is of Rasulullah (Sm.) himself, but its
meaning, content and spirit have been received directly from Allah by way of
‘Tlham' or dream is called 'Hadith-i-Qudsi'. In a nutshell, the Hadith of which the
content came from Allah the Most High but the holy Prophet (Sm.)
communicated it to his Ummah in his own words is called a Hadith-i-Qudsi.
Although the idea, meaning and spirit of a 'Hadith-i-Qudsi' are from Allah the
Most High, it is not included in Al-Quran. Rather it enjoys special status as a
type of Hadith.

PRESERVATION AND COMPILATION OF HADITH

The sayings, deeds and tacit approval of Rasulullah (Sm) are generally called
Hadith. So, Hadith emanates from Rasulullah (Sm.). It was prohibited to write
down in the life-time of Rasulullah (Sm.), because Al-Quran was still in the
process of revelation. In such a situation there could be possibility of its mixture
with the Ayats of Al-Quran. For this reason, during the life-time of Rasulullah
(Sm.), Hadith was not extensively recorded for preservation.

However, the Sahabis (Ra.) used to memorize his sayings. They noticed when
and what acts Rasulullah (Sm) performed and what words passed through his
lips. The Arabs possessed extra-ordinary memory. They would never forget
what they once memorized. As a result each and every saying of the holy Proph-
et (Sm) was preserved in the memory of his companions (Ra.). Rasulullah (Sm.)
himself encouraged them to memorize Hadith.

He said," Allah will brighten the life of that man who memorized my words as he
heard them, preserved them accurately and conveyed it to such a person who
could not hear it (Tabarani). The Sahabis (Ra.) used to listen to the words of
Rasulullah (Sm), commit it their memory and convey them to the members of

78 Islam and Moral Education
their families, friends and relations. Thus preservation of Hadith began in
Rasulullah's (Sm.) life-time.

Besides, a good number of Hadith was preserved in writing too. Many Sahabi
would write down Hadith through personal initiative with Rasulullah's (Sm.)
permission. In this context, the 'Sahifa-i-Sadiqa’ of Hazrat Abdullah Ibn Amr Tbn
Aas may be mentioned. In this Sahifa, he had written down a good number of
Hadith. Besides this, the correspondences, treaties and agreements, Sanads,
Farmans, etc. were preserved in writing.

The name of the Umayyad Khalifah Hazrat Umar Ibn Abdul Aziz (Ra.) is
particularly mentionable in the domain of Hadith compilation. It was he who
first took initiative of collection and compilation of Hadith. Fresh speed was
added to the process of collection and compilation of Hadith due to his
encouragement and patronage. In line with it Imam Malik (Ra.) was the first to
compile authentic Hadith. This book of his is known by the name 'Al-Muwatta'.
The third Hijri century was the golden era of Hadith compilation. The six most
authentic books of Hadith were compiled at this time. These are collectively
called 'Al-Sihah Al-Sittah' or the six authentic Hadith books. The name of these
six books and their compilers are:

1. The Sahih Bukhari, Imam Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibn Ismail Al-Bukhari
Ra.)

2. The Sahih Muslim, Imam Abul Hussain Muslim Ibn Hajj as Al-Kushairi (Ra.)
3. The Sunan-i-Nasai, Imam Abu Abdur Rahman Ibn Shuayib An-Nasai (Ra.)
4. The Sunan-i-Abu Daud, Imam Abu Daud Sulaiman Ibn Ashas (Ra.)

5. The Jami Tirmizi, Imam Abu Isa Muhammad Ibn Isa AI-Tirmizi (Ra.)

6. The Sunan-i-Ibn Majah-Imam Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibn Yazid Ibn
Abdullah Ibn Majah (Ra.)

IMPORTANCE AND USEFULNESS OF HADITH

The importance of Hadith in the Islamic Shariat is immense. Hadith is the
second source of Shariat. This too is a certain kind of wahi. The holy Prophet
(Sm.) would give direction to men after receiving directives from Allah the Most
High.

Sources of Shariat 79
As Allah the Most High says: oF FET Ba1dG SB ye Gb eg
Meaning: "And he does not say anything from his own instincts. It is wahi that
is revealed to him." (Sura: Najm, Ayats: 3-4)
So, it is necessary to follow the sayings and deeds of the Holy Prophet (Sm.).
Obedience to Rasulullah (Sm.) is in way obedience to Allah, the Most High.
Allah the Most High becomes pleased. Allah the Most High says, "You Say! Be
obedient to Allah and the Rasul. If they tum their face, then know, Allah does not
like the Kafirs". (Sura Al-i-Imran, Ayat: 32)
Al-Hadith is the explanation of Al-Quran, so to say. Allah the most High has
narrated the various commands and prohibitions, rules and regulations and the
Principles of sharia in the Quran briefly. Then it was the obligation of the Proph-
et (Sm.) to state these rules and regulations clearly. Allah the Most High says-
"And we have revealed to you Al-Quran to make man understand clearly that
what has been sent to you". (Sura: Nahl, Ayat: 44)
Rasulullah (Sm.) would impart the necessary explanation of rules and
regulations of Al-Quran. In most cases he would teach them practically by
practising them himself. It is these sayings and deeds of Rasulullah (Sm.) that
are called Hadith. Therefore, for a proper observance of the Quranic rules and
regulations distinctly, it is extremely essential to follow Hadith. We can
understand the matter still better with the help of the example below. For
instance, there are commands in Al-Quran for establishing Salat. But the
detailed explanation has not been there in Al-Quran as to how, when and how
many rakats of Salat should be offered. Likewise the order to pay zakat has been
given in Al-Quran. But the rules regarding its payment such as who will pay
zakat, to whom to pay and how much to pay, have not been described in Al-Qu-
ran. Rasulullah (Sm.) has narrated to us all the rules and regulations in detail in
his Hadith. Consequently we are in a position to perform this obligation of zakat
properly. For this Allah the Most High says:

el SU Ass 2X gS Jc St Gs
Meaning: "Take what the Rasul gives you. And abstain from what he forbids."
(Sura: Al-Hashar, Ayat: 7)
It is also necessary to know Hadith for full observance of and obedience to his
orders and prohibitions. For, we can know all these issues through Hadith.
Rasulullah (Sm.) himself depicts the importance of Hadith thus:

80 Islam and Moral Education
~ apesE tail os Gy AGIs lial Kets
Meaning: "I leave behind for you two things. As long as you hold fast to them,
you will not go astray. One is the Kitabullah (Al-Quran) and the other is the
Sunnah of His Rasul." (Muwatta)
In fact, Al-Quran and Sunnah are the two predominant sources of the Islamic
Shariat. These two guide man to the way of truth, justice and peace. Men go
astray by abandoning the teachings and ideals of these two. So, side by side with
Al-Quran, the usefulness of the Hadith of the Holy Prophet (Sm.) is undeniable.
Task: Students will write a paragraph about the introduction and
importance of Sunnah or Hadith as the second source of Shariat.
10 Hadith of the Holy Prophet (Sm.)
LESSON 12
HADITH I
(Hadith relating to Niyyat or motive)
WORDS AND THEIR MEANINGS
Cy - in fact
JEST - deeds, acts, activities
ole - motive, intention, purpose, determination
(ory
AE SENG,
Meaning: "In fact, all deeds (their results) are dependent on intention." (Bukhari)
EXPLANATION
This Hadith is the first Hadith of Sahih Bukhari. Its significance is very vast. All
human activities are connected with Niyyat. Man does no work without Niyyat
or motive.
The importance of the motive of a deed can be understood from this Hadith. At
the same time, how a niyyat for a deed should be like can also be known from an
analysis of this Hadith.

Sources of Shariat 81
Allah the Most High will exact the accounts of all deeds of man in the next life.
On that day He will focus on the Niyyat or purpose of all deeds of man. Ifa man
does any work with good intention, he will get its reward. Even if he fails in his
work in spite of good Niyyat, he will get the reward. And if he does any work
with bad intention he will suffer punishment. Even if he worships or does
something good with a bad intention, he will not get any benefit. Rather, the
Niyyat being bad, even a good deed is considered as bad.
If we know the latter part of the Hadith mentioned above, we shall be able to
understand the purity of motive (Niyyat) more clearly. In the last portion of this
Hadith Rasulullah (Sm.) has said, ‘If a person migrates (Hijrat) with the Niyyat
of pleasing Allah and His Rasul (for their pleasure), he will gain the pleasure of
Allah and His Rasul. And if he migrates for mundane benefit or to marry a
woman, he will earn that for what he migrated but not the reward for Hijrat.'
Rasulullah (Sm.) had narrated this Hadith in a special perspective. And that was
like this - A woman named Ummu Qais migrated to Madinah after her
conversion to Islam. Then a person migrated to Madinah to settle there. On
knowing the intention of that person, Nabi (Sm.) narrated the Hadith. Its
Message is - It is a highly meritorious deed to migrate for the pleasure of Allah
the Most High. The man was deprived of the benefit of Hijrat for not having the
motive of Allah's pleasure.
TEACHINGS
1. The purpose or aim of the deed is called Niyyat.
2. The success of a deed depends on Niyyat. That means if the Niyyat is good,
the person will earn the best reward. And if the Niyyat is not good, that person
will not earn benefit even by doing a good deed.
3. Alongside the outward deed, Allah the Most High notices the state of the mind
also. So, we shall keep our Niyyat pure in all our actions. We shall not do any
good deed for show before others; rather, we shall work for the pleasure of Allah
the Most High and His Rasul (Sm.).

Task: Students will prepare a poster writing on it the Hadith on Niyyat

and its translation

Forma-11 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

82 Islam and Moral Education
LESSON 13
HADITH 2
[Hadith Concerning Foundation of Islam (Iman, Salat, Sawm, Zakat and Hajj)]
WORDS AND THEIR MEANINGS
G@  - foundation has been laid 3 - and, also, more
or established z :
; als, - to establish, set up
ge * Upon g AGA - prayer, Namaj
ur” five \Zl—- to give, to pay, to perform
age - to testify, testimony , re 45 ~ piece Thee, edith "The
‘ia t, without °
3} except withou Axe - fasting, Sawm
6I,e hi 2
bie his slave, servant wls3  - month of Sawm
43343 - his Messenger
ges |b. ye Ste aoe fF ae ok Cle AWG ov ne “% og \e {> «
ell9 8 M2)! 2615 433455 50GE WES G5 bt Di ANY SNSSGS .# Se ALY) a
Meaning: "Islam is based on five main confessions, such as there is none worthy
of worship except Allah and Muhammad is His slave and messenger and to
establish Prayer, to pay Zakat, to perform Pilgrimage (to Makkah) and fasting
during Ramadan." (Bukhari and Muslim)
EXPLANATION
The holy Prophet (Sm.) has narrated the five main bases of Islam. These are
Imam (Faith), Salat (Prayer), Zakat (Wealth-Tax), Hajj (Pilgrimage) and Sawm
(Fasting). The foundation of Islam rests on these five bases. If any of these is
dropped, Islam does not attain fullness.
The holy Prophet (Sm.) has narrated the subject nicely by way of an example. It
has been said that Islam is a house resembling a tent. Iman is the central pole of
the tent. It is very important. It is impossible to raise the tent without this central
pole. The remaining four poles of the tent too are important. These are Salat,
Zakat, Hajj and Sawm. [f all the poles remain in right position, the tent stands

Sources of Shariat 83
normally. In the absence of any one pole, the tent collapses. Therefore all these
five bases are important for the perfection of Islam. A perfect Muslim attaches
proper importance to each of these five bases.
TEACHINGS
1. The fundamentals of Islam are five in number.
2. Iman is the foremost and the most important of all bases.
3. Islam must be expressed by way of personal confessions.
4. Next to it, absolute allegiance must be paid to Allah, the Most High by way
of practising all other fundamentals, such as Salat, Zakat, Hajj and Sawm.
5. Islam cannot reach fullness in absence of any of these five fundamentals.
LESSON 14
HADITH 3
(Hadith concerning Charity)
WORDS AND THEIR MEANINGS
AX - day eglh -0 Allan!
Cea - reaches dawn SZi -you give away
skal - slave, Servant Ears -giver, spender
wil - two angels UE - reward, recompense
By Be - they two descend bust -seizer, miser
Aajst - one of them Lig -Loss, damage.
a « bo. 8 “ 459 @ “2 at 2. Z
3g Ls ass Let Sgt ASS! SS OG ols Tass Steal Rad od ge
- Ee bei Sabi 5251
Meaning: "Every morning two angels descend to a slave (servant) of Allah. One
of them says, 0 Allah! Give reward to the giver, and another says, 0 Allah! Cause
damage to the seizer (accumulator, miser) of wealth." (Bukhari and Muslim)

84 Islam and Moral Education
EXPLANATION
This Hadith is extremely important with reference to the use of wealth. It states
in clean terms the reward of charity and the demerits of miserliness.
It is an extremely virtuous act to spend wealth and practise generosity for the
pleasure of Allah, the Most High. This may be done in a number of ways. To
spend wealth with a contented heart for the benefit of the parents, relatives and
kins, friends and fellows is also one type of charity. Besides, it is the duty of all
to help the poor, needy, orphans, destitutes and beggars. Charity is mark of the
demonstration of Iman. Outwardly it seems to be a loss of wealth. But in fact it
does not reduce wealth. Rather, out of pleasure Allah the Most High bestows
stills more wealth to the charitable person in return. The residue with him brings
abundance. The angels of the heavens pray for his well-being every morning.

On the contrary, a person who averts spending wealth and accumulates wealth is

a miser. His wealth does not come to any use. There is no good and increase in

it. The angels of the skies curse him.

Thus a miser faces loss both on earth and in Akhirat (next life).

TEACHINGS

1. Generosity is a great virtue.

2. The Angels seek blessings for a generous person.

3. Miserliness is a hateful nature. A miser faces loss in all circumstances.
So, we shall be charitable. We shall help the poor, distressed and needy
persons. We shall spend wealth for our own parents, brothers and sisters.
This will make Allah the Most High pleased and He will bestow the best
return upon us.

Task: Students will write the teachings of the Hadith on Charitableness
and show it to the teacher.

Sources of Shariat 85
LESSION 15
HADITH 4
(Hadith on Plantation)
WORDS AND THEIR MEANINGS
shia - Muslim, Musalman ain = - fromit
Oo 35 - plants, to plant 5) - bird
Lazé - tree, sapling PACA] -man
58 - cultivates, grows beet - four-footed animal
(635 - crop Si - except, without
, eo?
“é G - eats, consumes Gio - charity, donation
gee, 0 tenn 3 2 9t 23 2) 67 Ie 2 Ih ete och cae Zot 5 26 2%, fe
Bio ASS Az 31 Gla gi par, EUS Es3E 53731 LOE UM bd lta gale
Meaning: "If a Muslim plants a sapling (tree) or grows any crop, and if some
birds, men or animals eat a portion from that, then it will be counted as charity
on his behalf." (Bukhari and Muslim)
EXPLANATION
This Hadith is especially important in stating the importance of protection of
environment for socio-economic development. In this Hadith the holy Prophet
(Sm.) has given us encouragement for plantation and agricultural pursuits.
Plantation and agriculture are very essential for human life. Man derives much
benefit from this. Man requires food, dress, shelter, etc. for survival. Tree meets
these needs of ours directly and indirectly. We get food, medicine, dress, wood,
fruits etc. from trees. Trees also give us economic solvency. Alongside this, trees
and plants play an important role also in the protection of the environment. The
contribution of trees in providing oxygen, preventing warming of climate,
flooding, draught etc. is undeniable. In this Hadith under discussion, the Holy
Prophet (Sm.) has induced us to derive these bounties and benefits through
plantation.

86 Islam and Moral Education
Many of us disdain plantation and farming. But in fact no work is mean. All
works done honestly are excellent. There is no shame attached to plantation.
Rather, it is an act of high merit. The Holy Prophet himself (Sm.) has encouraged
us for it.

Man can earn benefit from plantation in the next life parallel with benefits in this

life. For, birds, animals, warms and insects feed on crops and fruits. For this the
planters and farmers get rewards. Allah the Most High gets this reward recorded
in his accounts-book to the same tune as he could earn by giving that crop in
charity. As a result, he owns much reward even without himself being aware of
that.

TEACHINGS
1. Plantation is an act of virtue.

2. Man Profits from plantation. Environment is sustained. Side by side it
will bring return in Akhirat also.

3. The Holy Prophet (Sm.) has given us encouragement for plantation.

4. Other men, birds and animals have rights to a share in the fruits and
crops produced by men.

5. Whatever is eaten by any animal or living beings from the fruits and
crops grown by man that is not any wastage. Rather, it is recorded as
charity in the Accounts Book of the grower.

Task: A. Students will speak about the teachings of the Hadith

on Plantation from memory in the standing poster.
B. Every student will plant a sapling at his home and inform it to the teacher.
C. The class teacher will plant a sapling in the school ground in
accompaniment of all students to teach the process of plantation
practically.

Sources of Shariat 87
LESSON 16
HADITH 5
(Hadith on the best among the mankind)
WORDS AND THEIR MEANINGS
Bey A . or a
B85) - I shall inform you G#W1  - Those who
P aks - The best among you St - When
| AG - They said 1325 - is met, seen
RY - Yes Ve %  - reminds
in 39 careers 233% oes Te bt To sete voy ots 2€ wn 2 20%
Ses $eau 5 SESSA BS Ses DU stl Speak fg 28 sey saI Sil
Meaning: Rasulullah (Sm) said; "Shall I not inform you about good people."
They [companions (Ra.)] said, "O Rasulullah! Of course, do tell us. He said,
"Those among you are good people whose presence (sight) reminds you of
Allah." (Ibn Majah)
EXPLANATION
In this Hadith Rasulullah (Sm) has described the features of the best people. In
fact, the best people are those at whose sight Allah is remembered. Those people
are devoted followers of Islam in their conduct, manners, dress etc. They are
constantly busy in the remembrance and praise of Allah the Most High. At the
very sight of such persons the remembrance of Allah immediately follows.
These people are the best among mankind.
We mix with many men in the society. Allah does not come to mind at
everybody's sight. So, friendship should be cultivated with only those whose
sight inspires Allah's remembrance. By this we shall come under their influence.
We too shall be inspired by their noble deeds. Our conduct and manners will be
decent. As a result, we too shall be converted into excellent men.
TEACHINGS
1. Remembrance of Allah the Most High is the best deed.

88 Islam and Moral Education
2. A person's prestige does not depend on his wealth, education or power.

Rather it is by the observance of Deen (Islam) that his status is determined.
3. Those persons whose very sight inspires the remembrance of Allah, are the

best people.
4. We shall keep company of the righteous persons (Deendar), we shall

try to become like them.

LESSON 17
HADITH 6
(Hadith on philanthropy and service to the created beings)
WORDS AND THEIR MEANINGS
bei - created beings gy —_- he who
Ske -near and dear ones Cd - he favours, behaves-well
ési -more favourite, dearer dt - to, towards
Pa Par) “o g 2:

Meaning: "All created beings constitute the Family of Allah. So, the dearest to
Allah is that man who favours His created beings most." (Baihaqi)
EXPLANATION
Allah the Most High is the Creator of everything. He is the Creator. Excepting
Himself, all the rest that exist are creations or makhluq. As man is His creation
so are the insects and worms. In fact, Jinn and man, skies and earth, hills and
mountains, rivers and canals, seas and oceans, beasts and birds, worms and
insects, trees and creepers, the sun, planets and stars - all are Allah's creations.
Allah the Most High Himself has created all. He is the Nourisher, Cherisher,
Sustainer and Controller. He has not created all things in an identical mould. It
is a test from him. He has divided the creations in various groups and species,
and maintains all for the benefit of mankind. Man is the best of creations (Ashra-
ful Mukhlugat). So, man should behave well with all the creations and practise
good manners with all men. He should extend favours to beasts and

Sources of Shariat 89
birds. Allah the Most High becomes pleased if kindness is shown to them. Those
who deal generously with all these creations are the beloved slaves of Allah the
Most High. Allah loves them.

TEACHINGS

1. All creations are as if Allah's family.

2. It is the Islamic ideal to show love to and behave well with them.

3. Allah the Most High becomes pleased if animals, beasts and birds are shown

mercy.

4. Man can become a dear slave of Allah by showing favour to His creation.
Task: Students will form groups and prepare posters by writing on
them the teaching of the Hadith relating to philanthropy and service to
creations and then present it to the teacher.

LESSON 18
HADITH 7
[Hadith Concerning Public Service (Benevolence)]
WORDS AND THEIR MEANINGS
ral - brother 4gls - need, want
{E59 _ - he does not oppress him 4231 - his brother
a{Lig5f  - he does not surrender him
sp EGAu ob scsi Gob GoM VGA lath fi sLaalt

Meaning: "A Muslim is a brother to another Muslim. He does not oppress his

brother, nor does he surrender him to his enemy. Allah fulfils the needs of a

Muslim who tries to fulfil his brother's wants." (Bukhari and Muslim)

EXPLANATION

Muslims are brothers unto themselves. They believe in the same ideology; they

are the followers of the same philosophy of life. As a result, any Muslim residing

in any comer of the globe is tied together with all other Muslims by the bond of

Islamic brotherhood. It does not recognize any discrimination of land, age, race,

colour, rich and poor, black and white. Arab and non-Arab all are brothers unto

Forma-12 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

90 Islam and Moral Education
themselves. So, a Muslim has got to discharge certain obligations to his fellow
Muslim brothers. For instance, a Muslim brother cannot be oppressed or tortured
or unjustly treated. Rather, one must come forward to his aid. His life, property
and honour must be protected. He must be helped in combating his enemy. His
enemy must not be helped. A Muslim brother must be helped in the hour of any
need, be it petty or major. If ability permits, one must come forward to his rescue
even at financial cost. Else, he must be helped by advice and intelligent counsel.
Even he must be helped with physical means, if so needed.
In fact, a Muslim must come up with sincerity to see his Muslim brother out of
danger with the best of his ability. This makes Allah the Most High pleased with
him. He Himself helps the generous Muslim in return and fulfills all his needs.
TEACHINGS
1. Musims are brothers unto themselves.
2. They will not oppress and torture one another.
3. They will come forward unitedly against their enemies.
4. They will help one another in problems and dangers.
5. A helping Muslim is a favourite of Allah. Allah the Most High will satisfy his

wants.

Task: Students will write the translation and teachings of the Hadith on
benevolence and will show it to the teacher.
LESSON 19
HADITH 8
(Hadith on Honesty in Business)

WORDS AND THEIR MEANINGS

jolGi - businessman, trader Zeal - martyrs, one embracing martyrdom

el - trusted, trustworthy % - with

S351 - truthful Ax - day
Wy coe pect nee 9) 29% 22 25.n 92 3 ¢
Salga)l 455 WW Ge as BLN SE oli

Meaning: "A trustworthy, truthful businessman will be in the company of the
martyrs on the Qiyamat Day." (Ibn Majah)

Sources of Shariat 91
EXPLANATION
Business and commerce are a noble profession. Our beloved Prophet (Sm.) too
was a tradesman. An honest and trustworthy businessman commands high
esteem both here and the hereafter. Rasulullah (Sm.) has said, 'On the Day of
Resurrection an honest and trustworthy businessman will be in the company of
the martyrs’. On that Day there will be no fear or anxiety for him. Rather on that
Day they will be blessed with the favours of Allah. The martyrs are those who
sacrificed their lives for the sake of Islam. Allah the Most High has promised in
Al-Quran paradise for them. The honest traders will be the companions of the
martyrs. They too will enter into the heaven like the martyrs.
However, for this traders will have to fulfil two conditions. Firstly, they must
conduct their business with honesty and truthfulness. Secondly, they must be
faithful and trustworthy. That is if business and trade are conducted with honesty
and faithfulness, a great reward will be granted. On the contrary, if fraud and lie
are practised in business, this blessing will not be allowed. So, all types of wrong
and bad practices must be abandoned. Greed and avarice must be shunned.
Unethical practices such as giving less than the due quantity, selling bad things
with a false claim, that means fraud, adulteration, hiding the faults of the
merchandize, hoarding, black marketing etc. must not be practised. Rather,
business must always be conducted with honesty and faithfulness. Then only the
great dignity of keeping the company of the martyrs on the Day of Qiyamat will
be attained.
TEACHINGS
1. Business and commerce are a legitimate avocation. But it must follow the
tules of Islam.
2. Honesty and faithfulness are noble qualities in business. All tradesmen
must practise them.
3. All faithful and honest businessmen will become companions of the martyrs.

92 Islam and Moral Education
LESSON 20
HADITH 9
(Hadith on Patience and Forbearance)
WORDS AND THEIR MEANINGS
Lé - amazing, wonderful 8 - sorrow, difficulty, danger
ot! - mumins, immandar 3% - adopts patience
554 - his act, deed ile - joy, pleasure
3% - good, welfare fh - to thank, to express gratitude
i) - except, without 4) - for him
PEnUAl - reaches him
SNAILS eel yeh ysl Is pbs nsw isaid) yeh IE
oe se (So Weck oft
-ANIRS BS Hos $oAzsLo!
Meaning: "A Mumin's every deed is amazing. And each deed brings him
well-being and good. And none but a Mumin can get it. When he enjoys
happiness and peace, he expresses thanks. It is good for him. And if he suffers
sorrows and pains, he adopts patience. This too is good for him." (Muslim)
EXPLANATION
In this Hadith a nice direction has been given as to how to behave in different
situations of human life. In human life, happiness and peace go hand in hand
with sorrow and pain. These are tests from Allah the Most High. Allah the Most
High tests man by happiness and sorrow. Man should obey the commands of
Allah the Most High under all circumstances. A real Mumin does exactly this. As
a result all situations are beneficial for him. Because when he is in danger, a
Mumin does not despair. He does not do wrong things to overcome it. Rather,
even under such conditions he obeys the command of Allah the Most High and
relies on Allah the Most high with patience. At this, Allah the Most High
becomes pleased with him. He offers him reward and saves him from sorrows
and pains. Thus even conditions of sorrows and pains tum beneficial for a
Mumin.

Sources of Shariat 93
Again, in the situations of happiness and peace too, a Mumin does not forget
Allah, the Most High. Rather, he offers thanks to Allah the Most High for
happiness, peace and bounties. He pays gratitude to Him. As a result, Allah the
Most High becomes pleased with him and increases favours for him.
Consequently, in such a situation a Mumin receives the maximum blessing.
TEACHINGS

1. Happiness and sorrow are usual things in human life.

2. One must not despair at the time of sorrows and pains. Rather, one must
obey with patience the commands of Allah, the Most High.

3. At the time of joy too, it will not do to forget the commands of Allah, the
Most High. Rather gratitude must be expressed.

4. Thus in situations of both happiness and distress, divine blessings may
be earned through gratitude and patience.

5. All acts of a Mumin are beneficial. For a Mumin obeys the orders of Allah
the Most High in all conditions. In no circumstances does a Mumin
turn away from Allah. As a result, he earns the highest benefit in lieu
of patience and gratitude. In order to become a true Mumin, we
must strive to obey the commands of Allah the Most High.

Task: Students will write on his script the translation and teachings of the
Hadith relating to patience and fortitude, and show it to the teacher.
LESSON 21
HADITH 10
(Hadith Concerning Zikr)
WORDS AND THEIR MEANINGS
gas - two sentences ol Her) - very heavy
gkis - very dear, favourite olf - balance, weighing tool
or il - full of kindness, merciful Gla - most holy, sacred
yldkzad - very easy sy¥ - all praise are for Him
otal - tongue agai - most Great

94 Islam and Moral Education

Meaning: "There are two such sentences which are very dear to Allah. These

are easy to express or pronounce and very heavy as the Balance. These two

sentences are: 'Subhanallahi Wa Bihamdihi, Subhanallahil Azim' (Allah is the

Most Holy, and All Praise are due to Him; and Allah is the Most Holy and He is

the Most Great." (Bukhari)

EXPLANATION

In this Hadith the holy Prophet (Sm) has taught two very rewarding sentences.

These are: The first sentence: Subhanallahi Wa Bihamdihi

The second sentence: Subhanallahil Azim

Rasulullah (Sm.) was the best well-wisher of his followers. For this he has

taught us these two extremely auspicious Zikrs and narrated their excellence.

Firstly, these two sentences are extremely dear to Him. For, the holiness,

greatness and praise of Allah the Most High have been stated in them.

Secondly, we are Bengali speaking people. Arabic is not our mother tongue. In

spite of that we can easily pronounce and memorize them as these two sentences

are very nice and lucid. Their pronunciation creates no frigidity or irritation in

the tongue. In fact these two are easy, simple and nice utterances.

Thirdly, these two sentences will be very heavy when weighed on the balance

(Mizan). On the Day of Resurrection all deed of man shall be weighed on the

balance. If the side of virtue be heavy, man will enter paradise (Jannat). And if

the side of vice be heavy, his destination will be hell Jahannam). The reward of

these two sentences is very heavy. Their benefits will tum the reward side of

Mizan heavy. So, we shall memorize these two sentences and recite them

constantly. As a result, Allah the Most Great and Most Holy will become pleased

with us and bestow huge reward upon us.

TEACHINGS

1. Allah the Most High is Most Holy and Most Magnificent. If His holiness
and greatness are proclaimed, He becomes pleased.

2. Subhanallahi Wa Bihamdihi, Subhanallahil Azim -are the two sentences
dear to Allah the Most High. We shall repeat them constantly.

Sources of Shariat 95
3. On the Day of Congregation (Hashr) these two sentences will be very
heavy. As a result, their reciters will attain success.
Task : Students will write a Hadith in Arabic on a poster at home and show
it in the classroom.
LESSON 22
The Third Source of the Shariat: Al-I[jma
INTRODUCTION
The third source of shariat is Ijma. Ijma is an Arabic word. Its etymological
meanings are - to agree, to be united, to establish the agreed opinion, etc. In a
practical sense, to come to a common position on a matter or discourse is called
‘Tjma'. In the Islamic parlance, the consensus of the pious Mujtahids
(researchers) of a certain age on a particular issue is termed as 'Tjma’. Ijma may
take place in any age subsequent to the Prophet's (Sm.). Starting with the
Sahabis (Ra.) till the Doomsday Ijma may occur in every age. Ijma must
essentially be supported by Al-Quran and Al-Sunnah. Ijma is not to be attempted
on any matter opposed to Al-Quran and Sunnah or on an illegitimate and sinful
act. Ijma is a special status and favour divinely ordained for the Muslims.
RISE OF IIMA
It is no new phenomenon to solve any problem or introduce a new regulation by
ljma or consensus. Rather, its use or practise has been noticeable from the time
of Rasulullah (Sm.). Rasulullah (Sm.) himself would seek advice of his
companions on various issues. After that he would take the decision in the light
of the agreed opinion. Allah the Most High says- 44225.) 3 ba Als
Meaning: "And their affairs are resolved on the basis of mutual consultation."
(Sura: Sura, Ayat, 38)
Thus Rasulullah (Sm.) set the legitimacy, example and ideal of Ijma. The
Khulafa (Ra.) used to seek solution of any new problem facing them first in
Al-Quran. If not found there they would solve it by the Hadith of the holy
Prophet (Sm.). Again if the desired solution was not forthcoming even in the
Hadith, then the leading companions (Ra.) used to offer the solution on the basis
of their consensus. For instance, mention may be made of the issue of compiling

96 Islam and Moral Education

Al-Quran through consensus in Hazrat Abu Bakr's (Ra.) time. In the days of the

second Khalifah Hazrat Umar (Ra.) Ijma was established on the issue of fixing

the Tarawih Salat at 20 rakats. Thus various problems were solved in the

subsequent age through ljma.

RULE OR ORDER ON IJMA AND ITS EFFECTIVENESS

Ijma is the third source of Shariat. In determining rules and regulations Ijma is

recognized as an immutable instrument. Generally it is obligatory to act upon the

tules and regulations founded on ljma.

IMPORTANCE AND LEGITIMACY OF IJMA

In the Islamic Shariat, Ijma is very important. It stands next to Al-Quran and

Hadith. It is the third source of Shariat and an irrefutable tool. The legitimacy of

Ijma is proved by the various Ayats of Al-Quran as well as by Hadith. Allah the

Most High says - a

Meaning: "You are the best community. You have been raised (as such) for the

(benefit of) whole of mankind." (Sura Al-i-Imran, Ayat 110)

In another Ayat it has been said,

1 2 Y ad 12 te.
AD oAA IS KT EASE leg i's

Meaning: "Thus we have established you as a moderate nation, so that you can

be witness to mankind." (Sura Al-Baqara, Ayat 143)

In the two Ayats cited above the Ummat-i-Muhammadi (Followers of

Muhammad) meaning the 'Muslims'’ have been proclaimed as the best and

moderate community-an indirect evidence as support for Ijma.

If the Mujtahids resolve an issue by consensus, it is a serious sin to reject it.

Allah the Most High says in this context -

i}

abes 92s “ate 8 22 2911 ree ee Se. if Ts Ele Fee ts al Zo, 2,
* eas IS GAS ale apres GMI hs bydioe Iso gots

Meaning: "If anybody opposes the Prophet after the truth is revealed and treads

the path contrary to the one followed by the Mumins, then we shall let him tum

to that which he chooses and cast him into the hell." (Sura An-Nisa, Ayat 115)

The 'Path of the Mumins' as mentioned in this Ayat indicates to the Ijma

(consensus of the Muslims). Our beloved Prophet (S.) said -

Sources of Shariat 97
ee Sable Q5U - mazil hss
Meaning: "Whatever the Muslims prefer, that is preferable to Allah too." (Taba-
rani) The importance of the consensus of the Muslims has been proved by this
Hadith as well. The holy Prophet (Sm.) said, "Certainly Allah the Most High will
not let my Ummah agree on the wrong path. The hand of Allah (mercy and help)
is upon solidarity. He who has seceded will at last go to hell as being seceded."
(Tirmizi)
Ijma is one of the tools of Shariat. Its legality is proved by Al-Quran and Hadith.
It is obligatory to act upon it.
Task: Students will write a paragraph on the introduction, sources and
importance of Al-Ijma at home and show it to the teacher.
LESSON 23
The Fourth Source of Shariat: 'Al-Qiyas'
INTRODUCTION
The fourth source of Shariat is Qiyas. The word 'Qiyas' means to guess,
compare, measure, suppose, conjecture, etc. In the Islamic terminology, the act
of resolving an issue of a later age in an individual capacity by using the intellect
on the resemblance of the laws or principles which are founded on Al-Quran and
Sunnah is called 'Qiyas'’. In other words, Qiyas is to solve a problem-the solution
of which is not available in Al-Quran, Sunnah and Ijma, by applying personal
reasoning in accordance with the Islamic principles.
IMPORTANCE OF QTYAS
Qiyas is one of the sources of the Islamic Shariat. Its place is next to Ijma. For
the perfection of the Islamic Shariat, the importance of Qiyas is unlimited. Man's
life and society are in constant change. New and newer still civilizations and
cultures emerge in course of changes and evolutions. As a result there crop up
many queries, problems and complications. All such problems have got to be
resolved in the light and on the basis of civilizations and cultures. Islam is capa-
ble of solving these new problems very scientifically. For, Islam is a dynamic
code of life. It is a perfect and universal code of life. A complete direction
for all men to come till the Qiyamat has been provided in it. The issues of Shariat
have been presented in Al-Quran and the Hadith in such a manner
Forma-13 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

98 Islam and Moral Education
by adhering to their instances all the problems of all ages can be solved. And it
is this method that is called 'Qiyas'. So, for the Perfection of the Shariat, Qiyas is
indispensable.
Qiyas has been marked in Al-Quran and Hadith as a source of the Shariat. Allah
the Most High says in Al-Quran - o slay dal Feat)
Meaning: "Then, O you who have sight! You derive lesson." (Sura: Al-Hashr,
Ayat: 2)
In this Ayat Allah the Most High has directed the Muslims to derive lesson by
way of reflection and research. And Qiyas is the outcome of the thought and
reflections of the Muslim savants (scholars of Islam).
Qiyas is the last layer of Shariat. It is applicable only when there is no clear
solution of a problem in Al-Quran, Hadith and Ijma. Rasulullah (Sm.) has
encouraged his Sahabas about Qiyas. For instance, while sending Hazrat Muaz
Ibn Jabal (Ra.) to Yamen as a Judge, he asked him, "When a problem will crop
up, how will you solve it? Hazrat Muaz (Ra.) Said in reply, (I shall solve it)
According to the Book of Allah. Rasulullah (Sm.) asked again, what then if you
do not find it there. He [Muaz (Ra.)] said, Then according to the Sunnah of His
Prophet. Rasul (Sm.) again said, if you do not find it even there, then how?
Hazrat Muaz (Ra.) then said thus, and then I shall deliver the verdict by applying
my intellect and conscience. On hearing his replies Nabi (Sm.) said, all praises
are due to Allah Who had such replies given to the Prophet (Sm.) by his deputy
as pleased His Rasul (Sm.)." (Abu Daud)
Qiyas or 'Private Judgement’ by research has been encouraged by the Ayat of
Al-Quran and the Hadith of Rasulullah (Sm.) as mentioned above. So, there is no
doubt about Qiyas being one of the sources of the Shariat.
PRINCIPLES OF QTYAS
New problems used to be solved through Qiyas after the demise of Rasulullah
(Sm.) and during the age of the rightly-guided khulafa (Khulafa-i-Rashideen). In
the still later ages the use of Qiyas become more extensive. But it is not lawful
to exercise Qiyas whimsically, and also for self-interest. The Imams of Shariat
have stipulated some principles for the exercise of Qiyas. These are:
A. Qiyas cannot be applied to such matters as are clearly solved by Al-Quran,
Hadith and Ijma.

Sources of Shariat 99

B. Qiyas must not be opposed to Al-Quran, Sunnah and Ijma.

C. The method and laws of Qiyas must remain within the bounds of
human knowledge.

D. It is outside the scope of Qiyas to formulate any law opposed to the
principles of jurisprudence that have been determined by Al-Quran, Hadith
and Ijma.

In fact, Qiyas is a scientific and logical source of the Islamic Shariat. Qiyas has

rendered Islamic law dynamic and lent universality to it. It is now possible

through Qiyas to offer necessary regulations and principles on the novel and
non-conventional issues of current globalization.
Task: Students will write at home 15 sentences on the introduction,
importance and principles of Qiyas, and show the class teacher.
LESSON 24
Terminology Concerning Rules of Shariat

Shariat is the coordinated form of the Islamic rules and regulations. In the
Islamic terminology Shariat means such a strong and straight path by treading
which one can receive guidance and a balanced working method. And 'Ahkam'
means rules and regulations.
Every discipline has got some special terms of its own. Similarly Islamic Shariat
has got a good number of terms peculiar to it. The successive importance of the
regulations of Shariat can be comprehended through these terms. Among the
terms relating to the regulations (Ahkam) of the Islamic Shariat, the mentionable
ones are Farz, Wajib, Sunnat, Mustahab, Mubah, etc. We shall know a brief
introduction of them from a study of this chapter.

FARZ

‘Farz' (2 35) means a rule which must the obeyed or which is most essential.

Those rules and regulations of Shariat which are proved as mandatory and

inviolable by the irrefutable proofs from Al-Quran and Sunnah, are called 'Farz’.

A Farz cannot be violated in any situation. If farz is denied, Iman is lost; rather

a tejecter of farz becomes a Kafir. If these are not observed major sins

(Gunah-i-Kabira) are committed. If the Farz duties are not performed, the

100 Islam and Moral Education
defaulter will suffer severe punishment in Akhirat.

Farz duties are of two types; such as,- 1. Farz-i-Ain, 2. Farz-i-kifaya.

1. FARZ-I-AIN

Those farz regulations which all must maintain are the farz-i-Ain. In other
words, those farz deeds which every Muslim must do either privately or
collectively are the Farz-i-Ain. For instance, the five times daily prayers, fasting
in the month of Ramadan, etc. Every Muslim must perform these duties.

2. FARZ-I-KIFAYA

Farz-i-kifaya is collective farz. These are such farz duties which, if performed
jointly, by a group of Muslims; it will be accepted on behalf of all Muslims. The
rest non performing Muslims are exempted from this obligation due to its
performance by a group of Muslims. But if any group does not perform it, all
members of that society will be sinners. For example, the Janaza salat (funeral
prayer for a Muslim) may be mentioned. If a Muslim dies, it becomes incumbent
on all Muslims of that area jointly to hold the Salat-i-Janaza. In such situations,
if a group of persons holds it, all the rest of that community will enjoy exemption
from the obligation. But if none holds the Salat-i-Janaza of the deceased person,
then all will become sinners far abandoning a farz duty.

WAJIB

"Wajib' means obligatory, compulsory, indispensable etc. There are some such
regulations in the Shariat which are to be observed. But these are not Farz. Such
regulations are called Wajib.

In the Shariat the position of wajib is next to Farz. It is almost like Farz.
Although it is not substantiated by irrefutable evidence, it is obligatory. If one
rejects or denies wajib, one does not become a kafir. But he is considered as one
committing a major sin. Non performance of a wajib duty leads to serious sin.
One not performing it will have to suffer punishment in Akhirat. There are many
wajib duties in the Islamic Shariat. For instance, the two Eid Salats, Witr Salat
etc. Similarly, in offering prayers, there are some wajibs. For instance, to recite
Sura Fatiha, to stand erect after the ruku (bending), to sit erect after each sijda
(prostration), etc. If these wajibs of Salat are dropped these must be 'sijda Suhu'
(substitute sijdah before conclusion of prayer). Otherwise Salat will not be
proper. It will have to be repeated (for compensation).

Sources of Shariat 101
SUNNAT

‘Sunnat' means path, way, method, rule, system, etc. In the Islamic parlance,
those duties which have been embodied in the Shariat by the Prophet's (Sm.)
practice or example, (these) are called Sunnat. That means, those acts which the
holy Prophet (Sm.) himself did or ordered others to do or approved other persons
performing them in his presence or under his knowledge, those acts are called
Sunnat. Sunnats are of two types, such as -

1. Sunnat-i- Muaqqadah, and 2. Sunnat-i-Zaida.

1. SUNNAT-1-MUAQQADAH

Those duties which Rasulullah (Sm.) himself always performed and insisted on
others to perform them, are called the Sunnat-i-Muaqqadah. For example,
chanting of Azan and Iqamat, two Rakats of prayer before the Farz morning
prayer, four Rakats before and two rakats after the Farz of Zuhr (Noon) prayer,
two rakats after Farz each after Maghrib (sunset) and Ihsa (Night) prayers are
included in the Sunnat-i-Muaqqadah.

Sunnat-i-Muaqqadah is very close to Wajib. Their observance is necessary. It is
sinful to abandon them intentionally or negligently without a valid cause.

2. SUNNAT-1-ZAIDA

Sunnat-i-Zaida is additional Sunnat. Technically, those acts which are proved to
have been performed by the holy Prophet (Sm.) but not always; rather, which he
would do at one time but did not do at other times, are called the Sunnat-i-Zaida.
The holy Prophet (Sm.) encouraged the Ummah (followers) to perform them.
But he did not insist on their performance and it is not sinful to drop them either.
Sunnat-i-Zaida is also called Sunnat-i-Ghair-Muaqqadah, For instance, the four
rakats of salat each before the Asr and the Isha Farz salat. Performance of
Sunnat-i-Zaida prayers brings much reward ( sawab) to their performer.
MUSTAHAB

"Mustahab' means preferable. Such acts are regarded as Mustahab in the Shariat
for which Rasulullah (S.) encouraged his Ummat, such acts the performance of
which will bring reward but non-performance will not cause sin.

All kinds of acts are they of worship or otherwise, additional to Farz, Wajib and
Sunnat are considered as Mustahab. 'Mustahab' is also styled as 'Natl' or
"Mandub'.

102 Islam and Moral Education
MUBAH
Such acts are called Mubah the performance of which brings no reward as well
as non-performance brings no sin. Man can do such act by intention or refrain
from doing in absence of intention.
HALAL-HARAM
Earthly life is an examination venue for man. It is for the sake of man that Allah
the Most High has created all things. He says -
x ee wy Go

Re INGE 20. 5 GU sh
Meaning: "He it is who created for you all that is in the earth:' (Sura Al- Baqara,
Ayat 29) and the purpose of creating all these things is to test man. For this Allah
the Most High has declared some of these as lawful, and still others as unlawful.
He has declared as halal all those things which are beneficial for man as a whole.
And He has forbidden those things which are harmful. So, He has clearly
introduced to mankind Halal and Haram through revealed Books, Prophets and
Messengers. So, man should accept all that is Halal and abandon all that is
Haram (forbidden things and deeds). We shall try to know from this lesson about
Halal and Haram.
HALAL
‘Halal’ means lawful, legitimate, wholesome, approved etc. Besides these, the
term Halal is also applied in the sense of holy, sacred, pure etc. In the Islamic
terminology, those things are Halal in the Shariat which are distinctly proved by
AJ-Quran and Hadith as lawful. The term ‘halal' may apply to a saying, work or
thing. For example, those things or articles, the use of which is lawful in Shariat
are known as halal. For instance, eating beef, rice, pulse, fruits etc. among food
items, and wearing dress and approvals indicating decency and good taste etc.
are among the Halal things. Likewise, those sayings and deeds which Allah the
Most High and His Rasul (Sm) have permitted are recognized as Halal. For
instance, to speak the truth to conduct trade and commerce agreeable to the
Sunnat, to do well to man etc. are among Halal things.
HARAM
‘Haram’ is the opposite of 'Halal’. 'Haram' means prohibited, bad, unfair, profane,
etc. In the Islamic terminology, those actions or things which are abominable
and therefore, rejectable and discardable in pursuance of the clear directions of

Sources of Shariat 103

Al-Quran and Sunnah, are haram. In other words, those acts or things which

Allah the Most High and His Rasul (Sm.) have clearly forbidden- all those are

haram for man. For instance, usury, bribery, gambling, eating pig, drinking wine,

taking narcotics, etc. are haram.

NUMBER OF HALAL AND HARAM

Allah the Most High has described Halal and Haram very clearly the holy

Prophet (Sm.) said, _ i) Ags SISA

Meaning: "Halal matters are clearly stated. And Haram matters too are clearly

stated." (Bukhari and Muslim)

Halal things on earth are innumerable. This is unlimited and inexhaustible.

These are stamped as the gifts of Allah the Most High. Allah the Most High

SAYS- + [RAF shh sce pRIts

Meaning: "If you keep on counting the gifts of Allah, you will not be able to

exhaust them." (Sura: Ibrahim, Ayat : 34)

According to the verdict or statement of Shariat, everything is lawful (Mubah).

However, if a prohibitory provision is found against it in Al-Quran and the

Hadith, it will become Haram. So, it is understood that the number of Halal is

uncountable. And the number of forbidden things is limited.

It is very essential to have an identification of these Halal and Haram things. It

is disbelief (kufr) to believe in Halal as Haram, and Haram as Halal. As the

number of the Haram things is limited, a list of Haram matters and things is

given below:

1. It is haram to eat dead animals (but to eat dead fish is not haram).

2. To drink blood (but blood sticking to meat of Halal animal is not haram).

3. | To eat human flesh.

4. To eat pig or pork.

5. Eating flesh/meat of animal(s) sacrificed/slaughtered in the name of
anyone except that of Allah.

6. To drink wine.

7. To take any narcotics such as heroin, yaba, phencidil, ganja (hemp),
opium, etc.

104 Islam and Moral Education

8. To eat the meat of animals killed by chocking or by throwing down from
a high altitude.

9. To eat the meat of ferocious animals such as tiger, lion, bear, etc.

10. To eat the meat of poisonous and harmful animals such as snake,
scorpion, etc.

11. To eat the meat of those animals and birds that feed on filthy and impure,
unholy and unclean things, such as crow, vulture, dog, etc.

12. To eat the meat of ass (donkey), mule, elephants etc.

13. Money or wealth acquired through usury, bribery, and gambling, etc.

14. Money or goods acquired through theft, dacoity, terrorism, extortion,
fraud (deceit), etc.

15. Trading and transaction of illicit articles or merchandise.

16. To give false evidence, to take false oath, to talk ill of others (backbiting),
etc.

17. Above all, obscene, discourteous, oppressive talk, action, and things of all
types, etc.

In fact, all those thing prohibited by Al-Quran and Sunnah are haram. It is the

essential obligation of all Mumins to abstain from all these prohibited things and

activities.

INFLUENCE OF HALAL ON HUMAN LIFE

Allah the Most High is the Creator of all things. It is He who knows best what is

beneficial and what is baneful. Allah the Most High has enacted as halal those

things and matters which are beneficial for mankind. He says -

5 pb she esd Ge 1B HUGE

Meaning: "O Mankind! You take the Halal and pure things of the earth." (Sura:

Al-Bagara; Ayat, 168)

Man takes the gifts of Allah the Most High through taking the Halal things, and

becomes the recipient of the highest good.

Halal things inspire man to worship Allah. Man can worship Allah the Most

High more and more. Allah the Most High says in Al-Quran:

Sources of Shariat 105
BlaitF is agiigatse Jager
Meaning: "Oh Prophets! You eat from pure things and do good deeds.” (Sura
Al-Muminun, Ayat 51)
Halal and pure things keep man's body and brain sound. They generate Noor
(light) in the heart. As a result, man takes to hating unjust and dishonest conduct.
Man grows up with noble qualities. In fact, halal foods create a holy feeling and
self-purification. In consequence man becomes recipient of immense good in
both here on earth and in the Akhirat.
INFLUENCE OF HARAM ON MAN’S LIFE
The consequence of Haram things, sayings and deeds in man's life is very terri-
ble. There are some such ingredients in some Haram things as are extremely
harmful for human, mind, brain and body. More often these things pervert man's
brain. These even develop many severe and fatal diseases. For example, alcohol,
hemp, heroin etc.
Besides, it has been proved by modem knowledge and scientific research that
the flesh of ferocious animals contains some such germs as prove extremely
harmful for human body.
Haram activities also exert harmful influence on human society. Among these
usury, bribery, gambling etc. are a few examples. Due to these social
environment deteriorates, moral, human values are destroyed, disparity surfaces
in the society and many such men as practise them become destitute and
bankrupt. Many do not even hesitate to commit suicide.
Haram food extends harmful influence in man's heart. Men become inclined to
unfairmeans, obscenity and dishonesty. The noble qualities of human character
are destroyed. Men lose interest in worship. Their worship and supplications are
not accepted. The holy Prophet (Sm.) has said, "A man finishes a long journey
and prays to Allah raising his both hands, "O Allah! O Allah!" But his food and
drink, his dress- all are haram. So, how can his prayers be acceptable?" (Muslim)
Rasulullah (Sm.) has said in another Hadith-"That body (human) which is
formed ofharam, will be the fuel of Hell." (Ahmad, Baihaqi and Darimi)
Forma-14 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

106 Islam and Moral Education
In fact, Haram leads man to the path of evil and doom. So, we shall always
remain alert about Haram. We shall adopt Halal ways in all our sayings, actions,
food and drink ete.
of Shariat to show it to the teacher.
Exercise

Multiple Choice Questions:
1. What is the meaning of ‘Laa Taqhar’?

a) Do not threaten b) Do not forbid him

c) Do not give shelter d) Do not be harsh
2. What was the number of the scribes of Wahi?

a) 28 b) 42

c) 47 d) 86
3. The peculiarity of the Makki Suras is that they narrate-

i) Introduction of Shirk and Kufr

ii) The conspiracy of the Hypocrites

iii) The general principles of the Shariat
Which one of the following is the correct answer of Question No. 3?

a) i and ii b) i and iii

c) ii and iii d) i, ii and iii

Sources of Shariat 107
Read the Following Paragraph and Answer the Questions from
4-6
Mr. Alam is a respectable man of the village. He occupied all the properties of
his younger brother after his death and ousted the children of his younger brother
from home.
4. Whose rights have been violated by Mr. Alam's action?
a) of the poor people b) of the helpless persons
c) of the orphans d) of the deprived persons
5. Which regulation of Shariat has been violated by Mr. Alam's action?
a) Al-Quran b) Hadith
c) Ijma d) Qiyas
6. What may Mr. Alam be called?
a) Fasik b) Kafir
c) Munafiq d) Zalim
Creative Questions:
1. Sajib and Sajid are close friends. Sajib often offers his Fazr Salat (dawn
prayer) after sun rise and Asr Salat (late noon prayer) during sunset. As Sajid
calls upon the youths of the locality to speak the truth and offer Salat (Prayer) on
time, some youths speak ill of him on hearing his call. As the harassment of the
youths became intolerable, he takes shelter with his teacher, who recites the
following Ayat of Al-Quran- * og
p25 pias) RA ot
a. What is the meaning of the word ‘farghab’ ?
b. Explain the statement- ‘We have created man in the nicest shape.’
c. Explain whose features have come out from Sajib's activity.
d. Analyse Sajid's activities in the light of Sura Al-Inshirah.

108 Islam and Moral Education
2. Mr. Nasir and Mr. Zabir are two friends. Mr. Nasir has planted many fruit trees
around his home. People take rest in the shade of those trees and the birds eat
fruits. He gives the fruits to his neighbours. On the other hand Mr. Zabir runs a
grocery shop where goods are being sold at a fair price. There is no adulteration.
That is why many people buy goods from his shop in the month of Ramadan.

a. What is called the third source of Shariat?

b. Why is Haram rejectable?

c. How will Mr. Nasir's work be considered? Explain in the light of Hadith.

d. Evaluate the result of Mr. Jabir’s work in the light of Islam.

CHAPTER THREE
IBADAT (éstiait)

The purpose of the creation of man is the worship of Allah. Allah's command

such as offering salat, observing fast, performing hajj, paying zakat and

abstaining from His prohibited things such as usury, bribery, exposure of the

body, obscenity, shamelessness, etc. in the daily life is called Tbadat. Similarly

mutual fellow feeling and good conduct with one another in the manner shown

by the Nabi and Rasul (Sm.) are also ibadat. Basically obedience and servitude

to Allah the Most Great is expressed through ibadat. The well-being of man lies

on it.

After reading this chapter, we will be able to-

= — get an idea about Haqqullah ( duties to Creator) and Haqqul Ibad ( duties
to the created) and narrate the method of performing them;

= identify Haqqullah ( duties toward the creator), Haqqul Ibad ( duties
toward the creations) and apply this properly in practical life;

= narrate the introduction and importance of Salat;

= narrate the importance and teachings of Sawm (Roza);

= — explain the role and importance of Zakat;

= narrate the idea of Hajj and its rules;

= narrate the teachings of Hajj for acquiring brotherhood, sense of discipline
and morality;

= narrate the rights of the helpless and the poor;

» ~ explain the relationship between the owner and workers;

= narrate the idea of 'ilm' (knowledge), its kinds and importance;

= narrate the characteristics of a student and qualification of a teacher;

= narrate the idea about student-teacher relationship as well as that of
education and morality;

= narrate the idea, types and importance of Jihad;

=» explain the difference between Jihad and terrorism and the evil
consequences of terrorism;

= to lead a terrorism-free and humanistic life by realizing the difference
between Jihad and terrorism;

= Proceed to build up a moral and humanitarian life by observing the basic
Ibadats.

110 Islam and Moral Education
LESSON 1
Ba EP
IBADAT (8a)
Ibadat (5tzait) is an Arabic word. Its meaning is to express absolute humility
and humbleness and to be very extremely submissive. And in the Islamic
terminology, obedience to the regulations of Allah the Most High in all affairs of
daily life is called Ibadat. By creating as Allah the Most High has bestowed
innumerable fovours and gifts upon us to enable us to lead our life with ease, it
is our compulsory duty to believe in Him. Allah the Most High says in the holy
Al-Quran about the purpose of creating us thus,
Meaning:" I (Allah) have created the species of jinn and man for my worship
only." (Sura: Az-Zariyat, Ayat: 56). Whatever servitude we render on earth, the
objective behind all such service is to attain the pleasure of Allah. And if such
servitude is not exclusively for Allah, Allah will not accept it. Allah the Most
High says—" They were rather ordered to worship Allah with full attention
through absolute allegiance and with a pure heart." (Sura Al-Baiyynat, Ayat 05)
Nabi and Rasul (Prophets and Messengers) (As.) were sent to instruct man how
to worship Allah, and to lead earthly life in a manner pleasing to Allah the Most
High. In Al-Quran Allah the Most High has commanded man to follow them.
Allah the Most Great says, "You tell (O Prophets) you obey Allah and His Rasul.
If they turn away then know, Allah does not like the kafirs." (Sura Al-Imran,
Ayat 32)
We have understood from the said Ayat that to follow the path and decision
instructed by Allah and His Rasul is termed as Ibadat. So, we shall be able to win
His pleasure by performing the duties properly as commanded by them.
IMPORTANCE AND SIGNIFICANCE OF IBADAT
The differentiation between man and other animals as creation of Allah is man's
intellect, conscience and knowledge. If man fails to render servitude to Allah by
applying that conscience, intellect and knowledge, that he becomes peers of the
quadrupeds or even inferior to them Allah the Most High says, "They have heart
but they do not feel with it, they have eyes but they do not see with them, they
have ear but they do not hear with it, these are like beasts rather inferior (to the
animals), they are insensate". (Sura Al-Araf, Ayat 179). So, Ibadat does not

Ibadat 111
mean worship only. Rather to conduct affairs according to Allah's dictates as his
Khalifa is (called) Ibadat.
Allah the Most High says-
29 8 Gg 2 ok 27 Suns, mak dyon. gts iste

© GAME SUSI AIS ail 5 8 Sse LB cya BRS BING BTU ELEN oop
Meaning: "You scatter over the land after saying your prayers. Busy yourselves
in seeking divine favours and remember Allah ever increasingly so that you may
become successful." (Sura Al- Jumma, Ayat 10)
It is understood from the spirit of this Ayat that doing business, jobs, farming,
earning wealth by fair means and doings, all other noble deeds by fully
discharging the duties charted by Allah are Ibadat. Similarly, love for Allah and
His Rasul, hope for His mercy, fear of His punishment, Ikhlas (sincerity), Sabr
(patience), Shukr (gratitude/thanks), tawakkul (absolute reliance on Allah) are
included in Ibadat.
Allah will reward us in the next world if we properly follow the path as directed
by Allah and His Rasul. As a result we shall attain peace both on earth and
hereafter.
HAQQULLAH AND HAQQUL IBAD

é-

The Ibadat is of two kinds : a. Haqqullah (ah ) b. Haqqul Ibad (stash is)
A. Haqqullah (Allah's Rights)
The duties relating to obligations toward Allah are called Haqqullah. In our daily
life we perform many types of Ibadat (work) to earn Allah's pleasure. Some
Tbadat from among these are marked for Allah, among these are Haqqullah, such
as to establish salat (prayer), to observe Sawm (fast during Ramadan),
performing Hajj, etc.Whatever man (Muslim) must believe in at heart as
preconditions for the deeds are that there is Allah, the one and only, He has no
sharik (associate or partner), and it is He who is the Creator of all (beings and
things). It is by his command that everything in the universe shall perish. Our
life, our death is all at His disposal. All that exist in the universe are
encompassed by his knowledge. It is with his hand that the sustenance of all lie.
He it is when we worship. There is none besides him worthy of servitude. To
believe in and confess all this heart and soul are the rights of Allah over His
bandas (slaves).

112 Islam and Moral Education
To fulfill the rights of Allah we must perform the following duties:
. To accept the sovereignty and authority of Allah in our total life.
7 To obey all commands and prohibitions given by Allah,
. To surrender ourselves to Allah under all circumstances and seek His
blessings.
We shall obey the regulations of Allah in our personal, family, social, economic
and cultural life. At this He will be pleased with us. As a result, we shall receive
reward from Him in the hereafter.
B. Haqqul Ibad (Rights of Allah's Servants)
Man is a social being. Man has to live in a social group. We live together in
society with our parents, brothers and sisters, kith and kin, and neighbours. We
respond to one other's sorrows. We help one another in danger. It is this mutual
sympathy and obligation that is called Haqqul Ibad, the haqq or right of __ fel-
low-slaves of Allah. As it is known from Al-Quran and Hadith, in Islam a very
high importance has been attached to the rights of fellow servants, that is, the
human rights.
Regarding human rights there are innumerable Ayats and Hadith. Rasulullah
(Sm.) has said, "Verily your Rabb (Nourisher), your own body, your wife and
children have got rights upon you.” In another place Rasulullah (Sm.) further
said, "A Muslim has got six rights upon another fellow Muslim. These are to
return his salutation (Salam), to visit a patient, to attend his Janaza (Funeral
prayer), to accept his invitation, to help one who is oppressed, and to respond to
his sneezing." (Bukhari and Muslim)
Man's rights on his fellow brother can be classified into eight categories, such
as : (1) Rights of close relatives, (2) Rights of distant relatives, (3) Rights of
neighbourers, (4) Rights of compatriots (fellow citizens), (5) Rights of the ruler
and the ruled, (6) Rights of ordinary Muslims, (7) Rights of the needy, (8) Rights
of non-Muslims.
Along with discharging obligations to Allah, we shall be careful to discharge our
responsibilities and duties to man.
Task: Students will write down three examples each on the rights of Allah
and the rights of man.

Ibadat 113
LESSON 2
SALAT (3,L5i)

INTRODUCTION
Salat is an Arabic word. Its Persian synonym is Namaz. Its meaning is
supplication, to ask for forgiveness and to seek Mercy. As a slave offers
supplication, seeks mercy and pardon, so it is called Salat. Of the five pillars
upon which Islam is founded, Salat is the second. The holy Prophet (Sm.) said
in this respect-

b H ie 4 LA ties qt eo oe Be 18 il uty. od
AEDS ESN LEG BLE alts stl S35 EF SrsAbl MAINES oF de BLE gl
Meaning: "Islam is founded on five pillars. 1) To testify this that besides Allah
there is no other [lah (god worthy of worship), and Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) is
Allah's Rasul; 2) To establish Salat; 3) To give out Zakat; 4) Fasting during
Ramadan; 5) Pilgrimage (Hajj)." (Sahih Bukhari)
On the day ofQiymatAllah will demand the accounts of Salat. Rasulullah (Sm.)
has said, eh sys 6 He

Sli dela sg alla cals le Js}

Meaning: "On the Day of Qiyamat, of all things the accounts of Salat will be
demanded first." (Tirmizi)
Allah the Most Great has made farz the five times daily Salat. This are Fazr
(Morning), Zahur (Mid-day), Asr (Afternoon), Magrib (Sunset) and Isha (Night)
prayers. Salat restrains a Mumin (Believer) from evil and heinous deeds.
Allah the Most High says, * Sidhe sth 6 4s ERE
Meaning: "Surely Salat restrains man from absence and evil deeds." (Sura
An-kabut, Ayat 45)
Salat can never be abandoned except for a cause/reason approved by the Shariat.
RELIGIOUS IMPORTANCE
The importance of Salat in a Muslim's daily life is unlimited. Salat helps man
attain nearness to Allah. The slave gets the company of his Lord. Iman becomes
firm, the soul becomes purified. Salat makes man get up from bed early in the
Forma-15 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

114 Islam and Moral Education
morning which is very beneficial for health. About the importance of Salat Rasul
(Sm.) said, "One who offers Salat with attention, that Salat will be Noor (light)
for him." (Tabarani)
One day Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) said to his companions - "If there is a river
flowing by the side of a man's house and he bathes in it five times daily, will
there remain any filth in his body? The companions said in reply, No, O
Messenger of Allah. Then the holy Prophet (Sm.) said, The five times daily
Salats likewise remove his (he who prays) sins. The holy Prophet (Sm.) further
said, Salat is the identifier between Iman and Kufr." (Tirmizi)
Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) has narrated the importance of offering salat in
congregation. He said, "Salat offered in congregation brings twenty seven times
more reward than that offered individually." (Bukhari and Muslim)
And Allah the Most High too has ordered Salat to be offered in jamat. Allah
says, oy 3h
Oca 1 813855315
Meaning: "You bow down with those who bow down." (Sura: Al-Bagara, Ayat:
43)
SOCIAL IMPORTANCE
In many places of Al-Quran it has been said that Salat be offered in a body. The
Muslim gets the opportunity to assemble five times daily in a particular place.
They can help one another in weal and woe. At this the social bond among them
is boosted up. Even there remains no distinction of rich and poor while standing
in arow. As a result there develops equality among the Musallis (those who offer
prayers). Man gets the lesson of working in unison by forgetting mutual
differences of opinions through offering Salat.
Salat inspires us about the importance of time, sense of discipline, obedience to
the leader, leading regulated and clean life. We shall offer prayer regularly with
care for the right time. We shall build up our life decently.
Task: Students will construct five sentences group-wise on the religious
and social importance of Salat.

Tbadat 115
LESSON 3

SAWM (4341)
Sawm is an Arabic Word. Its Persian synonym is 'Roza’. Its literal meaning is to
‘abstain from’. In the terminology of the Islamic Shariat Sawm is to refrain from
food, drink and sensual pleasure from dawn to dusk in order to please Allah.
It is Farz for every adult man and woman to observe fasting during the whole
month of Ramadan. It is one of the five pillars of Islam. The importance of the
teachings of Sawm in our daily life is immense.
MORAL LESSONS OF SAWM
It is not only upon us that Sawm is Farz. Rather it was Farz for the followers
(Ummat) of all the preceding Prophets and Messengers. The spiritual
excellence of the Sayim (one observing fast) is attained through it. Taqwa (Fear
of Allah) and love of Allah develop in man's mind through Sawm. Man does not
eat or drink anything in spite of the pain of hunger and thirst and does not enjoy
the sensual pleasure for the sake of the love for and fear of Allah.
Allah the Most Great says- 4388 ashe Be Joost GF Aga le csy
Meaning: "Sawm (roza) has been made compulsory upon you as it was done
upon those who preceded you so that you can attain Taqwa (Fear of Allah).”
(Sura Al-Baqara, Ayat 183)
We shall observe fast during the month of Ramadan to acquire Taqwa.
Man indulges in many evil deeds under the influence of greed and avarice, envy
and hatred, anger and agitation. Sawm teaches man to keep away from these
deeds. Sawm is the shield between a man and his evil deeds. The holy Prophet
Muhammad (Sm.) has said- 2$2 gaff
Meaning: "Sawm (Roza) is as if a shield.” (Bukhari and Muslim)
Above everything else, physical, mental and spiritual peace are attained by the
observance of Sawm.
SOCIAL TEACHINGS OF SAWM
Mutual sympathy and fellow feeling is developed by the cultivation of Sawm. A
man practising Sawm comes to realize the points of another man who suffers the
pain of hunger. He can imagine how much distressful the pain of hunger and

116 Islam and Moral Education
thirst can be. At this the feeling of sympathy and fellow feeling is developed
towards the hungry people. The holy Prophet (Sm.) has said, "This month is the
month of sympathy."
Rasulullah (Sm.) would himself practise charity in the month of Ramadan as
much as he inspired others for that. Hazrat Ibn Abbas (Ra.) says, "Rasulullah
(Sm.) was more charitable among men. His charity would increase particularly
at the advent of Ramadan." (Bukhari and Muslim). Sawm encourages charity
towards the helpless and the poor.
RELIGIOUS IMPORTANCE OF SAWM
Sawm has much importance from the religious point of view. Allah increases the
rewards of all noble deeds from ten to seven hundred folds. But it is stated in the
Hadith-i-Qudsi about the return of Sawm thus-Allah the Most High says-
ay hss 6l5ch 23eall
Meaning: "Sawm is for me and I myself shall offer its return." (Bukhari)
As Sawm is observed for Allah with the hope of return (reward), Allah the Most
High forgives all previous sins of Sayim. As the holy Prophet (Sm.) has said-
~ a8 gy BiH Al sad cast BEI Glas slags
Meaning: "Allah the Most High forgives all the past sins of a person who
observes fast by cherishing faith in and hope of reward from Allah." (Bukhari)
Sawm is a fundamental obligatory duty. If anybody rejects it he will become
Kafir.
SOCIAL IMPORTANCE OF SAWM
Aman can feel the pain of hunger from fast. He can express sympathy towards
the hungry and needy section of the society. A Sayim averts from the unfair and
indecent deeds. He keeps away from mutual fighting. As a result peace prevails
in the society. He exchanges with others Sahri and Iftar and helps the needy
people financially in the hope of more rewards. This creates the feeling of
fraternity and the social bonds become more strong and firm. So we should
observe the fast of Ramadan in the hope of attaining nearness to Allah and in
consideration of the social importance of Sawm.
Task: Students will write down a paragraph on the social lessons of Sawm.

Ibadat 117
LESSON 4
ZAKAT (3 Ags )
INTRODUCTION
In terms of economic condition there are both rich and poor men in the society.
Allah the Most Great has made provision of Zakat in Al-Quran with a view to
bridging up the gap between the rich and the poor. The poor people of the society
too will become solvent provided Zakat is paid up. As a result, a link will emerge
between the rich and the poor. This will ensure peace, discipline and tranquility
in society. Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) has mentioned Zakat as a bridge of Islam
thus- oo Bo ee ee
ASN ESD
Meaning: "Zakat is the bridge of Islam." (Baihaqi)
The etymological meaning of the word Zakat is holiness, purity and to increase.
And in the Islamic Shariat point of view, the spending of 2.50 percent of a
Muslim owner having Nisab (taxable) amount of wealth at the close of the year
on specified heads of expenditure is termed as Jakat. Nisab is the minimum
amount or volume of surplus asset which imposes obligation of the owner there-
of to pay Zakat. In so doing the wealth of the rich person is sanctified, puri-
fied and augmented. That is why, it has been called Zakat. In the Islamic
view-point Zakat is not mercy of the rich to the poor, rather it is the right of the
poor. This being so, Allah has directed payment of Zakat as mandatory. Allah the
Most High says- , tt 2
PASS RIT ROA] Peenr}
Meaning: "Establish you prayer and pay up you Zakat." (Sura: An-Noor, Ayat:
56)
IMPORTANCE OF ZAKAT
Allah the most High has spoken of Zakat several times along with Salat. Zakat
is the third of the five pillars of Islam. Zakat holds social, moral, economic and
religious importance. For all these reasons Allah the Most Great has made Zakat
Farz on the Muslims.
SOCIAL IMPORTANCE
Zakat establishes amity in society by removing instability and chaos. Alongside
bringing social security Zakat removes the material disparity among men in the

118 Islam and Moral Education
: oh, fl 2%. 2g8559 he a4,
society. As Allah says, 4 3? pacers Os U8S ro IS
Meaning: "So that wealth does not rotated only among the wealthy persons."
(Sura: Hashr, Ayat : 7)
So, it is our responsibility and duty to construct the society on the basis of
equality by removing inequality through introducing the Zakat system.
ETHICAL IMPORTANCE
Zakat produces fear of Allah in the mind of man. It prepares a sacred and high
attitude. It teaches to prevent misuses. Above all Zakat ensures man's inner
peace, moral upliftment, purity and sanctity of wealth. As Allah the Most Great
says,
s gee PA i
Gags Hs abs Bie aglisal geld
Meaning: "You take Sadaqah (Zakat) from their material possessions. Through
it you will purify and refine them." (Sura: At-Tauba, Ayat: 103)
So, we shall pay up Zakat to be morally purified.
ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE
Zakat is one of the sources of the Islamic economic system. The economic
foundation and the success of the social welfare projects are dependent on it. It
moves forward the flow of wealth. The wealth of the rich reaches the poor also
instead of remaining concentrated. As a result, the state economies take off.
Production increases and unemployment is reduced. The per capita income
increases. The economic base of the state becomes firm and strong. The
insolvent section of population gradually becomes solvent. Gradually the
number of wealthy people increases. Allah the Most High says-
se SLEIGH 5 lalla Soe
Meaning: "Allah destroys Riha (usury) and increases charity." (Sura: Al-Baqara,
Ayat: 276)
We shall also try to pay up Zakat properly to strengthen the economy.

Ibadat 119
RELIGIOUS IMPORTANCE
Unless a Muslim pays up Zakat, he cannot continue to remain a perfect Muslim.
Ip gh “ be
Allah says- 63540 sb5 2 SU sb sb S DOSE A
Meaning: "Those who do not give out Zakat, and they are not believers in
Akhirat too." (Ha-rnim Ash Sijdah, Ayat : 7)
Rejection of Zakat is tantamount to rejection of Allah and His Rasul. According
to the Islamic Law, a man capable of paying Zakat must pay it. Hazrat Abu Bakr
(Ra) the first Khalifa of Islam waged war against the rejecters of Zakat. Salat and
Sawm are physical worship and Zakat is financial worship. So, paying up Zakat
is the obligation of Muslim demanded by faith.
ZAKAT AS THE RIGHT OF THE HELPLESS AND THE POOR
It is not mercy or favour of the rich to pay Zakat among the poor. Rather Zakat
is their due or right. If one is follower of Islam one should dispense Zakat
voluntarily and take it to the doorsteps of the poor. Allah the Most Great says-
he UTE) Be 2 esa
O 4B aI5 BLEU $5 Sghls2tGs
Meaning: "And in their (of the rich) wealth there is right of the beggars and the
needy (deprived)." (Sura: Az- Zariyat, Ayat : 19)
So, a wealthy man will think it before enjoying his wealth that there lies the right
of the helpless. Their right must be allowed. Otherwise the entire property will
be unclean. At long last, he will have to suffer punishment in Akhirat. Allah the
Most Great says, "And those who accumulate gold and silver and do not spend
in the way of Allah give them the tidings of severe punishment." (Sura: At-Tau-
ba, Ayat: 34)
Employment may be generated for the unemployed and the poor through
collecting Zakat under state initiative. At this the country will be economically
self- reliant. The disparity of wealth between the rich and the poor will vanish.
So, it is singularly essential on the part of the rich to pay up Zakat.
Task: Students will write down in the classroom a paragraph on the
economic importance of Zakat.

120 Islam and Moral Education
LESSON 5
HAJS (g4')
INTRODUCTION
Hajj is the fifth base of Islam. The literal meaning of Hajj is to resolve, intend.
In the Islamic terminology, the visit to Baytullah (Kaba, house of Allah) and the
places connected thereto on the fixed days in the fixed method in the month of
Zil Hajj with the intention of pleasing Allah is called Hajj. Hajj is obligatory on
all those Muslims who are physically and financially fit to visit Makkah and
discharge the necessary obligations. Allah the Most Great says,
» Seca é tal edhe Babs
Meaning: "Among men he who has the ability to approach Allah's house, it is
incumbent on him to perform Hajj." (Sura: Al-e-Imran, Ayat: 97)
For those that have the means Hajj is Farz only once in a life time.
RULES OF HAJJ
There are in all 3 Farz in Hajj. These are -
1. To tip up Ihram (To adopt the formal intention).
2. Presence at the Arafa ground on the 9th Zil Hajj.
3. Tawaf-I-Ziyarat (Circulation around nobel Kaba on any day from the
morning of the 10th to the 12th.)
There are 7 Wajibs of Hajj. These are -
1. To stay at a place called Muzdalifa at night following the 9th Zil Hajj.
2. Torun between the two mountains called Safa and Marwa.
3. Throwing of 7 stone pebbles aiming the devil on three fixed spots at Mina
on three successive days-10th, 11th and 12th Zil Hajj.
4. Qurbani (Sacrifice of animal in Allah's name for His pleasure)
5. Shearing the head or trimming the hair of head.
6. To perform the farewell Tawaf ( obligatory for all Hajis coming from places
other than Makkah).
7. To offer 'Dom' (If by forgetfulness or mistake, any of the seven Wajibs is
dropped an additional Qurbani is obligatory for each lapse (fault).

Ibadat 121
: —
y Ios.
Fe g sese =
2s Es | Bae 8
gee + $38 3
So a £ % 2a &
25 § bm e 983 S
BS o Z E| 4 | Zso s
we & t—| 3.8 2 sg
meses |#X 2 gfe 8
oS TR y» 5 zat
2o's's F 2 g ‘« 2
eRE Ss & g =\ I 4 g
o£ -2 = og = < =
ag2eg = S i
ag ee 5
seee 2 19 ¥ Ls
 smegt ¢.
Boag = hw fl é ~ —_—_——
BEzE x
ah2o = A
Sues § : g
age ¢ A &
of2™ Ss BS
= .25 & = o 7 3S
Roads g ° § Sx =
= Mt FS) 2 icy
23 mo og Se =
2a a Bs Ss
& E8Se a Bo 5
As €t25 a as %
¥ oS 9
a 2 CAy ames &
& % SHC f 8sas —_—— Ba
3} a] “
2 %% % <CS Fs = g
a
aan): > oe ate E
be) a) o2eN 2
Q i — ; BY) sSis rv
a FE oa SEES
2 fe § PET
a ge Beas
i ozs.
i 22a
a | "25
a, es *
4
t Ay
f ae On .
SQ NG E
x oa J Z
> po <i) <
GS, EQz
aS) {Ses
§ s Cn #E
m4 3 eos eé B
S i 228s
or 28s
+a Beha
Forma-16 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

122 Islam and Moral Education
RELIGIOUS IMPORTANCE OF HAJJ

The importance of Hajj is immense in Islam. Allah the Most High has revealed
a Sura in Al- Quran with the same title (ie. Sura: Hajj). Besides this Allah has
revealed Ayats about Hajj at different places of Al-Quran. There are many
Hadith stating importance of Hajj from Rasulullah (Sm.).

Rasulullah (Sm.) says,- _ ded Si sie i rag sh ii

Meaning: "The only return for an accepted (by Allah) Hajj is nothing else but
paradise." (Bukhari and Muslim). The sins of past life are forgiven through Hajj.
Rasullullah (Sm.) said, "He who performs Hajj, becomes as sinless as a just born
baby." (Ibn Majah)

A rejecter of Hajj will become Kafir. We should seek Allah's help to be able to
perform such Hajj as proves worthy of Allah's acceptance.

SOCIAL IMPORTANCE

Hajj is instrumental in building universal brotherhood. Hundreds of thousands
of Muslims from different comers of the world assemble in the same place. Hajj
is the grand congregation of the Muslims of the whole world. Allah says in the
holy Quran,- "And proclaim to mankind about Hajj; they will approach you
(Makkah) on foot as well as on the back of feeble animals of all kinds; they will
traverse long distances." (Sura: Al- Hajj, Ayat: 27)

All submit to the court of Allah being clad alike. They chant in chorus Labbaik,
Allahumma Labbaik: O Allah! Here we all are before the court of your Majesty.
LESSON AND IMPORTANCE OF HAJJ

Hajj teaches that the Muslims are united in spite of the difference between man
and man on the grounds of wealth and riches, colour and tribe, race and
nationality; Hajj binds the Muslims with the bond of fraternity. The king and
subject, the master and slave-all wear the same unsewn cloth. It trains them for
equality as they assemble before the court of the lord the magnificent with the
same objective. Hajj turns man sympathetic by imparting the lesson of universal
brotherhood. General people honour the Hajji for their Tawaf of Baitullah. So in
order to qualify themselves for Allah's mercy (favour), rich Muslims must
perform Hajj as soon as possible in obedience to His commands. We shall be
imbibed with the spirit of universal brotherhood by deriving lesson from Hajj.

Tbadat 123
Task: The teacher will divide the students in several groups and will
select one from each group to speak for 2/3 minutes on the theme ‘Hajj is
the grand gathering of the world Muslims.’

LESSON 6
EMPLOYER- EMPLOYEE RELATIONSHIP

Food, dress, shelter, education and health care, etc. are the basic rights of man.
And man has been working every day to secure these. Man is a social being. No
man on earth can do all his works alone. In this age of industrialization, every
individual has got to look up to others to maintain himself. One individual works
under another in all levels of society. So, one becomes an employer and the other
his employee. The relationship between the employer and his employee is very
close. As the employer cannot do without the help of the working class, so also
the working classes are dependent on the salary and allowance of the employer
for their daily life (sustenance). It is not a condemnable matter to work for others
for a fixed remuneration. Our beloved Nabi Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) also
worked as a wage earner. He was asked, "Which type of income is the best and
pure? He replied, the earning by one's own hands as well as that earned by
honestly dealing (trade)." (Baihaqi)

Islam has enjoyed decent dealing with subordinates. Allah the Most High says,-
aT « ! i 97 10? p19 1 it ‘ 4 2H -

ols 281 dis bath gs Wis Sis iclis sil Gays bcs! Biss
BTUs. Jo Boils

Meaning: "You behave courteously with your parents. Deal decently with your

near relatives, orphans, the needy (beggars) and also be kind to your neighbours,

friends and fellows, travellers and your subordinates." (Sura: Nisa, Ayat: 36)

We come across an excellent example of decent relationship between the

employers and the employee in the life of Hazrat Anus (Ra.) He says," I have

served Rasulullah (Sm.) for ten years. He never uttered Uh! To me and never
scolded me saying why did you not do this, why did you do this? He used to help
me more often than not with his own hands." (Bukhari)

Hazrat Umar (Ra.) was the Amirul Muminin (commander of the faithful). He set

example of equality and human dignity while riding the camel at times and

124 Islam and Moral Education
dragging it at another during his visit to Jerusalem. He shared the benefit of
riding and the labour of dragging the camel equally with his servant by turns.
Such an example of excellent relationship between the employer and the servant
is unprecedented in history. During the farewell pilgrimage Rasul (Sm.) was
asked - "How many times may a subordinate person be pardoned?" Rasul (Sm.)
said in reply, . és
Ghahe 2

Meaning: "Seventy times a day." (Tirmizi)
The master should impose work load proportionate to the strength and capacity
of the worker. Rasulullah (Sm.) said,

EUS Jes ge trys
Meaning: "He (worker) must not be burdened with work beyond his strength and
capacity." (Muslim)
Islam does not approve any discrimination between the master and the worker in
respect of every matter including food, dress, etc. About the dignity and rights of
the worker Rasulullah (Sm.) said, "They (who work for you) are your brethren,
Allah has made them subservient to you. It is meet that he(moster) feeds them
with ( servants) what he himself eats, that he let them wear that what he wears
and will not impose such burden upon him as he cannot carry out. In case it so
happens, then he himself must come forward for his aid." (Bukhari Muslim)
The Islamic regulation in respect of quick payment of wage, is quite clear.
Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) said- ag isi SsiglagS giz
Meaning: "Pay the worker his dues before his sweat dries out." (Ibn Majah)
It is not right to delay the payment unduly. Rasulullah (Sm.) saw to it that a
worker gets his just wage when he says, ‘do not employ him without fixing his
pay.’ Similarly, a worker has been inspired by Islam to discharge his
responsibility to his master with fairness. Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) said, "When
a slave (worker) performs his duties for his master nicely, and worships Allah
properly, he gets double remuneration." (Bukhari and Muslim)
If the employer and the worker can work out their relationship in the way
envisaged by Islam, the worker will get his due and the owner will get just
service. There shall never be bad blood between the master and the servant.
Stability will prevail in the mills and factories. Therefore we should follow the
ideal labour policy offered by Islam.

Ibadat 125
Task: Student will write down 10 sentences on rights of worker in class.
LESSON 7
'ILM' (KNOWLEDGE)
‘Ilm' is an Arabic word. Its meanings are knowledge, to know, to be informed, to
become aware, learning etc. In the Islamic parlance 'Ilm' is to realize the exact
situation or condition of something. On the contrary, the meaning of 'Islam' is to
obey and 'to surrender’. So, every Muslim must know whom and how he obeys
and to whom and how he will surrender. This cannot be done without Ilm. So,
the importance of Ilm in Islam is immense.
IMPORTANCE OF ILM IN ISLAM
The importance of Ilm in Islam is so much that Allah the Most High inidiated the
revelation of Al-Quran with the word 'Read' dsp. Allah proclaims -
fe med tue 31 08
SEGAL
Meaning: "Read in the name of your Lord who has created." (Sura: Alaq, Ayat:
1)
As knowledge is acquired by reading, it is indispensable to cultivate knowledge
to foster the growth of humanity and to become a perfect man. A learned man
and an ignorant man can never be equal. Knowledge enriches and elevates the
dignity of learned man. As Allah the Most Great has said -
Meaning: "Allah will elevate their dignity who has believed and who has been
blessed with knowledge." (Sura: Al-Mujadala, Ayat: 11)
Islam has enjoined acquisition of knowledge on all Muslims. The holy Prophet
(Sm.) said,- valk tee
Meaning: "Acquisition of knowledge is compulsory on every Muslim." (Ibn
Majah) In another place Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) called acquisition of
knowledge the best worship. Ilm has got many branches and twigs. Of these, the
best Ilm is that by which truth and falsehood can be differentiated, lawful and
unlawful matters can be understood and nearness of Allah can be attained.

126 Islam and Moral Education
KINDS OF ILM
Ilm is divided into two groups. Such as: (a) Ilm-i-Deeni (Religious knowledge)
& (b) Ilm-i-Duniya (mundane knowledge).
Religious knowledge generally implies knowledge relating to Islam. These are
knowledge of Al-Quran, Hadith, Fiqh, Tafsir, etc.
And mundane knowledge implies knowledge related to worldly prosperity.
These include knowledge of Mathematics, Science, Geography, Literature,
Physics, Chemistry, etc.
In a different way knowledge can be grouped into two categories. such as: (a)
Adorable knowledge & (b) Avoidable knowledge.
Adorable knowledge is that which brings good (welfare) both here and hereafter.
These are knowledge of morality, medical science, engineering, physics,
chemistry etc. which are beneficial. And avoidable knowledge is that which does
no good to mankind. Rather it causes harm both in this world and next life.
These are knowledge of immorality, theft, decoity, injustice, oppression,
war-mongering, terrorism etc. In the Islamic view-point, every Muslim must
gain basic knowledge of Islam. However, there must be a group of experts on
Islam in all communities and lands. Otherwise, all shall be jointly held liable to
Allah in the next life. Allah the Most Great says-
Wee otf Liar eeie yey gyeseict title ofrerlen So Set

Ba GAS 51 BGST a LEL5 H NS I sgabe ABS £42835 356 ys 5H 3S
Meaning: "Why a section of each group does not emerge well-equipped with the
knowledge of religion so that they may warn their communities as they return to
them (for advice)." (Sura: At-Tauba, Ayat: 122)
This being so, a group from us must acquire profound knowledge of religion. In
the Islamic view-point, knowledge of mundane issues is likewise important as
that of religion. However in no way these will contradict the regulations of
Allah. Rather, these must conform to the standard of morality. For, it is the
synthesis of morality with knowledge that ensures the blossoming of humanism.
And if there 1s no coordination of morality with knowledge, humanity perishes.
The basic objective of Islam is to bring to man that only what is good. As the
holy Prophet (Sm.) has said- "Deen (Religion) means to do well" (Muslim). So
it is essential to acquire such knowledge as brings good to man's life. So, we
shall acquire that knowledge which will ensure well-being of man in both
temporal and eternal life.

Tbadat 127
avoidable knowledge.
LESSON 8
CHARACTERISTICS OF LEARNERS
One who studies regularly and is eager and careful about learning is called a
learner (student). A genuine student must possess certain qualities. Here and
some such features of a student are mentioned:
1. To obey the instructions of teachers.
2. To enquire about their well-being whenever they are met after paying
respect tothem.
3, To listen attentively whatever the teachers say and obey accordingly.
4. To behave with them in a humble, gentle and decent manner.
5. To maintain friendship and good relationship with class-mates.
6. To attend the classes regularly.
Ts To maintain cleanliness of classroom and school.
8. To keep the body clean and dres tidily.
9. To show respect by standing, both in classroom or anywhere else.
10. Toseek permission to leave the classroom.
11. To implement in life all the noble teachings received from the teachers.
12. Torefrain from such activities as are disliked by teachers.
13. Never to misbehave with anyone.
14. To wish well for the teachers always and pray for them when dead.
15. To be accustomed to disciplined life.
16. To be eager to learn and to try to keep in touch with teachers always.
17. 17. To study with understanding and shun the habit of memorizing.
18. To note down what the teachers impart in the classroom.
19. To give up shyness in acquiring knowledge.
20. Toread everyday lessons regularly.
21. Toconsult the lessons of the following day beforehand.

128 Islam and Moral Education
When asked by his pupil Imam Safie (R), about the qualities of a student, his
teacher Allama Wagqi (R) said that the only feature that a student must show is his
avoidance of all sinful activities.
We shall acquire these qualities of a student & become ideal students.
Task: Students will make 5 placards containing characteristics of an
ideal student as homework & present in the class,
LESSON 9
QUALITIES OF TEACHERS
He who teaches us is a teacher. The most respected and dignified profession in
the world is teaching. Our beloved prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) has
introduced himself (before mankind) as a teacher thus- (¢[z3.2 itt
Meaning: "I have not but been sent as a teacher." (Ibn Majah)
It is meet that the qualities of man of the best profession must necessarily be the
best. Here follows some such features that characterize a teacher:
A) A good teacher must be a man of high ideals.
1. He will possess ideal knowledge;
2. He will possess the philosophy of his own religion and also other
philosophies of life;
3. He will raise his students on the basis of the best ideal;
4. He will prove true to his words;
5, He will be tactful and bold in propagating the ideal;
6. He will undertake his profession as both avocation and devotion;
7. He will engage himself in this profession with a view to getting benefit
both in this world & Akhirat; and

8. He will prove uncompromising in the face of injustice.
B) A good teacher must necessarily be profoundly learned.
1. He will always cultivate knowledge;
2. He will take proper preparation prior to holding class;
3. He will keep in touch with current affairs;
4. He will take part in such other activities that boost up intellect;

Ibadat 129

5. He will take to writing on different issues.

C) A good teacher will be conscious of his own personality.

1. He will keep clean and tidy;

2. He will dress up befitting decency, refinement and impressive
personality;

3. He will be well equipped with correct pronunciation and expression;

4. He will maintain mental balance;

5. He will be strict in principle;

6. He will maintain soundness of mind and body.

D) A good teacher will cherish kindness and love for students.

1) He will impart the lessons with affection and kindness;

2) He will treat all pupils with equal consideration;

3) He will create among students an interest for learning;

4) He will repeat a matter if needed;

5) He will be as if their own acquaintance;

6) He will not scold, punish or beat the students.

7) You will neither beat them nor show cruelty to them, rather you let them
rectify their failings and mistakes with a tender and kind heart.

A prominent Sahabi, Muawiyah Ibnul Hakam As-Sulani says about Rasul

(Sm.)," [have never come across a teacher more excellent than him either before

or after him. By Allah, he did not scold, beat or call me names." (Muslim)

E) <A good teacher will be sagacious. He will remain careful about the
student's temperament, likes-dislike, receptivity, etc.

F) A good teacher will be sincere and caring to his institution. He will
maintain fair contact with the administration.

If in practical life we ever happen to be teachers, we shall acquire these virtues

and become ideal teachers.

Task: Students will write down in the class 10 sentences on the virtues
of a good teacher.
Forma-17 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

130 Islam and Moral Education
LESSON 10

STUDENT-TEACHER RELATIONSHIP
A teacher is the architect of an ideal nation. He stands next to parents. He is a
man worthy of extreme obedience and respect. Parents only procreate and bring
up the children. On the contrary, it is a teacher who makes a true man out of a
kid.
Students are fond of imitation. So students will learn only what the teachers
teach them. Teachers guide the students from their early life about their aims and
objectives of life. Teachers teach their students religious rules and laws, good
manners, courtesy, humility, politeness, punctuality, kindness, sympathy, etc.
which when applied in their later life will bring them total success. It is our duty
to show respect to our teacher for the sacrifice they undergo in wishing our
absolute well-being.
Student-teacher relationship is one of heart. It is as if the relationship between
parents and children. As parents with children well and inspire them to good,
similarly a teacher wishes his students well and guide them to the right path. As
children inherit property from parents, likewise students inherit knowledge from
teachers. As children may become richer by utilizing the inherited property, sim-
ilarly a student may become a great scholar by enriching the knowledge received
from the teacher.
The Nabis and Rasuls (As.) are designated teachers of mankind and their
Ummats are their students. Rasul (Sm.) has designated the learned among his
followers as his successors. He says, "Ulama (learned men) are the heirs of the
Nabis. They are not heirs of riches and wealth; rather they are heirs of
knowledge ( of the prophets)." (Tirmizi)
So between students and teachers the same relationship exists as the relationship
of inheritance between parents and children. So we shall be respectful to this
relationship. The fourth Khalifah of Islam Hazrat Ali (Ra.) says, "I'm his slave
from whom I have learnt a word. He can sell me out, set me free or hold me in
slavery.”
So according to him, the relationship between a student and a teacher is likened
to that between slave and master. This aspect of student- teacher relationship has
come out in full glow in the sight of a polite student. In fact, student-teacher
bond should be fair, where there shall prevail sincere respect, affection and love.

Ibadat 131
Task: Students will attempt a paragraph on the nature of student-teacher
relationship.
LESSON 11
EDUCATION AND MORALITY
EDUCATION
Education is the backbone of a nation. A nation without education is like an
animal without a backbone. Application of the acquired knowledge and
experience in one's life is called education. This education helps one to become
areal man and illuminates the human heart by removing the darkness from there.
By education we mean, the coordinated growth of body, mind and soul. Here by
"education" it is particularly Islamic education that has been indicated. And the
education system in which Islam has been fully and perfectly depicted is called
Islamic education. In a word, the education synthesized in the light of Al-Quran
and Hadith is properly called Islamic education. Through this education a person
can build up himself as an honest, chaste, Allah fearing, patriotic, responsible
and worthy citizen.
The two main sources of Islamic education are-
1. AL-QURAN: Allah the Most Great has described in this Quran all that is
necessary for mankind. Allah the Most High says -
As ANGESG
Meaning: "We have not left anything unmentioned." (Sura: Al- Anam, Ayat: 38)
In another place Allah further says -
£ d M > 1A ale fake
Meaning: "We have revealed to you the Book containing descriptions of all
things." (Sura: An-Nahal, Ayat: 89)
2. AL-HAD ITH: The sayings, actions and tacit assent of Rasulullah (Sm.) are
called Hadith. It is the second source of Islamic education. On the importance of
Hadith Allah himself states thus -
C8 aig la uw 25 4 oo
1 13786235 29 es SIE SAH Gey

132 Islam and Moral Education
Meaning: "You accept whatever the Rasul offers you. And eschew that which he
forbids." (Sura :Al-Hashr, Ayat: 7)

Besides Al-Quran & Hadith the consensus (Ijma) of the religious scholars of
Islam and the analogical deductions by them (Qiyas) form the third and the forth
sources respectively.

The basic objective of Islamic education is to enable a person to earn Allah's
pleasure by obeying His laws, rules and regulations in all aspects oflife, the
starting point being his personal life. Basically the foundations of Islamic
education are:

Tawhid (oneness and singularity of Allah), Risalat (calls and invitations to Allah
by Nabis and Rasuls) and Akhirat ( the reckoning after Resurrection, Heaven
and Hell etc). We shall fashion our life in the light of these and try to make life
decent and fruitful.

MORALITY

Honesty, good and courteous conduct, decent habit, sweet words, ideal
character-all these go to make Morality. A man is branded as a morally
accomplished person if his gait, movement, conduct, transaction- all is admira-
ble and agreeable. Rasulullah (Sm.) has declared such a man as the best man. He
said, "Certainly the best among you is he whose character is the best." (Bukhari
& Muslim)

Morality is the basic human property of man and his best asset. If this is acquired
his life becomes decent and prosperous. Through this he earns honour and
dignity. The main objective of Islamic education is to provide moral lessons. An
immoral and characterless person is inferior to quadruped. Allah the Most Great
says, "They have got heart but do not feel, they have got eyes but do not see.
They have got ears but do not hear; they are like quadruped animals, rather they
are inferior to them. And it is they who are heedless." (Sura: Al-Araf, Ayat: 179)
IMPORTANCE OF MORALITY

The importance of morality is immense in the Islamic way of life. The holy
Prophet (Sm.) had been raised to instruct man into morality. He says, "I have
been sent to bring noble moral qualities into perfection." (Bukhari)

It is not enough to talk of morality. Rather these should be reflected in real life
by practising the principles of the World Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.).

Tbadat 133
The holy Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) has called such a man a perfect
Mumin who is a man of principles. He says thus -
Meaning: "The man having the best character is the perfect Mumin among the
Mumins." (Tirmizi)
Aman will become as much a good man as he is morally elevated. Thus he will
be favourite to Allah and His Rasul.
The holy Prophet (Sm.) further said, "He among you is most favorite to me
whose Akhlaq (moral character) is the best" (Bukhari). In the same vein a certain
person asked Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) of all gifts bestowed up on man which is
the best. Nabi Karim (Sm.) said, "Of all the gifts the best is a decent character."
We should become favourites of Rasul (Sm.) by acquiring the virtus of decent
character & moral conduct. It is much easier to know about morality and apply
it to real life. Through Islamic education a person can acquire perfect morality.
So it can be said that moral education is an integral part of Islamic education.

Task: Students will write down 10 sentences each on Education & morality

as home- work and show it to the class teacher.
LESSON 12
JIHAD (321)
INTRODUCTION
Jihad is an Arabic word. Its literal meaning is labour, toil, effort, pain, trial, etc.
And in the Islamic parlance, Jihad is to uphold Deen (Islam) and establish truth
and justice by way of sacrifice in terms of life, wealth etc. as well as through
(spreading) knowledge, good deeds, writings and speeches. Many take Jihad to
mean only bloodshed, Qatl (killing). But this is not right. For Jihad is a word
conveying extensive meanings. Allah's pleasure lies in all good that there is on
earth. And it for Allah's pleasure alone that Jihad can be possible. Allah says in
the holy Quran- —
b slge SaulGtaiales

Meaning: "You fight in the way to Allah in a way that is befitting for Jihad."
(Sura : Al-Hajj, Ayat: 78)

134 Islam and Moral Education
In fact, Jihad is inclusive of all efforts, toil; endeavor in favour of truth & justice
as well as against falsehood & injustice.
TYPES OF JIHAD
Jihad is of three types in the Islamic perspective-
1. To fight against one's own evil self (Nafs). As Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) has
said: sds GAB ale gAbalesi
Meaning: "A true Mujahid is he who struggles against his evil self (Nafs) in
order to establish allegiance to Allah." (Musnad -i-Ahmad)
Rasulullah has declared such Jihad as the highest form of Jihad. On return from
the battle of Badr he said,
Meaning: "We have reverted from minor Jihad to major Jihad (Jihad against evil
instincts / propensities)." (Kanzul Ummal)
2. To conduct Jihad with the help of knowledge: This type of Jihad has been
called in the Al-Quran as the greatest Jihad. Allah says-

OS Slee gy obiales ce gli ghi WG
Meaning: "So you do not obey the unbelievers and you constantly wage big fight
against them with it (Al-Quran as a tool)." (Sura: Al- Furgqan, Ayat: 52)
3. To wage war against the enemies of Islam. It is the highest level of Jihad. It is
fighting against one who turns away from Islam (a renegade) and fights back
Islam.
IMPORTANCE OF JIHAD
Jihad is an obligation (Amal / Deed) in Islam. To protect the peculiarities of
Deen (Islam) in all spheres of life and follow the rules and regulations of Islam
are the obligations of a Mumin (believer). Likewise, to save and uphold Deen
and adopt for Jihad measures where necessary. Allah's pleasure is also his
obligation. Basically Jihad is for the sake of peace only. To convert His slave
absolutely obedient to Allah by freeing him from evil instincts & the
provocations of the Shaitan (Devil) is the objective of Jihad.
In stating the benefits of Jihad Rasulullah (Sm.) said-

Tbadat 135
SHAR atl Jade 4BeHeils
Meaning: "A slave whose feet are smeared with dust in his Jihad in Allah's way,
he will not be touched by the hell-fire." (Bukhari)
Task: Students will write down a paragraph on the importance of Jihad.
LESSON 13
JIHAD AND TERRORISM
Jihad ( SGZf) has been narrated in the preceding lesson. We shall narrate
terrorism (2143 vi) in this lesson. By 'terrorism' we understand creation of terror
in people's mind and causing harm to them through disorder and destruction in
the hope of material gains.
A class of people has equated Jihad and Terrorism due to lack of knowledge of
Islam. In fact there is a gulf of difference between them. It can be said that these
two are mutually opposed to each other. The objective of Jihad is not territorial
conquest, capture of power, greed for wealth, murder and destruction,
plundering and unjust bloodshed. Rather, its objective is to bring man to the fold
of Allah's suzerainty by freeing them from the bondage as well as to bring them
under the pleasant shade of justice and fairplay by ending oppression and
exploitation. Another objective of Jihad is to equip man with the spirit of truth
and morality.
Allah the Most High says-
ty P39 wr Cae gen 23% 4 be a2 slalZe
« Aha CAM G39 dss G SG HE sb sbL5s
Meaning: "And you shall be fighting against them until mischief is over and
Allah's Deen (Islam) is established in full." (Sura: Al-Anfal, Ayat: 39)
On the contrary, the objective of terrorism is capturing of lands by bloodshed,
usurping power, acquiring wealth and establishing supremacy and authority by
plundering and killing people.
Islam cannot teach Muslims bloodshed by Jihad, rather the Jihad that Islam
advocates gives direction of humanism, not bloodshed. In any Jihad of the
Muslims no innocent common man suffered any harm. In his life-time
Rasulullah (Sm.) participated in about one hundred Jihads either directly or

136 Islam and Moral Education
directly or indirectly. History records that all taken together from both sides even
less than five hundred people lost their lives in Jihads.
In recent times anarchy is being caused in the name of Jihad by such acts as
bomb-blast, war mongering, bloodshed and killing of innocent people. Islam
bears no connection with these. Rather it is terrorism in different name.
From the above discussion and review of real history, we find that there is no
place of terrorism in Jihad. So, we shall differentiate between Jihad and
terrorism by knowing the true teaching of Islam and from the study of history.
We shall try to earn Allah's pleasure by becoming true Muslims.
Task: Students will form two groups and discuss the difference between
Jihad and terrorism.
EXERCISE

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS:

1. Which is the fourth pillar of Islam?

a) Salat b) Zakat

c) Sawm d) Hajj
2. 'So that wealth is not heaped up among the rich of you.'- Which matter
does this Ayat indicate?

a) Hajj b) To donate

c) Payment of Zakat d) To help

Tbadat 137
Read the paragraph below & answer questions 3-4
Mr. Bilal went from Bangladesh to perform Hajj. But due to illness he couldn't
perform Tawaf-i-Ziyarat although all other formalities were duly observed.
3. Which type of regulations of Hajj could Mr. Bilal not perform ?
a) Mustahab b) Sunnat
c) Wajib d) Farz
4. What must Mr. Bilal do now?
a) To repeat the Hajj b) To offer Dom (compensational sacrifice)
c) To go for Hajj again d) To pray for Allah’s pardon
CREATIVE QUESTIONS:
1. Mr. Shafiqur Rahman is a rickshaw puller. He obeys the Islamic rules and
regulations in his personal life. When someone falls sick, he takes him to the
hospital. One day he deposited Taka five lakh with the purse left behind by a
passenger to the Headmaster of the local high school. The headmaster returned
the bag with money to the owner's address found in the bag.

a. How many wajibs are there in Hajj?

b. Explain in writing the basic objective of education.

c. What type of Ibadat was offered through the Headmaster’s action?

d. Analyze Mr. Shafiqur Rahman’s action in the light of the related issues.
2. Mr. Sajjad and Mr. Saqib are two friends. Mr. Sajjad is the owner of a garment
factory. Labour unrest took place on the eve of the last Eid-ul-Fitr due to willful
delay. The workers observed one day's cease-work. On the contrary, Saqib was
benevolent from his student life. Currently he works in the hospital after passing
out from the Medical College. He offers health services by regular attendance in
the hospital. One day when his school teacher came to hospital for treatment, he
showed respect by standing and arranged for his proper treatment.

a. Who is the architect of building an ideal nation?

b. “Pay the remuneration of the worker before dried up his sweat"- Explain

the Hadith.

c. Whose ideal has been violated by Mr. Sajjad’s conduct?

d. ‘Saqib is a right follower of his teacher'- Evaluate the statement in the light

of the textbook.

CHAPTER FOUR
I 4 eae
AKHLAQ (G4)
‘Akhlaq' is an Arabic word. It is plural. The singular form is 'Khuluqun' ( $8) ‘
Its literal meaning is nature, conduct, etc. In etymological consideration it
implies both good and bad conduct. For instance, we call a man of bad conduct
as a ‘characterless person’. In the usual sense 'Akhlaq' denotes good and
excellent character only.
Basically, Akhlaq is the sumtotal of man's natures. The thoughts and ideas,
mentality and ways of work- all taken together are called Character or 'Akhlaq’.
It can include both good and bad natures. In a word, Akhlaq denotes all activities
and principles of man.
Akhlaq is of two kinds. Such as-
A. Akhlag-i-Hamidah (8324 391)
B. Akhlaq-i-Zamimah (2.5591 )
The admirable qualities of man are Akhlaq-i- Hamidah and Akhlaq-i-Zamimah
is the name applied to the sumtotal of the bad habits of man. We shall know from
this chapter about these two types of Akhlaq, with their introduction,
importance, merits and demerits as well as some good and bad characters.
After reading this chapter, we will be able to-
° narrate the idea, types and importance of Akhlaq;
. narrate the introduction and importance of some good conduct
(Akhlaq-i-Hamidah);
. explain the concept and importance ofTaqwa (Fear of Allah, Piety);
° explain the importance and necessity of keeping Wada;
. narrate the idea and importance of truthfulness;
. narrate the idea and importance of decency;
. narrate the introduction of Amanat, ways to protect it and its importance;
° narrate the idea of service to humanity and its importance;
° describe the necessity and benefit of brotherhood and communal
harmony;
. narrate the dignity of woman in Islam;

Akhlaq 139
. narrate the importance and significance of patriotism;
. narrate the importance of dutifulness;
. narrate the idea of cleanliness in Islam, its importance and significance;
° narrate the idea of frugality, its usefulness and importance;
. narrate the idea of self-purification and its importance;
. explain the importance of commanding good deeds and forbidding evil;
. narrate the evil conduct (Akhlaq-i-Zamimah), its introduction and bad
effects;
° explain the idea of deception and its bad consequences;
. explain the idea and bad effects of slandering;
° narrate the idea and bad results of envy and hatred;
. explain the idea and bad results of quarrel-mongering and feuds;
° narrate the bad outcomes of indolence and aversion to work;
. explain the evil consequences ofbribry and usury;
. imbue to give up bad manners and cultivate good manners
LESSON 1
AKHLAQ-I-HAMIDAH
INTRODUCTION
‘Akhlaq' means character, nature and 'Hamidah' means admirable. So,
‘Akhlaq-i-Hamidah' means admirable character or noble character. In the Islamic
terminology, that kind of nature or character is called Akhlaq-i-Hamidah which
is admirable and lovable and which is favourite to Allah the Most High and His
Rasul (Sm.).
In a word, the decent, clean and refined qualities of man's character are called
‘Akhlaq-i-Hamidah.' When man's conduct and manners are nice, sound and
beneficial in the standard of Shariat, then it is called 'Akhlaq-i Hamidah'.
‘Akhlaq-i-Hamidah' is also termed as 'Akhlaq-i-Hasanah' or 'Husnul Khulq’.
‘Akhlaq-i-Hasanah' means nice character. The excellent and moral qualities of
human character are included in Akhlag-i-Hasanah. These are honesty,
truthfulness, keeping promise, service to humanity, cleanliness, kindness,
forgiveness, etc.

140 Islam and Moral Education
IMPORTANCE
Akhlaq-i-Hamidah is fundamental human qualities and the best asset of life.
Man reaches the highest peak of humanity through this. It is through
Akhlaq-i-Hamidah that the perfection of humanity and morality is achieved. It is
on best Akhlaq that man's happiness and peace in this and next life depend. A
man of noble character is favourite to Allah as to the eye of society.
It has been stated in a Hadith of holy Prophet (Sm.),
Meaning: "More favourite to Allah is the person who is most excellent in
conduct/ character/manners." (Ibn Hibban)
For this reason, it was one of the responsibilities of the Prophets and Messengers
to instruct mankind on Akhlaq. Our beloved Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.)
was possessed of excellent character. All sorts of noble qualities are found in his
character.
Allah the Most High Himself says about him -
- 42 125 ah
[e) tbe gs Juehls
Meaning: "You indeed stand on the most magnificent character." (Sura: Al-Qa-
lam, Ayat: 4)
Rasulullah (Sm.) proclaimed,
- GSES 4s af tia)
Meaning: "I have been sent to bring the excellent qualities of character into
perfection." (Baihaqi)
Rasulullah (Sm.) taught mankind how to build up noble character as he
possessed it. He commanded to cultivate honest and noble qualities in order to
become perfect Mumin. He said, "Among the Mumins he is the best who
possesses the best character." (Tirmizi)
In fact, noble character will be the means to salvation in the next life too. Best
conduct brings man reward or good return. The holy Prophet has said,
Meaning: "Good character is a reward by itself." (Muslim)

Akhlaq 141
Admirable conduct and nature will add to the weight of the balance of a Mumin
on the day of Qiyamat. Rasulullah (Sm.) says in a Hadith, "Certainly ( on the
Day of Qiyamat) no other thing will be heavier on the Mizan than good
character." (Tirmizi)
In this life of the earth too Akhlaq-i-Hamidah is very important. All love and
trust a man of good character. All respect and show him honour. They come
forward to help him in danger.
Because of nice character he finds his seat of high status in the society. The holy
Prophet (Sm.) said on this issue -
-N1 hc sh) aSsls
Meaning: "Best among you is he who is most decent in terms of character."
(Bukhari)
If everybody in the society maintains good conduct, there remains no envy,
hatred, haggling, killing, etc. Society is overflowed with happiness and peace.
Good-naturedness is a special gift of Allah the Most High. All the Nabis and
Rasul (Sm.) were personifications of good character. Besides, the memorable
and applauded personalities too cultivated good character. All the beauties of
Islam bloom from good character. For this reason, special emphasis has been
laid on the obligation of acquiring Akhlaq-i-Hamidah.
Task: Students will write down 10 sentences on the introduction
and importance of good character and show it to the teacher.
LESSON 2
TAQWA
INTRODUCTION
The meaning of the word 'Taqwa' is to abstain, to live, to fear, to protect oneself
etc. In the practical sense it means abstinence, fear of Allah is called Taqwa. In
other words, Taqwa is another name of leading life by saving oneself from all
kinds of sinfulness in pursuance of the directions of Al-Quran and Sunnah. One
adopting Taqwa is called Muttaqi.
Fearing Allah the most great implies a huge volume of meanings. Allah the Most
High is our Creator and Nourisher. He sees and knows all our affairs. He is

142 Islam and Moral Education
Punisher and Most powerful. He will take accounts of all our deeds. Then He
will punish for sinful deeds. 'Fear of Allah' means the fear of offering account
before Allah, the Most High. So, with fear deeply rooted in the heart, one has got
to refrain from all sorts of sinful deeds. One has to keep away from all injustice,
obscene words & deeds, evil ideas and thoughts. Fear of Allah the Most High
easily saves one from all such sinful deeds. As a result the Muttaqis will enter
Jannat in the next life. Allah the Most High says, that person will enter Jannat
who cherishes the fear of standing before Allah and saves himself from evil
inclinations. (Sura: Naziat, Ayat: 40-41)
IMPORTANCE
Taqwa is a great moral virtue. The importance of Taqwa in human life is
immense. Taqwa brings man honour, dignity and success in this and the next life.
According to Islamic philosophy of life, the most dignified among men are those
who are Muttaqis. Allah the Most High says,
Bylo o> oh
6 aKaHlablis aXagi15!
Meaning: "To Allah the most honoured among you are those who are men of
Taqwa." (Sura: Al-Huzurat, Ayat: 13)
Taqwa is of high value to Allah the Most High. Mere riches and wealth, power
and authority, cars and houses are not considered for dignity from Allah the most
High.
Rather it is that person who adopts Taqwa that will command honour from Allah
the Most High. Allah, the Most High announces-
ogisithe fails
Meaning: "Certainly Allah loves the Muttaqis.". (Sura: At-Tauba, Ayat : 4 )
The Muttaqis receive many gifts from Allah the Most High. Allah the Most High
constantly helps the Muttaqis. He saves them from dangers and perils and
bestows upon them blissful sustenance (Rizq). Allah the Most High promises
thus- "Allah guides the right path and bestows sustenance from unimaginable
sources to anyone who holds Allah in awe and fear." (Sura : At-Talag, Ayats:
2-3 )
In the next life as well there are great rewards for the Muttaqis. Allah the Most
High will forgive all sins of the Muttaqis and grant them great success. Allah the
Most High declares in Al-Quran, "O you who believe! If you adopt Taqwa (fear

Akhlaq 143
of Allah), He will grant you the power to distinguish between right & wrong will
remove your sins and will pardon you and Allah is the Most Forgiving." (Sura:
Al-Anfal, Ayat: 29)
Allah the Most High further says, © Flas haLUS)
Meaning: "Surely there are rewards for the Muttaqis." (Sura: An-Naba, Ayat:31)
In fact, Taqwa is the most vital nature in man's character. Through this does man
achieve honour, dignity and success?
INFLUENCE OF TAQWA IN MORAL LIFE
The influence of Taqwa is undeniable in forming moral life and in protecting
principles and morality. Taqwa is the root of all noble qualities. The main base
of Islamic ethics is Taqwa. Taqwa impels man towards human and moral
qualities. It induces to give up Haram and accept Halal. A Muttaqi constantly
remembers Allah the Most High. He firmly believes that Allah the Most High
sees, hears and knows everything. So, he cannot indulge in any illegal and
unethical activity. He cannot incline towards any obscene and indecent talk,
deed and thought. For he firmly believes that Allah the Most High sees and
knows about every evil deed however much secretly it is done. In no way it is
possible to deceive Allah the Most High. As a result, a Muttaqi adopts morality
in all activities and shuns immorality and obscenity.
Taqwa purifies man's heart and shapes him into a man of character. It inspires
man to cultivate all noble and nice virtues. As a result the Muttaqis get inspired
in cultivating noble and decent qualities. And he who does not have Taqwa,
cannot be devoted & righteous. He indulges in various unlawful and oppressive
deeds. He does not care for human ideals. As a result, he becomes a source of
immorality and crimes in the society.
In fact, Taqwa is a noble element of character. It is indispensable for the
formation of moral character. We all shall try to be Muttaqi.

Task: Students will speak before the class teacher on his knowledge of

Taqwa, its importance andits impact on moral life.

144 Islam and Moral Education
LESSON 3
KEEPING PROMISE

INTRODUCTION
Wada is called 'Al-Ahdu' (Saati ) in Arabic. 'Al-Ahdu' literally means promise,
undertaking, pledge, agreement, to give word to someone, or to commit oneself
for something, etc. In the Islamic terminology, Wada means to fulfil properly a
promise or pledge already agreed upon.
IMPORTANCE
Keeping promise is one of the virtues of Akhlaq-i-Hamidah. Its importance and
usefulness in human life is immense. Keeping words helps maintain peace and
order in the society. Everybody likes one who keeps his words. Everybody
reposes confidence & reliance on him. He enjoys honour and dignity in Society.
According to the Islamic philosophy of life, it is essential to keep promise. Allah
the Most Great Himself commanded man to fulfil promise. He says,

» pall ssi Bal aug
Meaning: "O you who believe! You keep your promise." (Sura: Al-Maida, Ayat:
01)
In another Ayat Allah the Most High says,

A Vad PPat ani da

OV 22GB SEIS! « yal ssals
Meaning: "You keep up your promise. Surely you will be held accountable for
your promise.” (Sura: Bani Israil, Ayat: 34)
To fulfil promise is obligatory. On the ground of Hashr, man shall have to
account for his pledges. A person not keeping his promise on earth will be
punished in Akhirat.
It is the token of a Mumin to fulfil promise. Man of honesty and moral
accomplishment always honours his promise. A person who does not keep
promise cannot be a perfect Mumin (Imandar). The holy Prophet (Sm.) says in a
Hadith, tre 8 oe
~ AGE Y Gees Y

Meaning: "A person not keeping his promise, does not have Deen:' (Mus-
nad-i-Ahmad)

Akhlaq 145
Our beloved Prophet (Sm.) always keeps promise. A peep into the lives of the
Sahaba (Ra.) and Awlia (Ra.) convinces us that they never failed in fulfilling
their promises. For, it is among the symptoms of a Munafig to break promise.
Munafigs do not keep their promise. Allah the Most High has warned Muslims
against breaking promise. Because, the mark of Muslims is that they go by their
promise. Allah the Most Great says about this,
Fae 9 96 rae ae
OG VEG 3) 385 steal ewer
Meaning: "O you who believe! Why do you say that what you do not yourselves
do?" (Sura : Ash Saaf, Ayat : 2)
Therefore if someone is given word, it must be respected and promise if made
must be maintained. A promise given and agreement signed must be fulfilled.
Then only Allah the Most High will be pleased. Peace and success will be
attained both in this world and the next.
Task: Students will write down 10 sentences on the 'importance of keeping
promise'to present in the class.
LESSON 4
TRUTHFULNESS
INTRODUCTION
The Arabic synonym of truthfulness is 'As-Sidq'. Generally, the habit of
speaking the truth is termed as truthfulness. Otherwise, the expression of a real
or true event or matter is 'Sidq'. That means, to narrate an event or matter
accurately or without any change, addition or distortion is called 'Sidq'. A person
who speaks the truth is called 'Sadiq'«3lz). And the most extremely truthful
person is called 'Siddiq' (Sih
The antonym of truthfulness is lying. To present an event or issue in a distorted
way is ‘lying’. Lying is called 'Al-Kazib' Ci in Arabic. A person who tells a
lie is called Kazib 5h. And an extremely lying person (Liar) is called Kazzab
(21555), most extreme liar.
IMPORTANCE
Truthfulness is a great virtue in man's life. Its importance in man's life is
immense. A man adopting truthfulness and honesty in speech, actions and
Forma-19 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

146 Islam and Moral Education
conduct can achieve success in both this world and Akhirat. It is the command
of Allah the Most High to speak the truth and to say nice and right words at all
times. He says,-

orga Ssigssssain Bitacaghiulig
Meaning: "O you who believe! You fear Allah & speak the truth." (Sura:
Al-Ahzab, Ayat: 70)
One of the symptoms of the Mumin is that they are truthful. They practise
honesty and truthfulness in all situations of their lives. Mere practising of
truthfulness in one's own life is not enough; rather there must be good terms with
the truthful. At this truth strikes in the roots of the society. About this Allah the
Most High has said, "Oh Mumins, you fear Allah and keep company of the
truthful." (Sura: At-Tauba, Ayat : 119)
A true Mumin must necessarily be truthful. Our beloved Prophet (Sm.) was the
personification of truthfulness. He practised truthfulness in every moment of his
life. His companion Hazrat Abu Bakr (Ra.) was extremely truthful. It is for this
reason that Hazrat Abu Bakr has been called 'the most Truthful (Siddiq)’.
A person who speaks the truth is loved and trusted by all. On the contrary, a
person who is a liar is not loved and respected by any. Rather everybody hates
him. For, to tell a lie is a grave sin. It is the root of all sins. Allah the Most High
is extremely displeased with the liar.
INFLUENCE & CONSEQUENCES
The influence of truthfulness in human life is limitless. Truthfulness helps man
build up moral character. It saves him from sin and indecent deeds. A truthful
man cannot indulge in any unfair dealings and oppression. We come across its
evidence in a Hadith. It has been stated in that Hadith thus-
One day a man came to the holy Prophet (Sm.) and said, "I steal, tell lies and do
many other bad activities. It is not possible on my part to give up all bad deeds.
May you please instruct me to give up any one of these?" The holy Prophet
(Sm.) said, "You give up telling lies." The man said, "It is rather a very easy
task." As per the instruction of holy Prophet (Sm.) the person gave up the habit
of telling lies. Later it was found that due to leaving falsehood, it was not
possible on his part to do any other bad deed. He gave up all bad deeds. Because
as he thought out, if anyone asks him about committing theft, he would not able
to tell a lie; rather he will have to confess the crime. If so, it will bring him shame

Akhlaq 147
and he will suffer punishment. Thus, by giving up only telling lies, the man freed
himself from all bad practices. Thus, truthfulness helps man acquire excellent
character.
The consequence of truthfulness is success and salvation. So goes the saying-
Meaning: "Truthfulness liberates and lying brings perdition."
As a result of truthfulness man is respected and earns dignity. And the reward of
truthfulness is paradise in Akhirat. Allah the Most High says-
Meaning: "It is that day on which the Truthful shall enjoy the benefits of their
truthfulness. For them the award is Jannat." (Sura: Al-Maida, Ayat : 119)
The holy Prophet (Sm.) says, "You become truthful. For truth shows the way to
virtue. And virtue leads to the path of Paradise." (Bukhari & Muslim)
It is there in another Hadith-Once the holy Prophet was asked "Which practice is
it that leads to paradise? He [The holy Prophet (Sm.)] said in reply, Speaking the
truth." (Musnadi Ahmad)
Truthfulness is one of the moral virtues. It brings man immense good and
success. So, it is our common obligation to become truthful and truth rooted.
Task: Students will write down 10 sentences on ‘truthfulness’ & show it
to the teacher.
LESSON 5
COURTESY
INTRODUCTION
Courtesy means to be polished, nice and befitting. To be gentle, civilized &
polished in words, conduct and movement is called courtesy. Courtesy can be
achieved by shunning pride, vanity, audacity, obscenity in all spheres of life as
prescribed by the Islamic ideology.
The scope of courtesy is very wide. It is the sumtotal of many moral qualities.
Gentleness, politeness, beauty, good taste, modesty, etc. all taken together reflect
courtesy. Obscenity is the opposite of courtesy. Pride, vanity, haughtiness, bad
taste and superstition are the habits quite opposed to courtesy.

148 Islam and Moral Education
IMPORTANCE OF COURTESY
Islam is the religion of beauty. It inspires a life which is beautiful, sound and.
marked by good taste. One of the objectives of Islamic education is to rear man
as polished, polite, pure and sanctified. To achieve this objective the importance
of courtesy is immense. It may well be said that it is courtesy which serves as the
foundation of Islamic society.
Islam instructs all men to be polite, gentle and courteous, because obscene and
discourteous activities destroy humanity and moral values. Man adopts beastly
habits with the loss of humanity. As a result, evil practices, rape, obscenity
engulfs the society. Man's evil instincts, lust and depravity shatter family and
social values. This brings anarchy and disorder everywhere.
Lack of decency in dress and movements very often spread obscenity in the
society. Eve-teasing, promiscuity, etc. raise their heads. For this Islam has laid
much emphasis on the observance of segregation of males and females in order
to protect shame and decency. Allah the Most High says, "And you (women)
shall stay indoors and shall not make a show of the age of ignorance (Jahiliyyah
days)." (Sura: Al-Ahzab, Ayat: 33)
Therefore, women should not aimlessly roam about publicly. Rather if they need
to go outside, they must maintain a covering for decency (Parda). This applies to
the males equally. They too must take on decent dress for movement in the
society.
One of the aspects of sanctity and decency is shyness. Modesty helps make man
decent. Man will succeed in next life as a reward for shyness. The holy Prophet
Sm.) says, £82 60 ¢ ot iy
isn} & pee ite
Meaning: "Modesty is out and out a bliss." (Muslim)
Rasulullah (Sm.) further says, -
2 we ge ra
eigadadsteal
Meaning: "Modesty is a distinct portion of Iman." (Sunanu Abu Daud)
Rasulullah (Sm.) says more thus, "Obscenity turns anything bad and modesty
(shyness) adorns everything.” (Tirmizi)
Therefore, it is essential to be modest and sober in movement, dress,
conversation, conduct and manners. Courtesy can be cultivated in all situations
by following decent, gentle, pleasant and refined qualities. Courtesy protects

Akhlaq 149
man's honour and brings peace and order in society. So, we shall maintain
courtesy in all actions. We shall give up obscene and discourteous deeds.
Task: Students will write in the classroom a paragraph on the importance
of courtesy and show it to the teacher.
LESSON 6
AMANAT (TRUST)
‘Amanat’ is an Arabic word. Its meaning is to deposit or safe-keeping. Generally
to keep something (of value) to someone as a deposit for safely is called Amanat.
However, in the wider sense, keeping not only valuable, but anything worth the
name is called Amanat. The life, honour, wealth, honour, a secret of a person is
Amanat to another. One who properly protects and duly returns the valuables of
others is called ‘Ameen! or 'Amanatdar'.
The antonym of Amanat is Khiyanat. Khiyanat means to misappropriate, to
damage, to break, etc. To misappropriate the deposited thing without returning it
to its owner properly is called khiyanat. One who usurps such things is called
Khayin (gh) which means a ‘grabber’.
IMPORTANCE OF PROTECTING AMANAT
One of the important issues of Akhlaq-i-Hamidah is protection of Amanat. A
man of noble character possesses trusteeship as a peculiar quality. Protection of
trust is a command from Allah the Most High. In Al-Quran, Allah the Most High
says, "You return the Amanats to their owners." (Sura: An-Nisa, Ayat: 58)
Protection of Amanat is obligatory for a Mumin. A true Mumin never violates
trust. The holy Prophet (Sm.) says,
SEUY dae
Meaning: "He who does not honour trust, does not have Iman."
(Musnad-i-Ahmad) Protection of Amanat is a part of Iman per se. Breaking of
Amanat is not the mark of a Mumin, rather it is the mark of a hypocrite. Our
beloved Prophet is the embodiment of Amanatdari. Even his arch enemies used
to consider him as an Amanatdar and kept with him their valuables as Amanat.
They called him 'Al-Ameen' the ‘Trusted or Amanatdar'’. Rasulullah (Sm.) too

150 Islam and Moral Education
protected Amanat all his life. Even when the Kafirs of Makkah were out to kill
him before Hizrat, he did not forget about Amanat. He made proper arrangement
to return things to their real owners.
In the Islamic philosophy of life, maintaining Amanat is extremely important.
Breaking Amanat is absolutely forbidden (Haram). In a Hadith of the holy
Prophet (Sm.) it has been stated that Khiyanat is one of the symptoms of
Munafiqs. Allah the Most High is displeased with the Khiyanatkar (usurper).
Allah the Most Great says,

og sdie dans!
Meaning: "Surely, Allah does not love the breakers of trust." (Sura: Al-Anfal,
Ayat: 58) Breaking of trust (Khiyanat) brings disaster even in earthly life.
Rasulullah (Sm.) has said, "Amanatdari brings with it solvency and khiyanat
brings in its trail poverty." (Musnad-I-Shihab Al-Qazai)
A Khiyanatkar shatters the confidence and faith of man. Men hate him. They
avoid him. They do not desire to carry trade/or make transactions with him.
Consequently the Khiyanatkar suffers financially as well.
POINTS OR ASPECTS OF AMANAT
If someone is trusted with a thing or matter, that must be protected. No alteration
is allowed in that thing. That cannot be used for self-interest. Rather it must be
returned as soon as demanded by the depositor. It is what Islamic principle of
Amanat is.
The domain of Amanat is extremely vast. Not merely riches and valuables,
rather a word, deed, honour, etc. may be issues of Amanat. The holy Prophet
(Sm.) has said, "When a man leaves after talk, his words are also included in
Amanat." (Abu Daud)
It means that if a person says something and desires it to be kept secret, such
word is also Amanat per se. It will be Khiyanat if that is exposed to others.
In Islam every duty and responsibility of man is Amanat per se. alongside
personal tasks, man has got to discharge many other responsibilities. These
responsibilities of man - domestic, social, political, national and international in
dimension are considered as Amanat. Here follows a list of some such
domains -

Akhlaq 151

1. Children are Amanat to the parents. To bring them up properly and to raise
them through proper education is their obligation.

2. Parents are Amanat to the (adult) children. To obey parents and to serve
them is the duty and Amanat of (adult) children.

3. Students are Amanat to the teachers. To impart to them proper lessons and
training is their Amanat.

4. All furniture of educational institutions are Amanat to the students. It is their
responsibilities to maintain them properly. To respect the teachers, to study
decently, etc. are also Amanat to them.

5. An institution is Amanat to the officers and employees thereof. It is their
responsibility to maintain everything.

6. All public properties and people's rights are Amanat to the government. To
neglect their proper utilization is considered as Khiyanat.

7. State is Amanat per se to the people. To protect and preserve the
independence of the state and to endeavour for national development is the
duty of the people. Wastage and damage of national property is considered
as Khiyanat.

Amanatdari (trust) is a great virtue. Man can protect Amanat by discharging

respective duties properly. We shall try to protect Amanat by performing our

duties and responsibilities.
Task: Students will write 10 sentences on the importance of protecting
Amanat and show it to the class-teacher.
LESSON 7
SERVICE TO HUMANITY

Service to humanity means to serve, to take care, to help and cooperate, etc.

Service to humanity includes service to all men irrespective of race, creed,

colour, etc.

Man is Ashraful Mukhlugat or the best of all creations. Allah the Most High has

created for man all that exists both on earth and the heavens. Man's duty is to be

kind to all these and make the best use of them. Side by side man has the
obligation to extend help and cooperate and to show sympathy to other men. For,

152 Islam and Moral Education
it is through mutual service and cooperation that peace and order can be
maintained in the world.
All rights (Haqq) are of two types according to Islam. These are (1) Haqqullah
and (2) Haqqul Ibad. Haqqullah is the right of Allah. All types of worship,
praise, remembrance are included in it and Haqqul Ibad is the rights of man.
Haqqul Ibad includes love, service, help and cooperation to all men irrespective
of race, religion, colour, etc. Service to humanity is one of the aspects of Haqqul
Ibad.
IMPORTANCE
Service to man is one of the issues of Akhlaq-i-Hamidah. It is the indicator of
man's refined character. He who serves man is a great soul. He holds special
respect in society. Allah the Most High too loves such a man. Allah the Most
High too helps and shows kindness to a man who serves and helps other men.
The holy Prophet (Sm.) says,
o ca Pe Tae a
- HIF ZIG 4abl® py
Meaning: "Allah is not kind to a man who is not kind to others." (Bukhari)
sy . . 2 "9
Rasulullah (Sm.) has said in another Hadith- idgA BFR? Bp lle lords a)
Meaning: "You help those who are on earth. Then He Who is in the heaven will
help you." (Tirmizi)
In another Hadith Rasulullah (Sm.) has said, "As long as a man helps his brother
(another man), Allah continues to help in the same manner." (Muslim)
In fact, all men are brethren unto themselves. All are children of Adam (As.). So,
a person who helps his brothers, Allah the Most High too helps that person, and
removes his dangers.
Service to humanity is one of the virtues of man. A Mumin keeps himself always
busy in helping others. The holy Prophet (Sm.) has ordered about it thus, "You
give food to the hungry, narse the sick, free the captives and redeem the debtor."
(Bukhari)
There are many ways to serve humanity. To offer food to the hungry, clothes to
the naked, shelter to the helpless, nursing to the sick, help to the destitute and
distressed are all service to humanity. Helping the young and old, showing them
kindness, care and love to them are included in service to humanity.

Akhlaq 153
The return of service to humanity is unlimited. On the last Day of Judgment
Allah the Most High will give lavish reward and gifts to a server of humanity.
The Holy Prophet says, "A Muslim who gives clothes to another Muslim. Allah
will offer him the dress of Jannat. If he gives food to the hungry, Allah will offer
him tasty fruits of Jannat. If he gives water to a thirsty Muslim, Allah will give
him water from a jar with the seal of Jannat." (Abu Daud)
Our beloved Prophet (Sm.) has set excellent examples of service to humanity.
He would help the young and old, rich and poor Muslims and non-Muslims,
cooperated with them and enquired about them. He used to help the distressed
and the needy. Even his deadly enemies were not deprived of his kindness, care
and sympathy. We come to know many such instances from a study of his
biography. We all know the story of the old woman who used to cause pain to
Rasul (Sm.). This kafir old woman used to put thorns on the path through which
Rasulullah (Sm.) used to pass. Still he would say nothing to the old woman. One
day he did not find thorns on his path. The kind Prophet (Sm.) thought to himself
that the woman might have fallen sick. He searched out the house of the woman.
He found her sick indeed. All the more, there was none to look after her. The
holy Prophet (Sm.) sat by the side of her head and nursed her. As a result, the old
woman recovered from her illness. She became ashamed of her misdeed. She
never set thorns on that path.
It is the ideal of Rasulullah (Sm.) to extend help and cooperation to all men. He
has inspired us to it. So, we should serve all men to the best of our ability.
and importance of service to humanity. Others will listen and the teacher will
act as president.
LESSON 8
FRATERNITY AND COMMUNAL HARMONY
Fraternity is to express one's feeling as a brother, that is, to consider another
person as own brother and behave with him in a brother-like manner. We wish
well of our own brothers, forgo our self-interest for them and come forward to
their aid. Similarly, to cherish the same feeling for all men on earth and to
demonstrate it through practical actions is the feeling of brotherhood per se.
Forma-20 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

154 Islam and Moral Education
And communal harmony is the feeling of amity and love for men of all
communities. Men of different religions, colours and languages (dialects) live in
our society. Such people constitute one community. The feeling of mutual unity,
integrity and cooperation among these various communities is called communal
harmony.

The role of fraternity and communal harmony in establishing peace in society is
extremely important. Persons possessing moral and human values cultivate
these in their own lives.

No nation can prosper without the feeling of brotherhood and communal harmo-
ny. In the absence of these two, peace and order are harmed. The prosperity
of the nation is obstructed and even the independence and sovereignty of the
state are threatened.

Feeling of brotherhood inspires man with the spirit of sacrifice, fosters such
qualities as cooperation, fellow feeling, etc. As a result unity and order prevail in
society. On the contrary, in the absence of brotherhood man does not love others,
nor wish others well. Rather, he does not hesitate to wrong, oppress or torture
others for narrow self-interest.

Communal harmony fosters in man such qualities as patience, tolerance and
respect for freedom of opinion. Man learns how to respect one another.
Indigenous civilization and culture grow richer due to peaceful coexistence of
men and communities of divergent religious and racial identities. On the
contrary, in the absence of communal harmony feuds and strife break out. At
times even civil war breaks out. Man does not hesitate to sacrifice the interest of
the country for the sake of own communal interest. In fact, feeling of
brotherhood and communal harmony are the indispensable ingredients for peace
and progress of a country.

Feeling of Brotherhood and Communal Harmony in Islam

Islam is the religion of peace. All its teachings and ideals are directed towards
the permanent welfare of the human race. Naturally Islam has laid down specific
pronouncements in the sphere of feeling of brotherhood and communal
harmony. All have been called upon to practise these two virtues.

In Islam all Muslims are brethren unto one another. Any Muslim living in any
comer of the world is brother of any other Muslim irrespective of being black or
white, rich or poor. Allah the Most High says, Epa 16 hs ah td

Akhlaq 155
Meaning: "All Mumins are but brethren to one another." (Sura: Al-Hujurat, Ayat:
10)
Rasulullah (Sm.) has said, hich Ji ALssif
Meaning: "A Muslim is a brother of another Muslim.” (Bukhari)
All muslims of the world are tied by the bond of brotherhood. They will behave
with one another in a fraternal manner. This is the teaching of Islam. The holy
Prophet (Sm.) depicts it in a Hadith. He says, "You will find the Muslims
displaying kindness, amity, love, and sympathy to one another as if they are a
single body. When an organ of the body feels pain, the entire body responds in
the form of fever, insomnia, etc." (Bukhari and Muslim)
The mutual brotherhood of the Muslims is Islamic brotherhood. As a result,
other Muslims come for the succour of a suffering Muslim, in whatever comer
of the globe he may reside.
Alongside this brotherhood of the Muslims, Islam has advocated another type of
brotherhood. It is universal brotherhood. That means, according to Islam all men
of this world are brethren themselves. This recognizes no distinctions
whatsoever, arising out of land, race, creed and colour. All men are tied with the
bond of fraternity. This brotherhood is fundamental from the point of creation,
i.e. by birth itself. No man is entitled to violate this brotherhood.
Allah the Most High declares in an Ayat:
tic 1? We wey 12% 0 aw

nipbslae) SSS Ad alee s BS F853 KOT ANGE
Meaning: "O mankind! We have created you all from a (single) male and a
female and divided you into different communities and tribes so that you can
recognize one another." (Sura: Al-Hujurat, Ayat: 13
The holy Prophet (Sm.) has said, ples als 28 AWN
Meaning: "Mankind is from Adam (Adam's progeny) and Adam is from clay."
(Tirmizi)
In fact, all men on earth are the children of original parents Hazrat Adam (As.)
and Hazrat Hawa (As.). From this point of view, all men come from the same
family. They command same respect and are brethren unto themselves.
So, all deserve brotherly conduct irrespective of race, religion and colour. All
have to be looked upon as brothers, helped in dangers and problems. No

156 Islam and Moral Education
injustice is permissible to any man on the plea of a different religion or race. It
has always got to be remembered that all men sprang from the same stock and
all are brethren on the ground of birth.
Alongside the feeling of brotherhood, communal harmony must indispensably
be maintained for ensuring temporal peace. All communities living in the society
must be treated well. Good conduct is an obligation to men of other communities
outside one's own community. They must be helped. One must come forward at
the time of their need and danger. Peace must be given preference to mutual feud
and strife. Allah the Most High says, "There is no good in their secret plans.
Rather good lies in such gifts, charities, good deeds and directions as contribute
to bring peace in society. We shall grant great reward to those who work thus to
please Allah.” (Sura: An-Nisa, Ayat: 114)
It is extreme piety to establish peace among men. At this Allah the Most High
becomes pleased.
We are Muslims. Many non-Muslim people live in our society. Some are our
class-mates, some colleagues, some playmates, some neighbours, some
teachers, others are friends and acquaintances. All must be treated well. For (like
us) they too are creations of Allah, the Most High. The holy Prophet (Sm.) has
said, . oo} wn oe
-Alkedlgcclgtatl I Mid s.shl Ske gal
Meaning: "All the creations are like the family members of Allah. So the person
who is sympathetic to His family members is the most beloved to Allah.”
(Baihaqi) The non-Muslim communities must be given liberty to observe their
religions. It is not proper and lawful to make a mockery of their religions,
scriptures, and places of worship, rites and rituals. They must not be prevented
from performing their
religious obligations. Allah the Most High says - Ovrsds Bhs Ke)
Meaning: "Your religion is yours, my religion is mine." (Sura: Al-Kafirun, Ayat:
6) In another Ayat it has been said thus - si gais1
Meaning: "So far as Deen (Religion) is concerned, there is no forceful
imposition." (Sura: Al-Baqara, Ayat: 256)
Amity must be maintained in other spheres of life apart from religious
liberty.They must not be oppressed in any form. Their properties must not be
trespassed. Rather, their lives, honour and properties must be protected.

Akhlag 157
Rasulullah (Sm.) has strongly warned the Muslims on these issues. He said, "A
person who murders a non-Muslim of covenant, he will never the smell of
Jannat." (Bukhari)
In another Hadith he states, "Beware! if a person (Muslim) oppresses a
covenanted nonmuslim ( citizen) or gives him less than his due or imposes on
him a task unlawfully or forcefully grabs his property, then on the Day of
Judgment I will stand against him (Transgressor)." (Abu Daud)
Islam has prescribed in a number of ways for preservation of communal amity.
We should practise these directions in all situations of life. If we all follow these
Islamic ideas of brotherhood and communal amity together, the whole world
will surely become a place of peace.

Task: All students will sit together and will select through consultation

four students, to speak on "Feeling of brotherhood and communal amity

in Islam". The teacher will preside as moderator. All will congratulate

the best speaker.

LESSON 9
RESPECT FOR WOMAN

Respect for woman is an aspect of Akhlaq-i-Hamidah. It is a noble quality.
Respect for woman has got wide meaning. Generally it means a feeling or
attitude to show respect to a woman and in the wider sense, respect for woman
denotes a respectful disposition of the mind to respect the entire womankind. For
instance, to recognize equality of man and woman on the ground of creation
(birth), not to underestimate a woman only because she is a woman, not to rebuff
or mock at woman. Rather, giving her due in terms of right and dignity, scope
and opportunity for work, protecting her life, property, honour, etc. are proper
instances of respect for woman.
IMPORTANCE AND SIGNIFICANCE
Women have been given extensive honour in Islam. Before the advent of our
beloved Prophet (Sm.), the whole world in general and Arabia in particular were
steeped in the darkness of ignorance and barbarity. In those days women did not
possess any honour and dignity. They did not have any right whatsoever. Then
they were considered as cattle. They were sold and bought in the market as
slaves. They used to be branded as consumable products, pleasure partners,
source of destruction, gateway to hell, necessary sin, etc. The Arabs of that age

158 Islam and Moral Education
considered the birth of a daughter as humiliating and even buried her alive. Allah
the Most High has mentioned this heinous deed of theirs in Al-Quran. Allah
says, "When anyone of them is given the tidings of a female child, his face is
turned black and he suffers acute mental agony." (Sura: An-Nahl, Ayat: 58)
Islam has liberated woman from such humiliating condition. It is Islam that has
first of all announced the rights and dignity of women. It has accorded
recognition to the contribution and role of women in various spheres of life. In
Islam directions have been provided for attaining success in this and the next life
by showing respect to women.
DIGNITY AND RESPECT FOR WOMAN IN ISLAM
In terms of birth/creation, there is no difference between a man and a woman.
Rather, as members of human species both are equal in terms of status. Allah the
Most High has spread mankind through man and woman both conjointly. In this
no one party enjoys credit singly. Rather both are equal partners of dignity and
success.
Allah the Most High says -
ZL. be By oe, asd
(BIS SSe4 CHEN AEN EG
z 2
Meaning: "Oh mankind! We have created you from a pair of male and female."
(Sura: Al-Hujurat, Ayat: 13)
Islam has accorded woman equal rights as a man in terms of religious freedom,
status and spiritual attainments. In performing religious obligations and getting
reward for that no discrimination exists. Allah the Most High says, "On
accepting Islam or acquiring Iman, of both man and woman, whoever does good
deeds will enter Jannat. No injustice ever of the size of a point will be done to
anyone." (Sura: An -Nisa, Ayat: 124)
Islam has announced dignity and honour for woman in domestic and social life.
As a mother she has been accorded highest honour from her children.
Rasulullah (Sm.) has declared, wl Witcied adi
Meaning: "Beneath the feet of mother lies the paradise of the child."
(Musnad-i-Shihab Al- Qazai)
In another Hadith it is laid down that one day a Sahabi (Ra.) (Companion) asked
Rasulullah (Sm.), "Who deserves my fair treatment first?" Rasulullah (Sm.)

Akhlaq 159
said, "Your mother". That Sahabi asked again, "Next who?" Rasul (Sm.) again
said, "Your mother?" Being asked the third time, Rasulullah (Sm.) offered the
same reply. On being asked the fourth time, Rasulullah (Sm.) said, "Your
father". This proves that a mother's right on her child is three-fold more than that
of the father. This is a robust indicator of the unique status of a mother.
The status of a daughter as a women is also unlimited. Islam has declared
burying alive the girl baby as Haram (forbidden). Order has been passed for their
proper upbringing. As a wife a woman enjoys the status and honour quite equal
to that of the husband. Allah the Most High says,
je 3, +8 42 2 ate
“sisi gysle Gun Sdegals
Meaning: "They too are entitled to similar rights over you very much as you
have over them." (Sura: Al-Baqara, Ayat: 228)
In another Ayat, Allah the Most High says,
¢ ” 4
Meaning: "They (Women) are your garment and you, their garment." (Sura:
Al-Bagara, Ayat: 187)
In the economic sphere too Islam has protected the rights and dignity of women.
Women can earn income independently. They get share in the properties of their
deceased parents. They have absolute control over their own properties. They
can spend their wealth independently. Allah the Most High says, "Whatever a
male earns, it is his own, and whatever a female earns, that is her own portion."
(Sura: An-Nisa, Ayat: 32)
Thus Islam has proclaimed the rights of women in all sectors of life. Islam has
established these rights of women, in personal, domestic and social, national and
international levels.
WAYS OF SHOWING RESPECT TO WOMAN
Showing respect to women is indicative of refined mentality in man. Mere
showing respect outwardly is not enough; rather one has got to prove it by one's
deeds and conduct. In our family we have relatives such as mother, daughter,
sister, wife, grandmother, paternal and maternal aunts, etc. and in our work place
we have female teachers, class-fellows, and colleagues. It is a mark of respect to
treat them well, show them proper respect, love and affection, to ensure the
security of their life and honour and to give them their rights. We have been

160 Islam and Moral Education
frequently instructed on these in Al-Quran and Hadith. Rasulullah (Sm.) has
said, = 5 he

clay gab |g
Meaning: "You fear Allah in respect of woman" (Muslim). That means, one must
not ill-behave with them and will let them have their rights. In the sermon of the
last (Farewell) Hajj, Rasulullsh (Sm.) has emphasized the protection of the
rights and dignity of women.
Allah the Most High has commanded good conduct towards wives (woman folk)
Meaning: "You shall live with your wives by keeping up best manners." (Sura:
An-Nisa, Ayat: 19)
Rasulullah (Sm.) has described as his best followers those persons who treat
their wives well. He says, _ ala) s Ee Ks pr
Meaning: "The best among you is he who is best to his wife." (Tirmizi)
In another Hadith Rasulullah (Sm.) says, "Surely, that person holds perfect Islam
who possesses best character and is more kind to his family." (Tirmizi)
In fact, best manners with woman is the mark of a Mumin. In the absence of
respect towards women, Iman does not become perfect.
Our beloved Prophet (Sm.) used to respect women and love wives and children.
One day he was in a gathering of his Sahabies. At that time Hazrat Halima (Ra.)
appeared before him. Hazrat Halima (Ra.) was the wed-nurse of the holy
Prophet (Sm.). Nabi Karim (Sm.) stood up on her sight. He spread his sheet of
cloth to make her room. He enquired about her welfare. Thus the holy Prophet
(Sm.) showed respect to her.
As for the female-child, Rasulullah (Sm.) said, "That person (Muslim) will enter
Jannat who has a daughter whom he does not bury alive, or neglect her, or give
preference to other child (male) over her." (Abu Daud)
It is how we find it in another Hadith. One day a Sahabi asked Rasulullah (Sm.),
"Do wives have rights over us?" He replied, "You shall feed them what you eat
yourselves, you shall let them dress as you dress yourselves, you shall not strike
or beat them on the face. You shall not call them names and you shall not sever
ties with them except on fair grounds." (Abu Daud)

Akhlaq 161
Feeling of respect towards women is one of the issues of Akhlaq-i-Hamidah. It
is essential to have this virtue in order to attain perfect moral and human
qualities. A woman has got to be respected by heart, shown care, love, and
honour and wives and daughters must be loved. Alongside these, one has to
prove true his feelings by one's conduct and deeds. Women must not be
oppressed in any form. They must not be mocked at, rebuked, rebuffed, or
slighted. Eve-teasing must not be practised and such act or sign by which they
feel insulted or pained at heart must not be adopted. Rather their dues and rights
must always be accorded. They must be helped and supported as and when
necessary. Facilities must be provided for the development of their merit and
talent. They have to be inspired for prosperity and progress. These are how
women can be respected. These make Allah the Most High pleased. Thus we can
attain success both in this world and Akhirat.
Task: Students will prepare a poster with 15 sentences written on ‘Respect
towards woman’ and display it in the classroom.
LESSON 10
PATRIOTISM
One's native land is also called 'motherland'. The country where a person is born
and brought up in its environment and where he grows up is called his own or
native land. It is a person's land of birth or motherland.
Love for and attraction of the motherland is called Patriotism. Love for one’s
native or motherland is inherent in man. Because, he is born here, breathes in its
light and air, and his body gets nourishment from its fruits and crops, food and
drinks. The contribution of the native land to a person is undeniable. So, some
peculiar type of love and inclination develops and this attraction and love grow
at heart and he feels it althrough his life. Even in case one goes abroad for some
business, this feeling of patriotism does not diminish. Rather, this feeling of love
and respect for own land pervades his imagination. This feeling of togetherness
and attraction is what may be called Patriotism.
IMPORTANCE
Patriotism is a great virtue. Love for our own land is a part of Iman. It has been
said- US) gs ybslde
Meaning: "Patriotism is the product of Faith."
Forma-21 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

162 Islam and Moral Education
A true Mumin loves his own country. He works for securing the interest of his
country. On the contrary, those who do not love their country are ungrateful.
They are guilty of treason and base character. And such persons can never be
truly pious andMumin.
Our beloved Prophet (Sm.) was a true patriot. He was compelled to leave his
native city Makkah and migrate to Madinah. While leaving Makkah for
Madinah, he was repeatedly looking back to Makkah in tears and telling, "O my
native land! How nice you are! I love you. Had not the people of my own tribes
conspired against me, I would never have left you."
Patriotism and service to one's motherland is likened to Ibadat. Allah the Most
High shall grant huge reward to the protectors of homeland. Rasul (Sm.) said in
a Hadith, "To keep awake in the border to protect the homeland in Allah's way is
better than all the treasures between the heavens and the earth." (Tirmizi)
HOW TO SHOW PATRIOTISM
Patriotism or love for homeland is a peculiar feeling. It is not visible. One has to
express this love through one's deeds and services. Patriotism is evinced by
working in the interest of motherland. Motherland can be loved by defending its
independence, contributing to national development, not helping anyone in
subversive activities, by maintenance of national resources, self-sacrifice in the
interest of the country etc. The best form of patriotism is to sacrifice one's life for
the welfare of motherland.
Patriotism can also find expression in love for the compatriots and working for
their well-being. Patriotism may also be demonstrated by contributing to the
advancement of her agriculture, industry, education, commerce etc.
We shall love our country. We shall build ourselves as impressive and competent
citizens through education, training, learning and other virtues. Thus we shall
work unitedly for the development of our land. We shall not allow any anti-state
activities to happen. We shall properly utilize our national resources. We shall
not waste, misuse and destroy the resources. We shall not hesitate to sacrifice our
lives when so needed for the defense of our motherhood.

Task: Students will write one paragraph each on the importance of

patriotism in the light of Islam and show it to the teacher.

Akhlaq 163
LESSON 11
DUTIFULNESS
Dutifulness is one of the issues of Akhlaq-i-Hamidah. There is no alternative to
it for the overall progress and success of man. Dutifulness means to discharge
duties or fulfil responsibilities properly, etc.
As man we are subject to various duties and responsibilities. To remain alert &
conscious about them, to discharge them nicely and artistically at the right time
& not to show any negligence or indifference to these are included in
dutifulness. Allah the Most high says, "Everybody gets his position according to
what he does and their Lord is not unaware of what he does." (Sura: Al-Anam,
Ayat: 132)
Allah the Most High says in another Ayat :
a eo Fa lie Pa loo
oF gcslgi gles IG cobb LPs isicaulgt
Meaning: "We do not damage the result of those who have faith & do good deeds
in the best manner." (Sura: Al-Kahf, Ayat: 30)
Allah the Most Great further says, "Everyone is responsible for his own deeds
and none shall bear the burden of anyone else." (Sura: Al-Anam, Ayat: 164)
It is there in another Ayat thus, "Do not follow that of which you have no
knowledge; accounts shall be demanded about ears, eyes, heart, each of these."
(Sura : Bani Israil, Ayat : 36)
It is there in another place in Al-Quran,
SAS Gl GlesciS US LS BAIS
Meaning: “Allah does not impose on anyone painful obligation beyond his
capacity. Whatever good he does, its reward is reserved for him and whatever
evil he does; its return also is reserved for him." (Sura: Al-Baqara, Ayat: 286)
VARIOUS ASPECTS OF DUTIFULNESS
Dutifulness is one of the tools of achieving success in human life. Allah the Most
High has created us for his servitude only. So, it is our obligation to worship
Him. We all live in family. So, we have various duties and responsibilities to all
the members of the family, such as, parents, brothers, sisters, grandparents, etc.
As social beings we have to discharge many duties and responsibilities towards

164 Islam and Moral Education
our relatives, friends and neighbours. As learners we have various obligations to
our school, teachers and fellow-students. Besides these, when required we have
to perform duties and responsibilities in state, national and international arenas.
All these duties have to be performed accurately and at the appropriate time.
IMPORTANCE
The importance of dutifulness in man's life is unlimited. Everyone loves and
respects a person who is dutiful. He earns the confidence and faith of others.
Dutifulness brings man success. The duties of students in student life are to
respect the teachers, obey their instructions, study properly, take care of the
furniture of the school, etc. A student, who performs these duties properly, is
loved by all. Teachers like him. He succeeds in the examinations. In later life
also he achieves success. On the contrary, a student who is not dutiful, is not
liked by anybody. He fails in every walk of life.
Dutifulness is a virtue of a Mumin. A Muslim discharges all his duties.
Alongside worshipping Allah the Most High, he performs all duties and
responsibilities of practical life. When introducing His devoted slaves, Allah
says, "They discharge their obligations and fear that Day on which the loss will
be colossal." (Sura: Ad-Dahr, Ayat: 7)
Any negligence to duty shall have to be accounted for in the next life. In a Hadith
the holy Prophet (Sm.) says-
rane 492 oe {tie may

~ AaleS ob Nghe 2X6 5615 38
Meaning: "All of you (man) are trustees and you shall be questioned for your
performance." (Bukhari)
Allah the Most High has entrusted us with various duties and responsibilities on
earth for test. In the next life He will ask us all about our performance. On that
Day those who are dutiful will attain salvation easily. For them, result will be
success and Jannat. On the contrary, those who neglected their duties and did not
perform these properly will be in jeopardy. They shall suffer punishment. For
them there is hell, a place of eternal damnation.
We shall be careful to be dutiful. We shall discharge our respective duties and
responsibilities accurately. Only thus may we expect to achieve success in this
world and to attain salvation in the Akhirat.

Akhlaq 165
LESSON 12

CLEANLINESS
A clean, nice, and tidy condition is called cleanliness. In other words, to keep
body, mind and other usable articles nice and pure and free from dirt and
disorderly condition is called cleanliness. A position free from corruption,
adulteration and trouble is also a phenomenon of cleanliness. The Arabic
synonym of cleanliness is Nazafat (25U&%) . In the Islamic Shariat the term
'Taharat' is usually used in the sense of cleanliness, purity and sanctity. In the
Islamic terminology, keeping body, mind, dress, food, house and environment
clean and tidy is termed as Taharat.
IMPORTANCE
The importance of cleanliness in human life is immense. To keep clean is the
symbol of a Muslim. It is not the nature of a Mumin to remain dirty, filthy and
repulsive of smell. Rather Mumin always stays clean and pure.
Rasulullah (Sm) said, gles 384 33g Meaning: " Cleanliness is half of Iman.”
(Muslim)
It is essential to stay pure in order to be a true Mumin. Because without purity,
no worship is accepted. To perform Salat one's body, dress and place must be
clean and pure. If these are impure Salat is not proper. Similarly for recitation of
Al-Quran too purity is required. It is forbidden ever to touch Al-Quran in a state
of impurity. Allah the Most High says, 96,3 9812 jy YI Z £4 J
Meaning: "And this (Al-Quran) none will touch except the pure ones." (Sura:
Al-Waqiah, Ayat: 79)
All love clean and tidy persons. Allah the Most High too loves and likes them.
Allah the Most High has said, 0 Gh ese] £5 ENE ZA!
Meaning: "Surely Allah loves the repentants and also loves them who stay pure."
(Sura: Al-Baqara, Ayat: 222)
In the Islamic Shariat, cleanliness and the purity of the body has been ensured by
the regulations of Uzu (ablution), Ghusl (bath) and Tayammum (rubbing by dry
earth). All man's impurities and uncleanliness are removed by five times uzu
before five times Salat.

166 Islam and Moral Education
PHYSICAL CLEANLINESS

For man physical cleanliness is very important. Physical cleanliness means
keeping the whole body free from dirt, including hands, feet, mouth, teeth, etc.
If a person's hands, feet, mouth, teeth, for that matter the entire body remains
unclean and dirty, it all smells bad. It is necessary to keep clean by removing the
dirt & bad smell, because all hate a dirty person. We can keep our body clean by
the help of bathing, by removing dirt and bad smell.

After a night's sleep our face does not remain fresh and clean. Eyes remain stuck
up, teeth stink. After having meals also there may remain something stuck up in
teeth and mouth. So, teeth and mouth have to be kept clean constantly.
Rasulullah (Sm.) used to brush up his teeth for cleaning. He has encouraged us
to brush up mouth and teeth. He has said," Where it is not troublesome I would
have enjoined my followers to make use of brush (Miswak)." (Bukhari)

Many of us are accustomed to maintain long hair and nails. It gives a bad look.
Dirt accumulates if nail is long. So, nail must be trimmed and cleaned. Hair has
to be kept tidy. This is the regulation of Islam.

Once as the holy Prophet (Sm.) happened to see a man with long hair, he
remarked, "Does not this man find anything to manage his hair?"

It is Islam's regulation that cleanliness must be maintained after natural calls.
For this dry earth ball has to be used at the first step. These days there is the
scope of using easily available tissue papers. Then complete cleanness is to be
ensured by the use of water. The holy Prophet (Sm.) has said," It is uncleanliness
from urine that will bring much of punishment in the grave." (Musnad-I-Ahmad)
In another Hadith, "It has been stated that-Beware of small drops of urine. For,
much of the punishment in the grave shall result from failure to avert from the
impurities of urine." (Daraqutni)

The importance of physical cleanliness and purity is immense. So, we shall
bathe every day, we shall perform Uzu properly before saying prayers the times
a day, we shall keep our hands, feet, nail, hair, teeth and all other organs clean.
CLEANLINESS OF DRESS

Like cleanliness of body, purity of dress is very important. If the dress is clean,
body and mind remain sound and one feels encouraged for work.

Allah the Most High says, 0 3gk3ciiis

Akhlaq 167
Meaning: "Keep your clothes clean and pure." (Sura: Al-Muddassir, Ayat: 4)
Our beloved Prophet (Sm.) used to wear clean and pure dress. Clothes may be of
cheap price or even tattered but it should be clean. For this clothes should be
regularly washed.
CLEANLINESS OF ENVIRONMENT
Whatever are there around us constitute our environment. Our environment
includes houses, trees, markets and shops, schools, madrasah, roads, etc. It is our
duty to keep these neat and clean. It is not possible to lead a decent life unless
the environment is neat and clean.
Environment turns filthy if cough, urine, stool, etc. indiscriminately lie scattered
everywhere. Scrubs of various kinds, dirt, chemical wastes, etc. should not be
dropped in streets or open spaces instead of dustbins. This turns roads and public
places dirty. Dirt sticks to our body and dress as well. These breeds germs and
worms of diseases. We fall ill.
Water and air are important elements of environment. These two are very
important for man's life. We drink water; bathe in water and wash our clothes
with water. So, water and air must be kept clean. No dirt should be thrown or
dropped into water. Many foolishly ease themselves in water. It is not proper. We
shall ease ourselves at fixed spots. Consequently our air too will not be stinking.
Environment belongs to us. It is our duty to keep it clean. So, we shall be alert
about it. We shall keep clean our hearths and homes, schools and colleges, roads
and ghats, etc. We shall conduct cleanliness campaign at least once a week.
Vehicles of transport, bus stations, ferry ghats, play grounds, haats and bazars
too have to be maintained clean. We shall be careful about this matter as well.
We shall assist the cleaners of the locality.

Task: Students will write 15 sentences, 5 each on cleanliness of body, dress

and environment in their script and show it to the teacher.
LESSON 13
FRUGALITY

Frugality is an aspect of Akhlaq-i-Hamidah. Frugality is to spend according to
need, sense of proportion, accuracy in speech and deeds, proper utilization of
wealth and properties, etc. Generally, proper and proportionate use of riches and
wealth is called 'Frugality'. It means to spend just in proportion to need; not less,

168 Islam and Moral Education
not more. Allah the Most High is our Creator and Nourisher He has given us
innumerable resources and amenities. It is our duty to use these gifts and riches
properly. No misuse, wastage or miserliness is permissible in this respect.
Rather, success lies in spending wealth as per needs. Such use of wealth is what
is called frugality. It is a middle course between wastage and miserliness.
IMPORTANCE OF FRUGALITY

Frugality is an important virtue of character. It brings peace and prosperity in
human society. On the contrary, miserliness and wastage create much
disturbance in the society. The wealth of an extravagant person is soon
exhausted. As a result, he falls victim to much hardship and sorrows. On the
other side, miserliness breeds bad blood and enmity. It creates economic crisis in
society. Frugality saves man from the demerits of wastage and miserliness.
Rasulullah (Sm.) has said,

Meaning: "It is a mark of wisdom on the part of a person to follow the middle
course in respect of expenditure." (Musnad-i-Ahmad)

A frugal person makes proper use of the gifts of Allah, the Most High.
Consequently, he earns much reward. Rasulullah (Sm.) said in a Hadith, "0 child
of Adam! You spend your surplus wealth for good work, it will bring you
benefit. And if you withhold it, then it will bring you evil. However if you retain
so much wealth as you will need, then you will not be rebuked." (Tirmizi)
Frugality is a virtue of Mumin. True Mumins spend as per their needs. They do
not practise miserliness either. They are moderate in spending. They spend their
surplus wealth for Allah's pleasure. Introducing his devoted slaves Allah the
Most High says in Al-Quran, oid As AIOE SRE ass Fe 138 a 338) Bh Fe ls
Meaning: "And when they spend they do not waste and not show miserliness
either. Rather they adopt the middle course in between." (Sura: Al-Furqan, Ayat:
67)

Allah further says, "And let not the hand be chained to the cheek, nor extend it
to the fullest extent so that you do not have to be rebuked and denuded." (Sura:
Bani-Israil, Ayat: 29)

Our beloved Prophet (Sm.) was a bright example of frugality. He used to spend
for himself and his family only to such extent as necessary. Thus he avoided both

Akhlaq 169
comfort and luxury and also miserliness. He used to give extra wealth in charity.
We get this lesson from the lives of both the Sahabas and saints oflslam. The
holy Prophet (Sm.) said, "Good news is for that person who has been guided to
Islam, who possesses articles of life as much as necessary and he rests content
with that." (Tirmizi)
Frugality adorns man with many noble qualities. It saves him from such bad
habits as greed and avarice, wastage and extravagance, niggardliness, indolence,
care-lovingness, etc. Frugality is liked by Allah, too. We all shall be frugal in the
conduct of our life. We shall keep away from all sorts of wastage, niggardliness
and luxury. Then our life will be decent.
Task: Students will write 2 sentences each on frugality from Al-Quran and Hadith.
LESSON 14
SELF-PURIFICATION
Self-purification means to recify oneself, to refine oneself, to purify oneself, etc.
In the Islamic terminology, to keep one's mind free and clean from all kinds of
bad talk & deed is called self-purification. To keep the heart clean from all else
except the remembrance, allegiance and worship of Allah is also termed as
Self-purification.
Self-purification is called 'Tazkiatun Nafs'. It is also called 'Tazkiah' in short. The
motive of Tazkiah is to keep the soul free from all kinds of sin as well as from
immoral deeds.
USEFULNESS OF SELF-PURIFICATION
The usefulness of self-purification for man is undeniable. In fact, Man is a
combination of both body and mind. The body is the sumtotal of hands, feet,
head, chest and other organs. The heart is the ‘soul’ or 'Qalb'. Of these two, the
role of 'Qalb' is greater. The organs of the body do as the heart dictates. So, for
the propriety of the activities of man, first of all is needed the purification of
Qalb. And the purgation of the heart is self-purification. If the Qalb dictates for
noble and good deed, body does accordingly. The holy Prophet (Sm.) has
narrated it nicely in a Hadith. He said, "Know you that there is a lump of flesh in
the body. If that is purified, then the whole body is purified. And if that is
polluted, the whole body is polluted. Remember that it is the Qalb." (Bukhari &
Muslim)
Forma-22 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

170 Islam and Moral Education
Allah the Most High has created man for His worship. And the precondition of
worship is self-purification. Because Allah the Most High Himself is pure
(holy). He does not accept anything except what is pure. So, for worship too both
body and soul must be pure. Physical purity is not enough; rather the 'Qalb' too
has to be purified. Servitude to His pleasure is to be rendered with a heart
detached from all else. And purity of the heart is to be achieved through
self-purification.
The importance of self-purification is immense also for man's mental peace,
prosperity and growth. Self-purification causes the growth of human qualities. It
always exhorts towards good thought and deed. Self-purification opens the door
to the practise of laudable qualities. On the contrary, a person with a polluted
heart indulges in various sinful thoughts and obscene deeds. He does not hesitate
to do injustice, oppression, terrorism and torture. As a result social peace and
order are disturbed. So the usefulness of self-purification is undeniable for the
preservation and growth of moral and social value.
IMPORTANCE OF SELF-PURIFICATION
Self-purification helps growth of and brings success to man. Self-purification
turns man perfect in his temporal life. Such man escapes from all kinds evil
instincts and keeps away from all sinful immoral practices. As a result he earns
respect and love of all.
In fact self-purification is the medium of success. A person is unfortunate who
fails to attain self-purity. He can never attain success.
M oe
Allah the Most High says- 6 25 g2oleg536 G53 oalinss
Meaning: "Surely that person will be successful, who has kept his soul pure and
that person will be unsuccessful who pollutes himself." (Sura: Ash-Shams,
Ayats: 9-10)
Success and salvation in the next life too are dependent on self-purification. He
who will maintain the purity of heart in life, it is he that will attain salvation. The
reward for him will be Jannat. Allah the Most High says-
if Si, ont o te We 26204 one
6 pth lial NaNO os SUE ag
Meaning: "On that day riches and properties will be of no avail, nor children be
of any avail. Rather that person shall earn salvation that approaches Allah with a
pure soul." (Sura: Ash-Shuara, Ayats: 88-89)

Akhlaq 171
Basically, success both here and in the hereafter can be achieved through
self-purification. For this, extreme importance has been attached to
self-purification.
WAYS OF SELF-PURIFICATION
Man's qalb is like clean glass. Whenever a man does a wrong thing, then and
then it is stained black. Thus habitual bad deeds tum it totally stained. Allah the
Most High says about this-
29 Lay Sh 2 22 Ve gag * oe

Gs S1BE Gob Olu JIS
Meaning: "Never it is so; rather it is due to their own acquisition that their hearts
are rusted." (Sura: Al-Mutaffifin, Ayat : 14)
Man's qalb becomes polluted because of his own deeds. So, the main way to
self-purification is to shun wrong deeds and to give up evil thought and bad
habits. Self-purification can be attained by building one's character with the
ideals of good deeds, honest thinking, moral and human qualities.
The holy Prophet (Sm.) has said, "There is cleanser for everything. And the
cleanser for human qalb is zikr of Allah." (Baihaqi)
The dark spot and rust of qalb can be removed by more and more of Allah's
remembrance (Zikr); Qalb becomes calm and purified by zikr. Self-purification
can be acquired also by Tauba (repentance), Istigfar (seeking Allah's
forgiveness), Tawakkul (reliance on Allah), Zuhd (abstinence), Ikhlas
(sincerity), Sahr (Patience), Shukr (gratitude),Tilawat (recitation of Al-Quran),
Salat (Prayer) etc.
We shall purify our Qalb, acquire self-purification and become favourites of
Allah.

Task: The student will write a paragraph at home on the usefulness
and importance of self-purification and ways of attaining it and
show it to the class teacher.

LESSON 15
Commanding Good Deeds and Forbidding Wrong Deeds
The Arabic version of 'commanding good deeds' and ‘forbidding wrong ones' is
‘Amr bil Maaruf wa Nahi Anil Munkar'. In Islamic philosophy of life, its
importance is unlimited. It is considerable as one of the virtues of Mumin. By

172 Islam and Moral Education
commanding good deeds or 'Amr bil Maaruf' is meant generally to exhort
someone to any kind of just and good deed. However, in its wider sense, to order,
exhort, inspire, request, advise someone are included in commanding good
deeds as indicated by Islam. 'Forbidding wrong deeds' or ‘Nahi Anil Munkar' is
to resist someone from committing such acts as are not supported by Islam and
opposed to morality and rationality. It is not only by oral dictates, rather by very
many other devices that one may be restrained from wrong deeds. Rasul (Sm.)
said in a Hadith, ‘When someone from among you finds a wrong deed being
done, he should resist it by his hands. If that is not possible, then he has to resist
it by words. If he does not command that much of power, then he must
disapprove it by his heart. And it is the lowest layer of Iman". (Muslim)
Rasul (Sm.) exhorted by this Hadith to resist ‘Nahi Anil Munkar' or ‘wrong
deeds’ by hands, words or heart (hatred). 'By hand’ in this Hadith is meant
resisting by one's own power and influence, as scholars of Hadith have
interpreted it. By resisting by words' is meant resisting by way of forbidding,
prohibiting, discouraging, forming public opinion, etc. Resisting by heart' means
to hate, dislike, disapprove or seek Allah's help through supplication (Dua) for
its undoing, to think and plan to protect, remain restless or anxious until any
desirable change, etc. "Nahi Anil Munkar' is to try to resist man from evil deeds
and pursuits.
IMPORTANCE AND USEFULNESS
In Islam 'Amr bil Maaruf and Nahi Anil Munkar' are extremely important
obligations. The Islamic social system rests on it. It is mandatory that there must
always be a group of people in the society to command what is good and forbid
what is evil. Otherwise, peace and discipline do not prevail in the society.
Injustice, oppression, terrorism, torture, etc. spread in the society. The social and
human values are destroyed. For a healthy and decent social environment, the
usefulness of such a group of (good) men cannot be denied.
To command what is good and forbid what is bad is an extremely great job.
Allah the Most High will reward them with success both in this world and
Akhirat. In Al-Quran the exhorters of performing good deeds and avoiding evil
deeds have been declared as the best among mankind. Allah the Most High
says- wo» 2 ae. ag

sys gtas Sth tosis sachs uli olibes slasias asst

Akhlaq 173
Meaning: "Only you are the best community. You have been sent for the welfare
of mankind. You will instruct for the virtuous deeds, and forbid the evil deeds
and repose faith in Allah." (Sura: Al-i-Imran, Ayat: 110)

It is the peculiarity of the Mumins to practise ‘Amr bil Maaruf and Nahi Anil
Munkar’. No person (Muslim) can become a perfect Mumin (faithful) without
this obligation. While introducing the Mumins, Allah the Most High says-

ts ao? > Laan) gle |e we, fe Lhe 2? he
Sidgtests Kah sists aseah ssas6 SPs lon eo esid seiargial
Meaning: "And they are such a people that if raised an earth, they shall establish
prayer, pay up Zakat, command good deeds and forbid bad deeds. And the
reward for deeds lies with Allah alone." (Sura: Al-Hajj, Ayat: 41)

Commanding good deeds result in spreading noble and just activities in the
society. Good conduct and moral qualities develop in man. And forbidding evil
deeds uproots injustice, obscenity and torture from the society. From this man
begins to realize what are right and wrong, good and bad and gradually follow
the path of truth and justice. On the contrary, if there is in a society no practise
of the principle of commanding what is good and forbidding what is bad, it
fringes on collapse. The holy Prophet (Sm.) has depicted this in a Hadith
thus- He says, "The instance of the submissive to Allah and the transgressors is
like a group of people who are passengers on a ship. Through lottery, one group
is placed in the upper and the other in the lower floor. The lower floor group
brings water for consumption from the upper floor. The lower floor people said,
"Let us make a hole right at the bottom of the ship in order to relieve ourselves
or the trouble or causing pains to the upper-floor passengers. If at this point the
upper-floor passengers stop them (from such unwise plan) they can survive and
save all others." (Bukhari)

Commanding good and forbidding evil restrains man from destruction. As a
result, Deen (Islam) can be stable in society. And a person who performs it can
be more profoundly inspired for further good deeds. That person can save
himself from all unjust and nasty acts in life.

Consequences of Abandoning 'Amr Bil Maaruf and Nahi Anil Munkar'
Commanding good and forbidding evil is an essential duty. Negligence to this
duty ends in terrible punishment. Allah the Most High punishes this lapse in this

174 Islam and Moral Education
world. And for such people there awaits painful punishment (Azab) in the next
life. Allah the Most High says, "Those of Bani Israel who had indulged in Kufri
(disbelief), were cursed through the mouths (words) of Daud (As.) and Isa Ibn
Maryum (As.). Because they rebelled took recourse to excesses, they did not
restrain one another from evil deeds. In fact, it was a heinous principle that they
had adopted." (Sura: Al-Maida, Ayats: 78-79)
The holy Prophet (Sm.) said, "When people find an oppressor in committing
oppression but do not catch hold of his hand (resist him), Allah shall soon send
punishment on them." (Tirmizi)
In another Hadith Rasulullah (Sm.) said, "I swear by that grand entity on whom
rests my life! Surely you shall command good and forbid evil. Otherwise, Allah
shall punish you soon. May be, you shall then pray but it will not be granted."
(Tirmizi)
In fact, 'Amr bil Maaruf and 'Nahi Anil Munkar' are indispensable duties in
human life. Success in both this world and the next rests on it. However, mere
commanding others to good and forbidding from evil will not be enough; rather
one must himself practice it. For, one refraining from such obligation but
commanding others thereto shall make oneself suffer terrible punishment in the
next life. The holy Prophet (Sm.) said, "On the day of Qiyamat, a person shall be
summoned, and then he shall be cast into the hell. This shall cause his intestine
to come out. He will carry it in rounds as donkey moves in a circuit. Then the
dwellers of Jahannam will assemble around him and ask, "O you! Why do you
find yourself in this state? Did you not use to command good and forbid wrong?"
He will then reply, Yes, I did command what is good, but would not practice it
myself. And I used to forbid others to do wrong, but did not use to refrain from
it myself." (Bukhari and Muslim)
Therefore, we ourselves shall do what is good and refrain from what is bad. Then
we shall inspire our own relatives, friends and fellows, neighbours-all towards
good deeds. We shall help and cooperate in good deeds and try to restrain them
from wrong deeds. We shall offer resistance against injustice, falsehood and
obscenity that prevail in our society. We shall endeavor to build up a decent and
peaceful society by eradicating all injustice and oppression jointly.

bad & show it to the teacher.

Akhlaq 175
LESSON 16

AKHLAQ - I- ZAMIMAH
INTRODUCTION
‘Akhlaq-i-Zamimah' means condemnable deeds. All natural instincts of man are
not good. Rather there are certain traits in man's nature which are dislikable and
abominable. Such detestable traits of human nature are called 'Akhlaq-i-
zamimah'. 'Akhlaq-i-Zamimah' is just the opposite of 'Akhlaq-i-Hameedah'.
‘Akhlaq-i-Zamimah' is alternatively called 'Akhlaq-i-Sayyiyah’. 'Akhlaq-i-
Sayyiyah' too means dishonest conduct, bad habit, etc.
There are many condemnable traits in man's character, such as lying, deceit,
mockery and ridicule, treachery, envy and jealousy, greed and avarice,
slandering, back-biting, wastefulness, miserliness, anger, pride, conceit, vanity,
etc. All these are traits of Akhlaq-i-Zamimah.
DEMERITS AND BANEFULNESS
The demerits of Akhlaq-i-Zamimah are very devastating. It brings disorder in
community life as it brings sufferings in personal life. A dishonest or
characterless person is inferior to animals. No shred of scruples, morality and
human values are found in him. He simply resembles man but his conduct is like
that of beasts. He strangulates human values for self-interest. Because of
Akhlaq-i-Zamimah he indulges in all sorts of injustice, oppression and
obscenity. Even he involves himself in murder, highway robbery,
war-mongering, etc. As a result, peace, security, social cohesion, unity and
communal amity are disturbed. Anarchy and discord prevail in society.
Aman of bad nature is pitied. None loves and trusts him. All hate and avoid him.
Even in his bad time nobody comes forward to his aid. Ignoble character leads
man to grave consequences in his next life. A characterless man indulges in
sinfulness and becomes disobedient to Allah the Most High. Allah the Most
High does not love him. On the Day of Qiyamat Allah the Most High shall meet
out severe punishment to such dishonest man.

. he if? te Pr thely 96. 43 5,8
The holy Prophet (Sm.) said, & agi Ys bt Brasd [aso
Meaning: "A wicked and harsh-natured person shall not enter paradise." (Abu
Daud)

176 Islam and Moral Education
In fact, Akhlaq-i-Zamimah is extremely detested and forgoable nature. Due to
this man incur terrible loss in both this world and the Akhirat. All should remain
safe from such habits.
We shall acquire good habits by shunning bad traits. We shall acquire good
fortune by becoming favourite of all as man in the true sense of the term.

LESSON 17

FRAUD

INTRODUCTION
Fraud means to deceive, deprive, hoodwink, cheat, play false, etc. It is a special
type of lying. In the Islamic terminology, seeking self-interest by means of
concealing the real phenomenon through deceit or disguise is termed as fraud.
Through fraud a person is deceived by trickery.
Fraud may occur in various ways. Generally, instances of fraud are more
frequent in financial transactions and trade and commerce. To give less in
weight, fake currency notes, concealing defects of products, give inferior article
by showing better samples, mixing inferior things with good ones, adulteration,
applying chemicals in fishe fruit, etc., fraudulent advertisement etc. are some of
the very many instances of fraud.
Besides these, fraud may occur in other situations of social life. Adopting unfair
means in examinations, causing damage to the rights of others through false
testimony, breach of trust, provide wrong and false information, to misguide a
confused traveller, mixing falsehood with truth and even not discharging one's
duties properly are prominent instances of fraud.
IMPORTANCE OF ABANDONING FRAUD
Fraud is an extremely unlawful and condemnable act. It is synonymous with
lying. In cases it even exceeds lying in terms of consequences. Because fraud
brings in two sins- one is lying and another is breach of trust. So, fraud must be
shunned in all circumstances. A person who cheats is not a true Mumin. For,
Iman and cheating cannot co-exist in a man. A true Mumin stays firm on honesty
and truthfulness. Our beloved Prophet (Sm.) said, "He who takes up arms
against us is not my follower and he who deceives another is not of the Muslim
community." (Muslim)

Akhlaq 177
Rasulullah has explicitly said in another Hadith, onl tb oF
Meaning: "He who cheats does not belong to our folk." (Tirmizi)
In Islamic Shariat, deceit or cheating is absolutely Haram. It is not lawful in
trade and commerce, financial transactions, mutual conduct, socio-economic
activities under any circumstances. Cheating must not be concealed. Allah the
Most High says,
Meaning: "Do not confound truth with falsehood and do not conceal the truth
knowingly." (Sura: Al-Bagara, Ayat: 42)
Goods and services must be transacted accurately. Faults and defects of goods
must be clearly described to the buyer. It is haram or unlawful to transact goods
without informing the actual position. It is so narrated in a Hadith, one day
Rasulullah (Sm.) was passing by a heap of food grains. Then he pushed his hand
inside the heap. He found that the grains inside were wet whereas the grains on
the surface were dry. He said, "O owner of food grains! How is this? The man
said in reply, O Rasulullah! It soaked in the rain water. Then Rasul (Sm.) said,
then why did you not place the wet grains on the surface? Thus the buyer could
come to know about the actual condition (and hence could save themselves from
loss). In fact, he who cheats will not be counted among my followers."
(Muslim)
Fraud is an anti-social crime. It destroys mutual confidence and faith. It fosters
enmity in society. None likes a cheat. He is hated to Allah as in the Society. The
holy Prophet (Sm.) says, "Such a person is an enemy of Allah who sells
defective goods without informing the buyer about the defect. The Angels
always curse him." (Ibn Majah)
In fact, a fraudulent person is hated, ashamed and harassed in this world also.
Again, suffering and perdition await him in Akhirat. Allah the Most High says,
376 47 Aityod + of of ov Sy fe PI Ca ee LE CP
OG3 pH BhF IS BIE Og dozs Lj lO JTS iad hata Us
Meaning: "For them is annihilation who give less in weight, who take from men
in fullness by weight but they give less by weighing when they pay." (Sura:
Mutaffifin, Ayat, 1- 3)
Cheating is an issue of Akhlaq-i-Zamiah. It is a great offence. Its adverse effect
is fatal in socio-economic sector. So, we must save ourselves from deceit in all
our sayings and doings.
Forma-23 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

178 Islam and Moral Education
Task : Students will form groups and write 10 sentences on the importance
of giving up fraud, and show it to the teacher.
LESSON 18
GHIBAT (BACK-BITING)
INTRODUCTION
Ghibat is an Arabic word. It means slander, back-biting, idle gossip, false
rumour, misreporting about others in their absence, undue criticism, exposing
others, scandal-mongering, etc. In the Islamic terminology, Ghibat is such foul
talk about another person in his absence which if he hears, would take it to heart.
In the usual sense Ghibat is to talk ill of someone in his/her absence.
The holy Prophet (Sm.) has introduced ghibat nicely in a Hadith. "One day Nabi
(Sm.) said, "Do you know what Ghibat is?" The Sahabi said, "Allah and His
Rasul know it best': Rasulullah (Sm.) said,"Ghibat is- you criticize your brother
in such a way which if he comes to know/hear, he will suffer pains". Then
Rasulullah (Sm.) was asked, "Will it still be Ghibat if what I relate about his
faults, which are there in him?" Rasulullah (Sm.) replied thus- "If your
allegations are true, it is still Ghibat," and if it is not there in him, it is slander."
(Muslim)
SHAPE OF GHIBAT
Often times we sit idle. We do not have anything to do. We friends gossip
together. At such times, we criticize others by the way. We find faults with,
classmates, friends, relatives, etc. We make fun and cut jokes about them. In fact
such talks are Ghibat. Many major sins are committed by such transaction by
way of jokes and funs. However, it is not only through gossips, but through
many other ways that Ghibat takes place. For instance, to criticize anyone
through writing, signs, body language, etc. are also Ghibat. Ghibat is also
possible through someone's habit being depicted in a sketch, write-up or
cartoon.
The most familiar form of Ghibat is discussion of someone's faults. Besides this,
criticism of someone's physical defects, dress-up defects, taunts and wiggery,
etc. about someone's family background, pedigree, criticizing or talking ill of
someone's traits and habit, etc. come under Ghibat.

Akhlaq 179
DEMERITS AND CONSEQUENCES OF GHIBAT
In the Islamic Shariat, Ghibat or back-biting is forbidden. Allah says -
S032 EL beer 201 of bo) 2 Perk Le nt hon of hae, clonte
Sia Grats 2 BUSI Sisiddl Slay sas
Meaning: "You shall not back-bite one another. Do you love eating the flesh of
your dead brother? In fact, you do dislike that." (Sura: Al-Hujurat, Ayat: 12)
Back-biting has been likened in Al-Quran to eating flesh of our dead brother. So,
back-biting is an extremely obnoxious act. No sound and conscientious person
can like such act. Allah the Most High too does not like Ghibat.
The holy Prophet (Sm.) has warned us in Hadith against Ghibat. Rasulullah
(Sm.) said, "Ghibat is more serious than rape." Sahabis asked, "O Rasulullah
(Sm.)! How can Ghibat be a more deadly crime than rape? Rasul (Sm.) said;' If
someone repents after rape, Allah the Most High may forgive him. But a
back-biter will not be forgiven by Allah until the victim of his offence forgives
him." (Baihaqi)
In the Islamic Shariat, Ghibat is absolutely haram. To hear Ghibat too is as haram
as to practice it. One should abstain from hearing Ghibat as from telling it. The
back-biter must be advised to refrain from Ghibat. Alternatively, one must avoid
such places as are used as venues of Ghibat.
The sin of Ghibat is very terrible. Often times we talk ill of such persons whom
we cannot even approach to seek forgiveness. As a result, even Allah shall not
pardon this sin. So, we will abstain from Ghibat. If it at all happens from us, we
must at once seek forgiveness from the victim of our Ghibat.
Task: Students will write a paragraph at home on introduction and evil
consequences of Ghibat and show it to the teacher.
LESSON 19
JEALOUSY
Jealousy is one of the basest aspects of Akhlaq-i-Zamimah. Jealousy means to
hold adverse opinion about others, to deem oneself superior to others, to hate
others, to wish ill of others out of enmity, to be indisposed to accept other
person's prosperity, happiness, etc. In the Islamic terminology, Jealousy means a
mental disposition that desires an end or damage to other person’s happiness and
prosperity, peace and success, and contrarily wishing oneself as owner of similar
good luck. The Arabic synonym of Jealous is Hasad ( {<i).

180 Islam and Moral Education
EVIL CONSEQUENCES OF JEALOUSY
Jealousy and hatred are extremely condemnable traits of man's nature. It
destroys man's character. A jealous person can never be a man of character. For,
pride and vanity, envy, enmity, wishing ill of others, etc. are intimately linked
with Jealousy. These faults develop in an envious person.
Man is a social being. He maintains relationships with all around him. Social
peace is his dominant goal. Social peace presupposes equality, love, fraternity,
mutual cooperation and fellow-feeling. In a Hadith the holy Prophet (Sm.) said,
"Deen is another name for mutual goodwill. Jealousy destroys all these noble
qualities. A jealous person considers himself as superior to others; he magnifies
his interest. He hates others. He cherishes enmity towards others, and wishes
loss for others. It destroys unity and cohesion in society; peace and order are
disrupted.
Jealousy and malice are obstacles on the way of national unity, integrity and
progress. It results in division and discord within the nation and enmity thrives.
It destroys unity of the Muslim Ummah. Rasulullah (Sm.) said," Jealousy and
animosity, a disease that cut to pieces (destroyed) the nations before you, is
approaching you crawling. I am not talking of hair- cutting; rather the destroyer
of deen (Islam)." (Tirmizi)
Jealousy and malignity are causes of loss to man in his next life too. Jealousy
destroys all good deeds of man. The holy Prophet (Sm.) said,

Pio . Le aoe) bes
Meaning: "You save yourselffromjealousy. For, as fire consumes (bums) wood,
so does jealousy consume (damage) all noble attainments of man." (Abu Daud)
In another Hadith Rasulullah (Sm.) said, "The sins of three persons are not
forgiven; one of these is he who cherishes malice to others." (Adabul Mufrad)
ISLAMIC REGULATION REGARDING JEALOUSY
In the Islamic Shariat, Jealousy and envy mostly are fully Haram. A true Mumin
can never be envious. Rather, to wish well of and help and cooperation with
others are the traits of a Mumin. Allah the Most High instructs us in Al-Quran to
seek refuge from Jealousy. He says - o fz Style hess
Meaning: "And seek refuge from a malicious man when he wishes malice."
(Sura: Al-Falaq, Ayat: 5)

Akhlaq 181
The holy Prophet (Sm.) said," You shall not envy one another; you shall not
show malice to one another and you shall not oppose one another. Rather, all are
slaves of Allah and maintain brotherly relations with one another." (Bukhari and
Muslim)
Jealousy and malice are extremely fatal social aliments. All must shun jealousy
and hatred for the sake of both individual and national progress.
Task: Students will make a poster containing a Hadith of holy Prophet
(Sm.) on the consequences of Jealousy and display it in the classroom.
LESSON 20
FITNA AND FASAD

INTRODUCTION
Both 'Fitna' and 'Fasad' are Arabic words. Fitna (aszaii ) means anarchy,
indiscipline; feud, etc. In the Islamic parlance, Fitna and Fasad mean unleashing
unrest and cause disaster. In other words, a situation contrary to orderly and
peaceful one is Fitna and Fasad. Many disruptions in human society can be
created through threats, injustice, oppression, etc. Such an unstable situation is
Fitna-Fasad.
Terrorism, hijacking, highway brigandage, disappearance, murder, kidnapping,
abduction, militancy, etc. are instances of Fitna-Fasad. Oppression, torture, feud,
conspiracy, wars and strife are some other forms of Fitna-Fasad.
ADVERSE EFFECTS
Islam is the religion of peace; it is a disciplinal and decent code of life. It does
not have any space for indiscipline and anarchy. Rather unity, fraternity, amity,
generosity, forbearance form the main foundation of Islam. All the rites and
rituals, rules and regulations of Islam are scientific and impressive. Offering
prayer in congregation is a glaring example of this. All irrespective of rich and
poor, king and subject, black and white stand shoulder to shoulder in rows
behind a single Imam (leader of prayer). All bow and prostrate together and offer
Salat. There is no scope of indiscipline. All other rules and regulations of Allah
the Most High are of the same character. Even this whole universe is directed in
a disciplined way dictated by Allah the Most High. No anarchy or
mismanagement is noticeable anywhere.

182 Islam and Moral Education
Our personal, social, national and international life too should be so disciplined
as this. It is this that Islam envisages. But Fitna and Fasad are obstacles to it. As
a consequence of Fitna and Fasad, disorder and disaster befall all levels of
society. Normal life style becomes intolerable.
A society in constant Fitna- Fasad can never prosper. Social unity and cohesion
are destroyed. In such a society, man's life, property and honour are not secure.
Man cannot follow his own religion freely. Education and training, trade and
commerce, transaction of all types, social rites and festivals, national occasion
and ceremonies cannot be observed smoothly. Fitna and Fasad breed threat and
panic in 'society'. Law and order collapse. In a word, anarchy prevails in society
and country as inevitable consequences of Fitna and Fasad. The path of peace
and progress becomes obstructed.
In fact, Fitna and Fasad are extremely fatal offences. The flood-gate of all kinds
of injustice and oppression is opened by these. Dishonest persons take advantage
of this anarchic situation. For this Allah the Most High says -
Meaning: "Fitna is worse than murder.” (Sura: Al-Bagara, Ayat : 191)
Fitna-Fasad breeds immorality and leads to spread of condemnable dealing in
society. Fitna and Fasad destroy the ethical and human values of society.
ISLAMIC REGULATION CONCERNING FITNA-FASAD
Fitna and Fasad are entire repugnant to the Islamic ideals. These are forbidden
(Haram). Allah the Most High has prohibited the breeding of indiscipline and
anarchy. He says - Gert hen e355) dls ’ . BYs
Meaning: "Once peace and order have been restored on earth, you shall not
breed anarchy." (Sura: Al-Aaraaf, Ayat: 56)
Fitna and Fasad on earth are the making of man himself. Man breeds different
types of Fitna and Fasad on earth by his unjust and wrong deeds. They are men
of heinous character who create Fitna and Fasad. Allah the Most High holds
them in severe indignation. He says -
OCA TAS! eI gslash gs Vs
Meaning: "You shall not cause strife on earth Surely Allah does not like the
strife-mongers." (Sura: Al-Qasas, Ayat: 77)

Akhlaq 183
The demerits and evil consequences of Fitna and Fasad are extremely terrible.
We shall always keep ourselves safe from them. We shall restore peace and
discipline in the society by means of practising noble qualities and good deeds.
We shall collectively raise resistance against terrorism, militancy and anarchy.
Task: Students will prepare a list of the bad effects of Fitna-Fasad and
hang it in their drawing rooms.
LESSON 21
INDOLENCE
‘Indolence' means aversion to work. To sit idle or unemployed in spite of ability
to work is called indolence. If a disabled or incapable person cannot do any
work, it is not indolence. For instance, the blind, deaf or physically retarded
persons are not capable of performing many types of work. Rather, not doing
any job and sitting idle in spite of competence and ability or for any other reason
intentionally is what is termed as indolence.
HARMFUL EFFECT
Human life is unthinkable without work. Man has to do many deeds to become
great, as well as to earn livelihood. Man's progress and success depend on doing
such deeds properly and punctually. On the contrary, an individual or a nation
averse to work cannot prosper. Aversion to work is unfortunate and scandalous
for a nation.
Indolence generates laziness in men. Thus man becomes inactive. Man's
aptitude to and ability for work comes to an end. Thus runs an adage: "An idle
brain is a devil's workshop." Lazy people indulge in various types of dishonest
and unethical thought and deeds. Often times they involve themselves in
dishonest and sinful acts like terrorist activities, hijacking, highway robbery, etc.
These lead to social decay.
As a result of indolence, man's talent, strength and time are wasted. Nobody
loves an indolent unemployed person. Nobody wants to maintain friendship and
relative-like contact with him. Indolence eradicates one's self-respect. There
develops in him an attitude of dependence on others for economic support. This
brings despair. Such situation often culminates in recourse to suicide.

184 Islam and Moral Education
IMPORTANCE OF GIVING UP INDOLENCE
Islam is the religion of well- being. Islam does not support any law or conduct
which may cause wrong to man. Indolence is indeed a curse in man's life. Islam
provides it no space whatsoever. Man has been encouraged by Islam to action.
Allah the Most High has exhorted man to spread on earth immediately after
worship is over. Allah the Most High says-
al LBS ye gM 2G UGE Loot SU
Meaning: "However, as soon as prayer is over, you spread up on earth and seek
Allah's favours." (Sura: Al-Jumua, Ayat: 10)
In the Hadith work for earning livelihood too has been announced Farz (Obliga-
tory). The holy Prophet (Sm.) said -
42 2-2-8222 WI, fe ilk
J.B} BN aje bj SSIS US obs
Meaning: "Seeking sustenance in a legitimate way is an additional Farz work
after the other Farz." (Baihaqi)
The need to work for earning livelihood is undeniable. Idleness will not avail.
Rather, in Islam encouragement has been provided for working on
self-initiative.
Rasulullah (Sm.) has said, "No one has ever eaten better food than what has been
earned by one's own hands." (Bukhari)
There is no scope for indolence in Islam. Rather every halal work has been
encouraged for earning substance. A study of the biographies of Prophets and
Messengers reveals that they adopted many avocations for earning their
livelihood. Hazrat Daod (As.) was a blacksmith, Hazrat Adam (As.) adopted
farming, our beloved Prophet (Sm.) took to trading. They would even graze
cattle for the sake of livelihood. So, no labour is mean. Hazrat Umar (Ra.) said,
"See to it that none among you sits in despair for earning livelihood". Many such
are found in our society as sit idle after completion of formal education. Such
unemployment as this is not proper. Rather everyone should work as per his/her
capacity. This gives both body and mind a smooth sailing. Allah the Most High
also becomes pleased.

Akhlaq 185
LESSON 22
RIBA (USURY) AND BRIBERY
INTRODUCTION: RIBA
‘Sood’ is a Persian word and it literally means profit, but is used technically in the
sense of ‘Riba’. The additional amount claimed on a loan given to someone is
called 'Riba'(! ong ). At the time of the advent of holy Prophet (Sm.), it took the
shape of a business or trade per se. In many societies of the world including the
Arabian, it had become a custom. As its outcome, the rich would become richer
and the poor still poorer. It was another name for exploitation. So, Islam declared
it Haram. There are many who equate Riba with profit. But virtually both are not
the same. For, in 'Riba’ there remains no risk of loss and so far as profit is
concerned, it runs the risk of loss. In defining 'Riba' Rasulullah (Sm.) says -
wegen 2, Oy
toby 5¢5 ass $4.02 336
Meaning: "Any profit (excess) earned by a loan is 'Riba’.". (Jami Saghir)
Realizing any kind of extra by the lender from the harrower is 'Riba'. For
instance, a person given a loan of taka 100 to another man on condition that the
loanee shall pay Taka 110 to the lender. In this case Taka 10 (ten) is 'Riba'. For,
this has got no basis to support it ( except the illicit contract).
‘Riba’ is not confined to transactions of money, goods etc. only. Rather, such
extra amount in case of transactions of the same or similar categories of goods
will come under its domain. For instance, taking ( or demanding) more than one
kg of rice or alternatively one kg of rice and some amount of other material in
return for a loan of one kg rice will be treated as 'Riba'. The holy Prophet (Sm.)
has explicitly said, "Any amount of excess of the amount of loan of a certain
category of article such as extra gold for gold, silver for silver, barley for barley,
date for date, salt for salt, etc. will be 'Riba’." (Muslim)
BRIBERY
‘Bribery’ means excess gain. Unlawful demand in cash or kind, taking or
demanding money, wealth, benefit or advantage in excess of what is due or
normal claim is bribe. The officers and employees of an institution receive
certain amount of salary or allowance in return for their work. But if they illegal-
ly take or claim anything extra in addition to their pay for this work, that excess
gain is bribe. For instance, it is bribery on the part of an officer if money is
extracted by him from a person by with-holding his file. In other words,
Forma-24 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

186 Islam and Moral Education
illegally realizing such things or benefit by anyone not within his rights is bribe.
Similarly offer of extra money or benefit for illegal gain by anyone to any man
in authority is also bribery.

Transaction of bribe is noticeable in society in various forms. Man generally
offer bribe in terms of money for getting their dishonest purposes served.
Besides money, bribe is exchanged in kind also in the form of television, fridge,
omaments, ready-made flats, etc. In truth, whatever is the price of the articles
exchanged, or the amount of bribe in money-little or huge, it is all Haram.
BANEFUL EFFECT AND CONSEQUENCES

‘Riba' (Usury) and 'Bribery' are heinous financial crimes. Their demerits and
harmfulness are very dreadful. Usury generates economic disparity in society.
The rich become richer and the poor still poorer, As a result, class distinctions
crop up in society. The way to mutual love, affection and co-operation is closed.
National growth and economic development are retarded. People do not feel
encouraged towards investment. Rather, wealth is invested in unproductive
sectors like usury. As a result investment in the country diminishes and national
development is thwarted.

Bribery also breeds unrest in society. A person who is given or takes bribe
neglects his duties and misappropriates Amanat (Trust). He misuses his power
and responsibilities. Both recipient and offerer of bribe transgress the rights of
others. As a result, there starts enmity of the affected party with them. Quarrel,
discord and strife get the upperhand in society.

In fact, the damaging effects of both usury and bribery are very severe. These
bring in moral degradation in society. Under the spell of usury and bribery man
loses moral and human qualities. Rather the cultivation of dishonesty and evil
habits gets momentum. These spread in man greed and avarice, wastefulness and
sinfulness. Very often for the lure of extra income from usury and bribery man
indulges in various types of criminal activities. Crimes like terrorism, hijack,
highway robbery, murder, etc. boom up. Rasulullah (Sm.) said, "A society given
to Zina (illicit sex), falls prey to severe famine. And a society immersed in
transaction of bribes becomes engulfed by fear and terror." (Musnad-I-Ahmad)
The impact of usury and bribery is very harmful in terms of socio-economic
advancement. From a religious point too, its baneful effects are very pervasive.
Wealth and properties acquired by usury and bribery are haram (illegal). And
haram is not entertainable under any circumstances. The Ibadat of a person is not

Akhlaq 187
accepted if his body is nourished by haram food and his dress is obtained
through haram money. Allah the Most High does not grant even his Dua (suppli-
cation). Persons involved in usury and bribery are condemned by both Allah and
His Rasul (Sm.) as they are hated by other men. Both Allah and His Rasul (Sm.)
curse and damn the persons involved in usurious practices and _ bribery. It has
been thus mentioned in a Hadith,
rd 45649929) ui “Wh ot oe tery €- aoe ey
shia Esko sieht sl alasarleatl fosti Jezigal
Meaning: "The generous Prophet (Sm.) has cursed a usurer, Riba payer or giver,
scribe of Riba-contract and witnesses thereof." (Muslim)
Nabi Karim (Sm.) has said elsewhere thus - os fed Feria Sabla
Meaning: "Allah's curse is on both the offerer and the recipient of bribe."
(Bukhari and Muslim)
The consequence of transaction of Riha and Bribe is awful. This turns a man fit
for Allah's damnation. Even in this life of the world, Allah the Most High holds
him in His grip. The holy Prophet (Sm.) says -
of eee rd 1 ew ty pa ie Ve
SW NSE SgeB set lH 3555 tes 5) 548 181
Meaning: "When illicit sex (Zina), rape and Riha spread in an epidemic form in
a village or country, Allah's punishments for the inhabitants thereof become
inevitable." (Mustadraq Al-Hakim)
The transactors of riba and bribe will find their place in Jahannam. On the Day
of Qiyamat he will face terrible punishment. Stating the condition of the usurer
(one who takes riba) Allah the Most High says, "Those who take interest (riba),
will stand like a man whom the devil rendered mad by his touch. This is so
because they say that buying selling is just like usury." (Sura: Al-Baqara, Ayat:
275)
As for the fate of the bribe-eaters, Rasulullah (Sm.) says,
LUGAK csiiclscsipl
Meaning: "Bribe-offerers and bribe-eaters, both of them are Jahannamis."
(Tabarani)
In another Hadith Rasul (Sm.) has narrated the peculiar punishment awaiting the
bribe-eaters. It is related in Hadith, Nabi (Sm.) employed a person to collect

188 Islam and Moral Education
zakat from 'Azd' tribe. His name was Ibnul Lutbiyyah. He (zakat collector)
returned afterwards and said to the holy Prophet (Sm.),"This is your protion
(zakat), and this portion I received as present." On ascending the Minbar (Pulpit)
Rasulullah (Sm.) paid praises to Allah and said, Of the posts put under my custo-
dy by Allah I employ someone from among you. He comes back from the
assignment and says, "These are your portion and these are mine (personal
presents for me). Why does not this man keep sitting in his parents’ house? If he
be truthful, then he will have these all sent to him there. By Allah, if anyone from
among you accepts anything (without right, unauthorized), he will appear before
Allah on the Day of Qiyamat carrying those things along. So, I do not want to
witness anyone of you in such state as he carries a camel and it will keep roaring,
or a cow and it will be lowing, or a goat and it will be bleating 'Bha’', 'Bha'." Then
he raised both hands so high that the whiteness of his armpit becomes visible. He
then invoked Allah's testimony thus- "O Allah! Have I conveyed (your
command)?" and repeated it thrice. (Bukhari and Muslim)

REGULATIONS CONCERING RIBA AND BRIBE IN ISLAM

Riba and bribe have been explicitly declared as prohibited in Islam. These are
unlawful. Transaction of riba and bribe is not lawful under any circumstances.
Allah the Most High says in the holy Al-Quran, *14:)Ls%55 Foal au) sis
Meaning: "And Allah has declared business as Halal and riba as Haram." (Sura:
Al-Bagara, Ayat: 275)

In another Ayat, Al-Quran announces thus, "O you, who believe. You do not take
riba in a compound rate and fear Allah." (Sura: Al-e-Imran, Ayat : 130). Allah the
Most High further says, "O you who believe. Observe your duty to Allah and
relinquish what remains (due) from usury, if you are (true) believers." (Sura:
Al-Bagara, Ayat : 278)

Transaction of bribe too is haram or unlawful. Allah the Most High says, "And
do not swallow up your property among yourselves. By foul means, neither seek
to gain access thereby to the judges, so that you swallow up a part of the property
of man wrongfully and knowingly." (Sura: Al-Baqara, Ayat : 188)

Akhlaq 189
Bribe is haram under all circumstances. It is as haram to take as to offer.
Similarly, taking and giving of riba, both are haram and equal offenses. Even
mere link with riba is a sin. Rasul (Sm.) has cursed them all who are somehow
or other linked with it. In fact, riba and bribe both are heinous sins. Rasulullah
(Sm.) has warned man against these in many of his Hadith.
Transaction of riba and bribe are very detestable acts. Man of principles and
human values can never commit such acts. We too shall refrain from transactions
of riba and bribe.
Task: Students shall write a paragraph on the demerits and fate of riba
and bribe and show it to the teacher.
EXERCISE

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS:
1. Damaging Amanat is a sign of-

a. Fasiq b. Kafir

c. Munafiq d. Liar
2. “He who cheats does not belong to our community”— whose saying is this?

a) The holy Prophet Hazrat Muhammad’s (Sm.) b) Hazrat Abu Bakr’s (Ra.)

c) Hazrat Umar’s (Ra.) d) Hazrat Ali’s (Ra.)
3. Patriotism is to be expressed by

i) One’s own deeds ii) One’s own words

iii) One’s own service.

190 Islam and Moral Education
Which one of the following is correct?

a)i b) iii

c) i and iii d) ii and iii
Read the following paragraph and answer Questions 4 and 5.
Mr. Rafiq and Mr. Shafiq work in the same office. Mr. Rafiq often talks in a
manner that hurts Mr. Shafiq's self-respect.
4. What does Mr. Rafiq’s conduct lack?

a) Brotherliness b) Amity

c) Sense of dignity d) Amanat
5. As a result of Mr. Rafiq’s conduct-

i) Mutual relationship will be a affected

ii) Working environment of the office will be affected

iii) Bad blood will persist
Which one of the following is correct?

a)i b) ii

c) iand ii d) i, ii and iii
CREATIVE QUESTIONS:
1. Mr. 'A' is engaged in a govermnent job. He leads and easy-going life with the
extra money extracted from the public after performing their business in his
office. His son Mr. 'B' on completion of varsity education is passing an
unemployed life. If anyone advises him to find out a job or to be engaged in
some profession, he says, "I do not like any work"?

a) What is meant by 'Akhlaq-i-Hamidah'?

b) Explain the act of Mr. 'B' in the light of Islam.

c) "The consequence of Mr. A's deed is dire"- Comment.

Akhlaq 191
2. Mr. 'A' was gossiping with his friends. Meanwhile Mr. 'B' said, "We don't see
Mr. 'D', where is he?" Instantly Mr. 'C' said, "He is a depraved person." Another
one said, "He gave me 45 kg rice, though I paid him for 50."

a) What is meant by 'Akhlaq-i-Zamimah'?

b) How is the comment of Mr. 'C'? Explain.

c) "Mr. 'D' will surely be punished for his work"- Evaluate.

CHAPTER FIVE
MODEL LIVES
g
"Model' has the Arabic synonym 'Uswa' (83.41) . 'Model' signifies that what can
be copied, imitated, followed in such matters as mannerism, rules and reg-
ulations etc. The activity of the greatmen which is followed to make the whole
life perfect and successful is called Ideal Life. Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) the last
and final Prophet and Messenger of Allah is the best model for our life. As Allah
i Cre OS BoC HLS 281
the Most High says- 4s oof ght J 325d B66 3B
Meaning: "Surely, there is for you the best model in the life of Rasulullah (Sm.)."
(Sura: Al-Ahzab, Ayat: 21)
Besides this, the excellent qualities of those great men who earned glory as noble
men by following the path of the holy Prophet (Sm.) and who inspired and
encouraged mankind for the right path are also our ideals.
The traits of ideal lives: Two traits characterize such lives. Such as, a) Positive
(Acceptable) qualities and b) Negative (rejectable) qualities.
Among the acceptable and positive qualities some are enumerated as under: a) a
happy combination of honesty, faithfulness, liberality, forbearance,
b) Self-control, benevolence, charity, sympathy, tolerance, humility and
tenderness. c) Discipline, mutual amity, impartiality, forgiveness, justice, etc.
Among the rejectable and negative traits are:- (a) Jealousy, Malice, murderous
instinct and egoism. (b) Grandeur, fraudulent, deceitfulness, back-bite,
falsehood. (c) Intolerance, factionalism, communalism, injustice, oppression,
rape, shamelessness and all other evil traits.
After reading this chapter, we will be able to-
= narrate the traits of an ideal character or great life;
= explain the social and cultural condition of pre-Islamic Arabia;
= — explain the unique examples of the holy Prophet's (Sm.) honesty, co-opera-
tion and sympathy in his adolescence;
= explain the elegant moral and human qualities of the holy Prophet (Sm.)
during his youth;
= explain the reception of Prophethood and preaching of Islam;
= explain the events of the Madani life of the holy Prophet (Sm.);

Model Lives 193

1 explain the charter ofMadinah and communal amity of the holy Prophet
(Sm.);

. explain the Farewell Hajj sermon, the ideas of human rights and equality,
as well as the importance of respect to woman, and establishment of
universal brotherhood;

/ explain the conquest of Makkah by the holy Prophet (Sm.) and his ideal
of general amnesty;

1 explain the introduction and ideals oflife of the Khulafa-i-Rashidun;

. explain the qualities exemplified in their character, such as service to
humanity; charity, generosity, cultivation of knowledge, love for their
subjects, as well as their idea of justice and good governance.

. explain the noble traits as blossomed in the lives of the Muslim savants,
such as their ideals of social service, equality, democratic values,
fraternity, fellow-feeling, courtesy, trustworthiness, sacrifice,
forgiveness, patriotism, benevolence and contribution to dissemination of
learning and education.

1 describe the contribution of the Muslim in the field of knowledge,
Science and technology specially in the area of medicine, chemistry,
geography and mathematics.

LESSON 1
Socio-Cultural Conditions of Pre-Islamic Arabia
The holy Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) is the last and the most excellent of
all Prophets and Messengers raised by Allah the Most High for showing the right
direction to mankind. The people of Arabia had been steeped in barbarism and
ignorance. Their socio-cultural, politico-religious and economic conditions were
extremely degraded. They made innumerable idols and worshipped them. Their
idols were as many as their tribes; they had installed 360 idols in the holy Kaaba.

Due to this serious decay, Allah the Most High sent as guide the holy Prophet

(Sm.) with the status of the best man ever in the history of the world. Allah had

sent down to him the greatest book Al-Quran. The great Prophet (Sm.) has

showed mankind the path of liberation.

Forma-25 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

194 Islam and Moral Education
SOCIAL SITUATION

Before the advent of the holy Prophet (Sm.) the people of Arabia had forgotten
the teachings of Nabis and Rasuls and indulged in anti-social activities. Their
rites, rituals, conduct and manners were barbarous and anti-humanity. This being
the cause, that age has been called 'Ayyam-i-Jahiliyah' or the 'Age of Ignorance’.
They had no idea whatsoever about decent and wholesome social system. There
was no security of man's life, property and honour. Homicide, murder, assault,
decoity, scuffle, burying female child alive, gambling, usury, bribe, sexual
promiscuity, had become common practices. Women enjoyed no dignity in that
society. Women were not ever deemed as human beings; rather they used to be
bought and sold as slaves to be used as chattels of luxury. Al-Quran contains
clear allusions to it. Allah the Most High says, "When someone is informed of
the birth of female child, his face turns pale and he feels acute mental pain. On
being given this news, he goes out in self-concealment out of shame. He starts
thinking whether to retain her in spite of self-remorse or to bury her alive.
Beware! Whatever decision they take, it is all base." (Sura: An-Nahl, Ayats:
58-59)

In a word, there was no such crime left which they would not commit.
CULTURAL CONDITION

In spite of being unlettered and uneducated, people of the Jahiliyah age of Arabia
were very fond of literary feats. Many of them would improvise poems. In the
then Arabia a fair called Ukaz used to be organized annually. In that fair the
prominent poets would recite self-composed poems. Those poems as would
have been considered the best, used to be hung from the walls of the holy Kaaba.
‘Al-Sabul Muallaqat' (Seven hanging poems) considered as the best of all ages,
were composition of the Jahiliyah days. The Arabs earned universal acclaim for
poetical accomplishments right in the Jahili age. Their poetry was very elegant
in terms of quality. Hazrat Ibn Abbas (R.) says, "When you fail to understand
any description of Allah's Book (Al-Quran), then you seek out its implications in
the poetry of the Arabs. For, poetry is the register of their life." (Al-Mufassal)
This explains the prevalence of unnumbered a days and epigram, various
legends and savoury stories as well as the art of oratory. However, their cultural
efforts were mainly embodied in poetry.

Model Lives 195
LESSON 2
The Holy Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.): Birth,
Childhood and Adolescence
BIRTH AND CHILDHOOD
The holy Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) was born in the Quraish tribe in 570
A.D. Abdullah was his father's name. His paternal grand father's name was
Abdul Mutalib. Amina was his mother's name while that of his maternal
grandfather was Wahhab. His father died before his birth. His paternal
grandfather christened him Muhammad. And his mother gave him the name
Ahmad.
After birth, baby Muhammad (Sm.) was brought up by his wed-nurse Halima
(Ra.). Halima was a member of the Banu saad tribe. And Banu saad practiced the
purest of the Arabic dialects. Consequently baby Muhammad too acquired
command over the purest Arabic dialect. Examples of justice and fairplay were
evident in Muhammad (Sm.) right from his childhood. He used to suck a single
breast of his wed-nurse Halima and reserved the other for Abdullah, son of
Halima.
Halima returned baby Muhammad to his mother Amina after rearing him for 5
years. When he was only six, his mother passed away. Now orphan and helpless,
his paternal grandfather Abdul Mutalib took him under his custody and care.
And at his 8th year his paternal grandfather too died. After that his upbringing
was assumed by his paternal uncle Abu Talib.
ADOLESCENCE
Abu Talib his uncle used to rear him up with utmost care and affection. Abu
Talib 's pecuniary position was insolvent. Having taken notice of this, Hazrat
Muhammad (Sm.) started to work with his uncle's cooperation. He used to graze
sheep. He was the best model for other shepherds. He behaved with them on
friendly terms. Never would he engage himself in feuds or quarrels with them.
He went to Syria for trade at the age of 12 in the company of his uncle. On the
way they met a priest named Buhaira (Bahira) who pointed to Muhammed as an
extra-ordinary boy and prophesied by saying this- "This boy shall become the
Akihiri Nabi (Last Prophet) of the final phase ( of time)."

196 Islam and Moral Education
Right from his childhood Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.), the great Prophet was
truthful and peace-loving. On his return from Syria, he witnessed the ferocity of
the war of Fiza. This battle began in the forbidden month. Moreover, the Qays
tribe had unjustly imposed this battle on the Quraish tribe. On account of this it
has been called the Harbul Fizar (unjust warfare). This battle lasted for five
years. Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) did not participate in this battle actively. But he
had witnessed its horror. Many men died and still others were wounded. At this
his tender heart cried out. On hearing the wailing of the injured, he became
testless and disturbed. As a peace-loving man this disturbance did not appear
tolerable to him. So, he formed the Hilful Fuzul (Peace Organization) with other
peace-loving youths. The motive of this body was to serve the afflicted, resist
the oppressor, help the oppressed, secure peace and order and maintain peace
among the tribes. Many peace missions of the modem age including the U.N.O.
are mostly indebted to this Hilful Fuzul of Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.). They are
also keenly striving to secure peace in society like the Hilful Fuzul by ending
warfare.
The Arabs of those days called Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) 'Al-Ameen' (Trustee)
for his noble qualities, such as trustworthiness, truthfulness, justice, fairness,
and sense of responsibility. Even those who had rejected him after his reception
of Prophethood could not accuse him of lying.
LESSON 3
Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.): His Youth, Prophethood and
Preaching of Islam
YOUTH
The news of young Muhammad (Sm.) truthfulness, justice, and other noble traits
of his character spread to all directions of Arabia. Hazrat Khadiza (Ra.) the
richest and erudite widow of that time entrusted her business to Hazrat Muham-
mad(Sm.). Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) toured Syria for her business undertakings.
He returned from this business trip with huge profit. The sense of responsibility
evinced by young Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) in Hazrat Khadiza's (Ra.) business
is an example for all young people. Hazrat Khadiza (Ra.) had deputed her most
trusted agent Maisara to Syria with Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) to acquire better
knowledge of Muhammad's (Sm.) character. In return from Syria Maisara
narrated to Khadiza (Ra.) the noble traits of Muhammad's (Sm.)

Model Lives 197
character. Having been charmed at Muhammad's noble qualities, Khadiza
herself sent proposal of marriage to Muhammad (Sm.). Hazrat Muhammad
(Sm.) married Khadiza (Ra.) with the consent of his uncle Abu Talib. He was 25
at that time and Khadiza was 40. After this marriage Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.)
became owner of huge wealth by Khadiza's (Ra.) grace and favour. But instead
of spending this vast wealth for his personal pleasure, luxury, comfort and
enjoyments, he spent them in the service of destitute, helpless, disadvantaged,
distressed, afflicted, and poor and beggar classes.

Peace shall today prevail and the sufferings, distress, poverty of society will
diminish if we spend our resources in the service of suffering humanity.

The noble Kaaba was reconstructed when Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) was 35. A
dispute arose among the various tribes of Arabia on the issue of the placement
(fixing) of the Hajr-i-Aswad (Black stone). Every tribe was equally eager to
have all the credit of putting it for itself, but no tribe was ready to relax its claim.
Consequently, a battle was about to brew. At last it was agreed that all will
accept the decision of one who will first enter the Kaaba next morning. It was
found that the first to enter Kaaba next morning was Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.).
All cried alike thus, - 'Here comes Al-Ameen'. We are confident of and satisfied
with him. All accepted without demur the solution offered by Hazrat
Muhammad (Sm.) with his sagacity and neutrality. As a result, they escaped an
inevitable bloodshed. Peace and order shall prevail if at present also, justice is
conducted with such discretion and impartiality. The nation will be saved from
many inevitable rivalry, conflict and bloodshed.

AWARD OF PROPHETHOOD

After his marriage with Hazrat Khadiza (Ra.), Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) would
engross himself in deep meditation in a cave of Mount Hira not far from the city
of Makkah. After his long years of meditation the Angel Gabriel (As.) appeared
to him with wahi (divine Message) at the night of Shab-e-Qadr, in 610 CE, when
he reached the age of 40 and thus he was conferred Prophethood. Gabriel (As.)
said- $2 SN <5 6%L1581 Meaning: "Recite you in the name of your lord who
created." (Sura: Alaq, Ayat: 01). In reply, the great prophet Muhammad (Sm.)
said, "I do not know how to recite." Gabriel (As.) took him in tight embrace and
said, "Recite you!" He replied, "I do not know how to recite." Thus, angel Gabri-
el (As.) had embraced him thrice. Then in the third time he was able to recite. On
returning home Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) related everything to

198 Islam and Moral Education
Hazrat Khadiza (Ra.) and expressed a suspicion of his life (Survival). Hazrat
Khadiza (Ra.) consoled him saying. "No, never. By Allah! He will never
humiliate you. Because, you do maintain the ties of kinship, provide food and
shelter to the distressed and the weak, enable the destitute and the needy for self.
employment. You offer hospitality to guests and help people in times of natural
calamities."
All these indicate how much heartily and intensely Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.)
practised the noble qualities and would devote himself to the service of
humanity. We should practise these ideal instances of the holy Prophet (Sm.) in
practical life.
PROPAGATION OF ISLAM
The holy Prophet (Sm) began preaching Islam to the people of Makkah after
receiving Prophethood. He announced that there is none worthy of worship
besides Allah. And Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) is Allah's Rasul. He further
announced that Islam is the only religion chosen by Allah; Al-Quran is the
sacred scripture of this religion. Allah is the Creator, Nourisher, Controller and
He is the owner of everything. He is the Giver and Taker of life of all creatures.
During the initial three years he secretly invited his relatives to Islam. Next he
took to open invitation to Islam by Allah's command. At this the idolaters began
to oppose him.
They continued to ridicule him as a renegade insane. They assaulted him
physically, harassed him mentally, wounded him with stones, heaped garbage
upon him, humiliated and disgraced him. Among other things they tempted him
with power, leadership, riches, woman of ravishing beauty etc. He said, "I shall
not desist from preaching this truth (Islam) even if you bring me the moon in one
hand and the sun in the other."We should likewise be self-restrained, patient, and
pains-taking in the way of truth and justice by taking lesson from the
self-sacrifice, dedication, patience and tolerance as evinced by the holy Prophet
Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) in his mission of preaching Islam.
LESSON 4

Madani Career of Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.)
The Kafirs of Makkah resolved on killing the holy Prophet (Sm.) after their
failure to dissuade him from preaching Islam. Then, by Allah's direction Hazrat
Muhammad (Sm.) migrated to Madinah in 622 A.C. In the relatively peaceful

Model Lives 199
and tranquil environment of Madinah, the holy Prophet Muhammad (Sm.)
adopted a number of important measurers. He brought to an end the age-old feud
between the two tribes called Aws and Khajraj. He cemented ties of brotherhood
and cordiality between Muhajirs (emigrants from Makkah to Madinah) and
Ansar (Helpers of Madinah who offered shelter to Muhajirs of Makkah). A new
horizon was thrown open in the social sphere. He built up a well-disciplined
social system on the foundation of the Islamic ideal. He set up the
Masjid-i- Nababi (Prophet's Mosque) as the centre of congregation.
CHARTER OF MADINAH

Madinah was the habitat of the people of different religions and tribes. Hazrat

Muhammad (Sm.) designed to formulate an Islamic state by uniting these

divergent tribes (races). With this end in view he prepared a written document in

consultation with the leaders of all tribes. This is what is known as 'The Charter
of Madinah’ in the history of Islam. There are 47 clauses in this character. Of
them the principal clauses are mentioned below:

1. Muslims, Jews, Christians, and idolatrous tribes signing the character shall
enjoy rights as citizens;

2. The holy Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) shall be the Chief of the
Republic and the Chief Justice of the highest court;

3. Muslims and non-Muslims- both shall enjoy respective religious liberty;

4. No one shall indulge in conspiracy with the Quarish of Makkah or any
other external enemies against the communities;

5. If any of the signing parties is attacked by any external enemy, it will be
resisted unitedly by all the communities;

6. In the event of any foreign aggression, all shall jointly face the enemy and
each tribe shall bear its portion of the expenses;

7. Anyone committing a crime shall personally be liable for it. A whole
community shall not be held responsible for it;

8. Madinah is declared as a 'Sacred city’. Henceforth, bloodshed, murder,
rape, illicit forms of sex and all other criminal activates are totally
prohibited here;

9. Allies of the Jewish community also shall enjoy equal liberty and security;

10. No tribe shall be entitled to wage war against any party without the prior
permission of Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.);

200 Islam and Moral Education
11. In the event of any dispute ever arising between the signing communities,
it shall be settled by Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) by Allah's ordinances;
12. A violator of the character shall be an accused of Allah.
The charter of Madinah is the first written constitution of the world. It clearly
demonstrates the excellence and superiority of Islam and the holy Prophet (Sm.).
It will be quite befitting on our part to build up a prim and prosperous republican
state free from discrimination on the grounds of creed, colour, clan, tribe and
communalism for the well-being of all citizens.
LESSON 5
Hazrat Muhammad's (Sm.) Conquest of Makkah and
Fare-Well Pilgrimage
CONQUEST OF MAKKAH
Preaching and spread of Islam were quite rapid at Madinah because of congenial
environment. The Quraish of Makkah signed the Hudaibiah Treaty with holy
Prophet Muhammad (Sm.) and the Muslims in the 6th Hijri year. (628CE). On
their violation of the treaty, Rasulullah (Sm.) advanced toward Makkah with
10,000 followers in 630 CE. Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) pitched his tent at a short
distance from Makkah. The Quraish were struck with fear at the sight of the
Muslim camp. They could not master courage to raise any resistance
whatsoever. Muslim forces conquered Makkah without any bloodshed or
opposition. After the conquest of Makkah the holy Prophet Hazrat Muhammad
(Sm.) announced general amnesty. He said,
san 225 Ut g2n8y sech cle og Hi)
Meaning: "This day has I no accusation against you; you go acquitted and free."
Forgiveness as shown to all arch enemies of Islam including Abu Sufyan now at
his disposal is without a parallel in the history of the world. Likewise we shall
also forgive our enemies if they realize their mistakes and repent. Forgiveness is
a great virtue.
FARE-WELL PILGRIMAGE AND ADDRESS
People were promptly accepting Islam in mass after the conquest of Makkah.
The message of Islam made headway outside Arabia to the international arena.

Model Lives 201
Hazrat Mumammad (Sm.) somehow realized that he was not destined to live
much longer. Accordingly, he intended to perform Hajj in the tenth Hijri year in
632 CE. With this purpose he proceeded to Makkah for Hajj in the company of
more than 1 million Sahabis in February of 632 CE. (Zil Qada). This is what is
known as the farewell pilgrimage. During this Hajj all the consorts of the holy
Prophet (Sm.) too accompanied him. All put on Thram (Hajj clothes) at Zul
Huzaifa and thence proceeded towards Makkah. On the 9th Zil Hajj, Rasulullah
(Sm.) delivered an epoch making address at the mammoth congregation at
Arafat ground. This address contained adequate guidance on all issues
pertaining to humankind. At the outset he ascended the hill nearby called the Hill
of Mercy (Jabalur Rahmat), spoke due praises for Allah the Most High-

Then he said-

1. People! Listen to my words with close attention. For, I do not know if I
shall be here among you the next year.

2. Your life and property are sacred to one another just as this day, place and
month are sacred.

3. | Remember, all must one day appear before Allah. On that day each one
shall have to furnish account of his or her deeds.

4.  Obelievers! Behave gently with your wives. They have got similar rights
over you as you have over them.

5. | Always guard the Amanat of others, abstain from sinful acts and you shall
not exact Riba (usury).

6. Do not associate any partners with Allah and do not unjustly kill one
another.

7. | Remember, all Muslims are equal irrespective of land, colour, tribe and
community. Right from this day tribal superiority is obliterated. The only
yardstick of superiority is Taqwa (Fear of Allah) and good deeds. The most
excellent person is he who acquires it by means of noble deeds.

8. Do not commit excesses in matters of religion; many preceding nations
became extinct for that. If a slave becomes a leader for merit and
competence, do not be disobedient to him; rather, you pay allegiance to
him.

9. Behave decently with both the male and female slaves. Feed and dress
them as you feed and dress yourselves. If any of them commits any

Forma-26 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

202 Islam and Moral Education
unpardoable crime, set him or her free, but you shall not maltreat them.
For, they too are human beings identical with you, very much Allah's
creation. All Muslims are brothers into one another and you are tied unto a
common brotherhood.

10. All superstitions and retaliations of the Jahiliya era are now declared void.
I leave behind Allah's words and His Rasul's (Sm.) ideal for your guidance.
So long as you adhere to these, you shall not go astray.

11. I have been the last of the Prophets and there is no Prophet or Rasul
subsequent to me.

12. You that are present here today, you shall convey my message to those who
are absent here.

Thereafter the holy Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) turned his face towards

the heavens above and spoke in a loud voice, 'O Allah! Have I been able to

convey your words to mankind properly?’ Instantly a sound arose from the huge

congregation of men thus, 'Most certainly, you have accomplished it quite

deservedly’. Then Rasulullah (Sm.) said, "O Allah! You stand as the witness to

all this.”

Right after this was revealed-

Meaning: "This day have I perfected for you your religion and completed my

favours upon you, and chosen for you Islam as the complete code of life." (Sura:

Al-Mayida, Ayat: 3)

The holy Prophet observed silence for a while. The grand assembly too

remained silent. Then with a glance of merry and affection to all he uttered,

"Al-wida" (goodbye). Some inexplicable note of bereavement swept over

everybody's heart."

The holy Prophet (Sm.) had practiced in his own life all that he uttered in this

address by way of direction and guidance (for mankind). Similarly we shall also

abide by in our own lives whatever we shall preach and utter. Thus our land and

nation will be still more decent, resourceful and advanced.

Task: The students will write ten sentences in the classroom ‘on the charter
of Madinah plays an important role in materializing communal harmony’.

Model Lives 203
LESSON 6

Ideal Lives of Khulafa-i-Rashidun
Khulafa-i-Rashidun imply the first four khalifahs of Islam. They are Hazrat Abu
Bakr (Ra.), Hazrat Umar (Ra.), Hazrat Uthman (Ra.). And Hazrat Ali (Ra.). All
of them received the teachings and lessons of Islam directly from the holy
Prophet Muhammad (Sm.). They followed and imitated them properly in their
own practical life. Therefore, their life and works are models for us.
HAZRAT ABU BAKR (Ra)
Hazrat Abu Bakr (Ra.), the first khalifa of Islam was born in 573 A.D. in the
Tayim class of the famous Quraish tribe of Makkah. His real name is Abdullah
while his laqab (title) are 'Siddiq' and 'Atiq'. Right from his early years he had
cultivated intimate friendship with the holy Prophet (Sm.). Among the adult
Muslims, he was the first to have embraced Islam. He used to keep constant
company with the holy Prophet (Sm.) in weal and woe, dangers and depression.
He spent all his resources in the battle of Tabuk. Such an example of spending
all means for the erection of truth and justice is very rare.
Hazrat Abu Bakr (Ra.) had deep faith and confidence in the holy Prophet Hazrat
Muhammad (Sm.). No sooner had he heard about the events of Miraj (ascension
of Prophet (Sm.) to Allah's court above) from the Prophet's holy mouth, he
believed in them unquestioningly. So he was styled the most faithful.
Such complicated issues as the election of Khalifah after the Prophet's (Sm.)
demise, his funeral and burial, his successor etc. were rightly settled by means
of the Prophet's precepts as reported by him. As a result the Muslim community
escaped an inevitable crisis and disorder. On his election as Khalifah he
addressed the crowd thus- "You shall obey and follow me as long as I obey Allah
and His Rasul (Sm.). And ifl tread the wrong path you shall rectify me. Those
poor among you are really strong to me as long as their rights are not restored.
And those who are strong, they are weak before me till the share of the rightful
claimants is not realized from them."
The reign of Hazrat Abu Bakr (Ra.) is an ideal example for all rulers of all ages.
Some problems cropped up in the Islamic State following the holy Prophet's
demise. Some arose as fake Prophets, some refused to pay Zakat, still others
renounced Islam. Hazrat Abu Bakr (Ra.) confronted them very firmly and saved

204 Islam and Moral Education
Islam and the Muslims from an expanding crisis. We likewise should conduct
the state-affairs with firmness and sagacity to save the land and nation from
disorder and chaos.
PRESERVATION OF AL-QURAN
Many memorizers (Haffiz) of Al-Quran embraced martyrdom in the battle of
Yamama. As there arose an apprehension of the extinction of Al-Quran, he
gathered scattered portions and had them bound up in book form. For this
epoch-making successful measure he has been styled as the ‘Saviour of Islam’.
Even after his election to the post of Khalifah, Hazrat Abu Bakr (Ra.) used to
carry on his private trade. He used to earn his own bread. Subsequently he used
to accept meagre allowance form the Bayt-Al-Maal (state treasury) only on
persistant request and pressure of the community. In spite of being the Khalifah
of the Muslim state, he showed such caution in spending the state resources as
deserve be to models for imitation by all kings, monarchs and heads of states.
Task: Students will present in the classroom a brief introduction of Khalifah
Hazrat Abu Bakr (Ra.).
LESSON 7
Hazrat Umar (Ra.)
Hazrat Umar (Ra.), the second Khalifah of the Muslim world, was born in the
Addi ya clan of the Quraish tribe in the city of Makkah in 583 C.E. The name of
his father is Khattab and that of his mother is Hantama. He was educated,
polished and of honest disposition. In his youth he was a wrestler, brave warrior,
poet and orator.
CONVERSION TO ISLAM
In the early phase Hazrat Umar (Ra.) was an arch enemy of Islam. One day he
was on his way with an open sword in hand to kill the holy Prophet Hazrat
Muhammad (Sm.). On the way he came to know that his sister Fatima and her
husband Sayid had become Muslim. He reached their home in order to kill them.
He assaulted them severely. He forced them to renounce Islam. But they would
better die than give up Islam. Such rigidity on their part moved him differently.
He became restless to embrace Islam. He reached to the presence of holy Proph-
et (Sm.), put his sword by his feet and said,"Isthe invitation you are offering
true?" The holy Prophet (Sm.) said, "Yes." Then and then Hazrat Umar (Ra.)

Model Lives 205
embraced Islam and said, "No secrecy anymore; from now onwards let us
offer Salat openly." The holy Prophet (Sm.), became highly pleased and gave
him the title 'Farug’ meaning one who differentiates between Truth and
falsehood. He accepted Islam in the 6th Hijri year at the age of 33.

Hazrat Umar Faruq (Ra.) was a dedicated servant of Islam. He ungrudgingly
spent his riches for the preaching and spread of Islam. He offered in the way of
Allah half of his total wealth for the Tabuk expedition. We too shall be bold like
Hazrat Umar Farugq (Ra.), tread the right path and speak the truth.

UPRIGHT JUDGE

Hazrat Umar Faruq (Ra.) was the personification of fairness and justice. On
legal issues he would never discriminate between rich and poor, high and low,
friend and foe. He punished his own son Abu Shahma very severely for the
offence of taking wine. Hazrat Umar Faruq (Ra.) was democratic-minded. He
used to consult the companions of Rasulullah (Sm.) important on political issues
and attached importance to their opinions.

CHARACTER

After his assumption of the charge of Khilafat in 634 C.E. Hazrat Umar's human
qualities became more glowing. He would remain very alert in respect of what
is true and what is false. He set up the department of police and espionage for
gathering information about the condition of all subjects. For better discipline he
made provision for compulsory leave of soldiers after every four months. He
arranged for digging canals for agricultural development. He used to roam about
in alleys and lanes in the cover of darkness to see for himself the conditions of
the people. On hearing the cry of hungry children he personally carried flour to
the poor woman's door-steps. He took along his wife to a nomad's tent to help his
wife in her childbirth. No such benevolent ruler can be found in all the history of
kings and monarchs.

Benevolent Hazrat Umar (Ra.) was the great model of equality and humanity. He
introduced the provision of receiving public complaints against government
officials on Friday at Jumua prayer time. Taking advantage of this a man lodged
a complaint against him (Khalifah) saying that while none else could have one
shirt made out of the cloth distributed from the Baytul Maal, how come that the
Khalifah himself has put on a shirt made of it. Abdullah (Ra.) the Khalifah's son
thus replied on behalf of his father, "I offered my share of the cloth to my father
and so my father has a full shirt made for him."

206 Islam and Moral Education
In our country too the government employees would be as well upright if
provision can be introduced for ensuring accountability.
Task: Students will write in the classroom ten sentences on the uprightness
of Hazrat Umar (Ra.)
LESSON 8
Hazrat Uthman (Ra.)
The third Khalifah of the Muslim world was Hazrat Uthman (Ra.) He was born
in 576 C.E. in the Umayyah clan of the Quraish tribe of Makkah. From his
childhood he had been extremely polite, gentle and bashful. In arts and letters
also he was unique. The holy Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) got two of his
daughters, Ruqayyah and Umme Kulsum (after the death of one daughter)
married to him. For this he is also called Zun Nurayin (Owner of two Nurs).
Hazrat Uthman embraced Islam at the age of 34. His uncle Hakam subjected him
to various tortures due to this. He bore all the persecutions. When the tortures by
his kins had become intolerable he migrated to Abysinia with his wife
Rugaiyyah, daughter of holy Prophet (Sm.).
SERVICE TO ISLAM
Hazrat Uthman (Ra.) was a leading rich man in Arabia. He acquired these riches
by trade. On account of this he was also called Ghani (rich). After accepting
Islam, he would spend his wealth ungrudgingly in the service of Islam. He had
bought a well for 18,000 (eighteen thousand) dinars (gold coin) and as charity
endowed it (Waqf) for removing the sufferings of the inhabitants of Madinah. He
distributed food as relief among the inmates of Madinah when famine had
broken out there. To extend the Masjid-i-Nababi as there was scarcity of
accomodation, he purchased the land adjacent to the mosque and managed its
extension. He took upon himself the burden of expenditure of (10,000) ten
thousand soldiers, just one third of the total of (30,000) thirty thousand deployed
for the Battle of Tabuk. Moreover he alone had donated 1000 camels in order to
strengthen the forces of this battle undertaken against the Roman rival forces.
Besides these, he had also contributed seven horses and 1000 dinars to the
personal fund of the holy Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.).

Model Lives 207
Hazrat Uthman (Ra.) had profusely donated his wealth to the path of Allah
(Islam) as lavishly Allah the Most Gracious had bestowed upon him. In this
respect he is a model for all rich people of all ages.
COMPILATION OF AL-QURAN
Arabs of different regions used to recite Al-Quran in their respective dialects.
During Hazrat Uthman's (Ra.) khilafat, the Muslim empire saw further
expansion. Due to this there arose among the Muslims much confusion on the
issue of recitation of Al-Quran. Consequently there arose the apprehension of
dignity among the Muslims. Hazrat Uthman adopted a quick measure realizing
the gravity of this situation. He sent for the written copy of Al-Quran that lay in
the custody of Hazrat Hafsa (Ra.), Ummul Muminin. He had a committee
formed with Hazrat Zayid Ibn Thabit (Ra.) as its chief. The other members of the
Committee were _ Hazrat Abdullah Ibn Zubayr (Ra.), Hazrat Sayid Ibn Al-Aas
(Ra.) and Hazrat Abdur Rahman Ibn Harith Ibn Hisham (Ra.). In the 30th Hijri
year corresponding to 651 C.E. further seven copies were reproduced in the light
of the copy at Hazrat Hafsa's (Ra.) custody and thereafter had them sent to
various administrative headquarters of the empire for popular use. This standard
copy of Al-Quran is called the 'Mashaf-i-Uthman’. As a result Quranic recitation
in a single and uniform style was introduced globally. For this unique act Hazrat
Uthman had been further styled as 'Jamiul Quran' (Gatherer, collector, compiler
of Al-Quran). The correct copies of Al-Quran are reproductions of the Masha-
fi-Uthmani.
for compilation of Al-Quran.
LESSON 9
Hazrat Ali (Ra.)
Hazrat Ali (Ra.) was the fourth Khalifah oflslam. He was born in 600 C.E. in
Banu Hashim clan of the Quraish tribe of Makkah. He was the son of Abu Talib,
paternal uncle of the holy Prophet (Sm.). His pet name was Abu Turab and Abul
Hasan. Right from his boyhood he kept constant company of Hazrat Muhammad
(Sm.). He cherished profound confidence and faith for the holy Prophet (Sm.).
So he accepted Islam when he was only 10. Among the boys he counts the first
as Sahabi.

208 Islam and Moral Education
While leaving Makkah for Hijrat to Madinah the holy Prophet Muhammad
(Sm.) left behind Hazrat Ali (Ra.) in his bed to return the Amanat articles (to
their respective owners). In spite of acute risk of life, he discharged this
responsibility properly. He considered the value of his life as trifling contrast to
that obligation. It was discharging responsibility that was his prime concern.
There are few boys ready to bet their lives for the cause of truth as Hazrat Ali
(Ra.). We too shall be devoted to truth and establish it.

HEROISM

Hazrat Ali (Ra.) possessed uncommon valour, heroism and strength. His very
name would strike terror in the hearts of the Kafirs.Rasulullah (Sm.) presented
him the sword called 'Zulfigar' for his unique heroism in the battle of Badr.
Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) awarded him the title 'Asadullah' (Allah's Lion) for his
conquest of Qamus Fort of Khaybar. He had drafted the Treaty of Hudaibiyah
with his own hands. The standard of the Muslim forces was at his hand at the
time of the conquest of Makkah.

PURSUIT OF KNOWLEDGE

Hazrat Ali (Ra.) possessed extra-ordinary talent. Right from his early life he was
devoted to acquisition of knowledge. He would constantly cultivate learning. He
was one of the leading figures of his age proficient in Hadith, Tafsir, Arabic liter-
ature and Grammar. It has been so said, "Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) is the city of
knowledge and Ali is the gate to it.' His own book of poetry 'Diwan-i-Ali' is of
inestimable value in Arabic literature. We too shall pursue knowledge always.
SIMPLE LIFE STYLE

Hazrat Ali (Ra.) did not have much life left for acquiring wealth for his
preoccupation with knowledge. He lived a simple & unostentatious life. He
earned by his own hands. He led his life by hard labour. Even he had to starve
sometimes. Still he did not show discontentment. There was none to help in
household affairs. His wife Hazrat Fatima (Ra.), beloved daughter of Rasulullah
(Sm.) used to grind (wheat/barley) and bake bread with her own hands. He
engaged none for domestic service even after becoming the Khalifah of the
Muslim world.

Model Lives 209
SERVICE TO ISLAM
He could not make much financial contribution to Islam because of insolvency.
But he served Islam through valour, prowess, heroism and writings. HazratAli
(Ra.) is our model for bravery, heroism, devotion to knowledge, self-abstinence
and simple life-style. We will be habituated to simple life-style by following his
example.
Task: Students will write a paragraph on Hazrat Ali’s (Ra.) devotion
to knowledge.
LESSON 10
Muslim Scholars
Wahi (Revelation) to the holy Prophet Muhammad (Sm.) began with the word
( {331 ) meaning "You do read’. Therefore, much dignity has been attached to
training, learning and scholars. Al-Quran has also been styled 'Al-Hakim'
meaning 'depository of science’. The holy Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) has
said, 'Acquisition of knowledge is incumbent on all Muslims.' (Ibn Majah)
Hazrat Muhammad (Sm.) the holy prophet set up an educational institution
called 'Darul Arqam' at Makkah for the dissemination of knowledge. After his
migration (Hizrat) to Madinah he set up an academy called 'Al-Suffah' in the
corridor of Masjid-i-Nababi with 70 seekers of knowledge. Masjid-i-Nababi
turned into a centre of learning subsequent to the conquest of Makkah. Learners
from far off places and countries such as Persia, Rome, Kufa, Basra, Baghdad,
Syria, Egypt would throng at Madinah for knowledge.
The holy Prophet (Sm.) used to send his Sahabis to different countries for both
seeking and imparting knowledge. After the Prophet's death Muslims had further
accelerated the cultivation of science and knowledge in various lands. They set
up many academies and libraries. Books from all over the world were collected
and translated into Arabic at Bayt-al-Hikmah founded by the Abbasid Khalifah
Al-Mamun. The Muslim savants were able to make substantial contribution in
History, Medicine, Astronomy, Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics with the
all-out patronage of the rulers. As a result, Muslims ascended the peak of science
and knowledge. The Muslim contribution to learning is recorded in golden
letters in the history of mankind. Muslims were able to make unforgettable
contribution to Hadith, Tafsir, Fiqh, History, Philosophy, etc. as well. The
Forma-27 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

210 Islam and Moral Education
contributions of Imam Bukhari (R.) to Hadith literature, Imam Abu Hanifa (R.)
to Fiqh, ImamA1-Ghazzali to Philosophy and Imam Ibn Jarir At-Tabari to Tafsir
are most mentionable.

IMAM BUKHARI (R.)

Imam Bukhari's (R.) original name is Abdullah; surname is Abu Abdullah, while
those of his father and paternal grandfather are Ismail and Ibrahim respectively.
His title is Ameerul Muminin fil Hadith (leader of the Mumins in compiling
Hadith). He was born on the 13th Shawwal, 194 Hijri, corresponding to the 21st
July, 810 C.E. in the city of Bukhara-then a cradle of Islamic civilization and
culture in central Asia. His father passed away in his boyhood. He was brought
up with his mother's care and affection.

PURSUIT OF KNOWLEDGE

Right from his boyhood he possessed acute desire for knowledge. He also
possessed a keen intellect. As a result, he memorized the entire Al-Quran at the
age of 6 (six). He began memorizing Hadith from the 10th year onwards. At the
age of 16, he memorized the two books on Hadith authored by Abdullah Ibn
Mubarak and Allama Waqi. Then he went to the holy city of Makkah along with
his mother and brother for performing Hajj. He learnt Hadith from the
Muhaddithin of the city. After learning Hadith for six consecutive years there he
travelled to places like Kufa, Baghdad, Basra, Egypt, Syria, Askalan, Hims,
Damascus, etc. for collecting Hadith. He committed to memory more than six
lakh Hadith along with their sanads. Due to acute sense of freedom and
self-esteem he would not visit Royal Courts.

COMPLITION OF BUKHARI SHARIF

Imam Bukhari (R.) had accommodated only 7275 Hadith in the Bukhari Sharif
from his collection of 6 lakh Hadith over long sixteen years. He used to offer 2
takats of natl Salat after proper ablution (wuzu) and bath (ghusl). Then he would
engage himself in Istikhara (invocation to Allah for good information in dream).
He noted down Hadith only when he was assured of its authenticity. Hadith
experts and esteemed Ulama (Islamic Scholars) certified Bukhari Sharif as the
most authentic book in the whole world next to Al-Quran. Besides this, he also
wrote many other books on various other subjects. Imam Bukhari (R.) is a
glaring example to the fact that it is possible to become worthy of
commemoration and admiration by devotion to knowledge through
self-sacrifice and pains- taking efforts.

Model Lives 211
HIJRAT FROM BUKHARA
After his return from prolonged stay abroad, there arose a dispute between him
and Khalid Ibn Ahmad, Badshah of Bukhara. On hearing of Imam Bukhari's
profound knowledge of Hadith the Badshah summoned him to his court. Imam
Bukhari (R.) reacted saying, 'I do not intend to bring disgrace to Hadith by
carrying it to the Royal Court. If he needs, let him come to either my place or the
mosque’. As the Badshah insisted, he left Bukhara for Samarqand.
MEMORY
Imam Bukhari (R.) was endowed with keen memory. He used to retain in his
memory whatever he saw or heard once. When he was only 11, he had corrected
an error in the narration of Hadith by a certain Muhaddis named 'Dakhili'. All
present there were struck with awe by the sharpness of Imam Bukhari's memory.
As many as four hundred Muhaddisin of Samarqand tested his memorization of
Hadith. As he successfully passed those tests all concerned had certified him as
the best Hadith expert of his time. It has been said that as many as 90,000 (ninety
thousand) pupils learnt Hadith under his feet. To those who aspire to achieve
excellence in acquisition and dissemination of knowledge Imam Bukhari (R.) is
a model worth emulation.
Task: Students will prepare an account on Imam Bukhari’s (R.) efforts
in compiling the Bukhari Sharif.
LESSON 11
IMAM ABU HANIFA (R.)
Imam abu Hanifa (R.) the father of Fiqh (Islamic Jurisprudence) was born in 80
Hijri year corresponding to 699 C.E. at Kufa. His name was Numan and pet
name Abu Hanifa. His title is Imam Azam (Greatest Imam). Thabit was his
father's name. He was a Tabiyi (2nd generation Muslim).
PURSUIT OF KNOWLEDGE
Imam Abu Hanifa (R.) was blessed with a very keen intellect. In early life he
desired to concentrate to trade. But upon the advice of the contemporary Ulama
of Kufa he resolved in favour of academic exercise. In spite of a delayed career
at 17, he acquired profound knowledge in Hadith, Tafsir, Fiqh etc. with

212 Islam and Moral Education
astonishing rapidity. He studied Fiqh under his tutor Hazrat Hammad (R.) for ten
consecutive years. This proves that learning knows no age. Knowledge can be
acquired at any stage of life provided the attempt is sincere and steady.
CONTRIBUTION TO FIQH

Imam Abu Hanifa (R.) was the designer of the science of Figh. He formed a
'Figh Editorial Board' consisting of forty of his disciples. This board gave Fiqh
the shape of a perfect discipline after a devoted mission for long 22 years. Later
he formed a special board with 10 members chosen from the former board. The
contribution of this board to propagation and expansion of Fiqh is of the highest
measure. As and when any problem (Masahla) was brought to its notice it would
immediately plunge into its research in the light of Al-Quranand Hadith and
offer a solution (Fatwa). Thus 83 thousand Masahla and solutions were recorded
in Kitub-i-Hanafiyyat (Hanafi Treatises). Imam Abu Hanifa (R.) is the founder
of the Hanafi school (Mazhab ). That a complex matter can be rendered easy
through mutual consultation, Imam Abu Hanifa's board is a proof thereto.
CONTRIBUTION TO HADITH

Because of his greatest contribution to Fiqh, Imam Abu Hanifa's (R.)
contribution to Hadith may relatively seem little. His contribution to Hadith is
his compilation known as Musnad-i-Imam Abu Hanifa which contains 500
Hadith.

QUALITIES

Imam Abu Hanifa (R.) possessed profound knowledge. He was the best Alim,
Abid and intellectual of his time. His disciple Y azid Ibn Harun said, "I have
come across thousands of Ulama and heard their lectures. I reckon only five who
were peerless among their contemporaries as Alim, Muttaqi and Faqih. Of five,
one was Abu Hanifa (R.)." Imam Shafi (R.) said, "In the discipline of Fiqh men
look up to (depend on) Imam Abu Hanifa (R)."

Hazrat Makki Ibn Ibrahim, favourite teacher of Imam Bukhari (R.) says, "Imam
Abu Hanifa was true to his words and deeds." He was too much devoted to
worship as is beyond one's imagination. He observed fast for 30 years at a
stretch. For long 40 years he did not enjoy night-sleep. In every Ramadan he
would finish Tilawat-i-Quran 61 times. He performed Hajj 55 times in all. He
was so pious that on coming to know of stealing of a goat at Kufa that he

Model Lives 213
refrained from purchasing mutton from Bazar for 7 years, with the apprehension
that it could be the meat of the stolen goat. He imparted knowledge gratis and
maintained his family from cloth-trade. One day he went to take part in the
funeral prayer of someone. It was scorching sun overhead in the field. All said,
"You may please stand under the shade of that tree." He asked whose tree it was.
He was said that it belonged to the father of one of his pupils. He reacted saying
that he would not go under the shade of that tree because his disciple might think
that he was thereby taking benefit in exchange of his service. This was a great
instance of an ideal preceptor.
UNWILLINGNESS TO PERFORM AS JUDGE
Imam Abu Hanifa (R.) refused to accept the office of the Chief Justice of
Baghdad offered to him by Khalifah Al-Mansur. As a result, he was put into
prison. It was said that this great intellectual died by poisoning at the Khalifa's
order in 150 Hijri corresponding to 767 C.E. Imam Abu Hanifa held high the
honour of moral and religious knowledge by rejecting the favours promised by
the Government. We also shall be careful in protecting the moral standard in
cultivation of knowledge.
Abu Hanifa (R_)
LESSON 12
Imam Ghazzali (R.)
Imam Abu Hamid Muhammad A1-Ghazzali was one of the greatest philosophers
and Islamic thinkers of the Muslim world. He was born in the city of Tus in 450
Hijri corresponding to 1058 A.C. His original name is Muhammad and surname
is Abu Hamid. Muhammad At-Tusi was his father's name. He laid emphasis on
Tasawwuf (Islamic Mysticism or Sufism) alongside religious and moral
instructions. He depicted the extent of the importance of moral education for
both spiritual and inner development of man. He has firmly established Islamic
philosophy and Sufiism. He wrote many basic books on various subjects.
Among them 'Thyau Ulum Ad-Deen' is his most important work. It means Reviv-
ification of Religious Sciences. He has established the supremacy of Islam by
means of standard and rational documents. He has been styled Hujjatul Islam
(Proof of Islam) in recognition of his unique contribution to Islamic Philosophy

214 Islam and Moral Education
and learning. He died in 1111 A.C. Those who aspire to spiritual and inner
progress, for them Imam Ghazzali is an icon.
IBN JARIR AT-TABARI (R.)
His name is Muhammad, and surname is Abu Jafar, and his father's name is Jarir.
He was born at a place called Amul in Tabaristan. He memorized the holy Quran
at the age of 7. He was a famous Mufassir, Arab historian and Imam. He
produced an authentic Tafsir (commentary) of Al-Quran. He wrote a book on
history also. The name on his book on Tafsir is ‘Jamiul Bayan An Tabili Anil
Quran’ and the name of his book on history is 'At-Tarikh Ar Rusul wal-muluk’.
These two books by him on Tafsir and History are famous and authentic. In his
book on Tafsir he has displayed profound scholarship and keen power of
analysis in producing his commentary. He collected many Hadith relating to
Tafsir and wrote Tafsir in the light of Hadith. Due to this reason his book on
Tafsir is extremely reliable and acceptable. The Tafsir book has been highly
acclaimed by the western scholars for historical and critical research. Thus he
has narrated many issues relating to religious principles and laws. He passed
away at Baghdad in 923 A.C.
Task: Students will write 10 sentences on the qualities of Imam Ghazzali
(R,) and Ibn Jarir At-Tabari.
LESSON 13
Muslim Contribution to Learning, Science and Technology
Muslims have shown equal capacity in the cultivation of science and technology
also as in general education. On the basis of such efforts and contribution they
once led the world for a pretty long time. Many branches of knowledge, science
and technology of this modem age are the outcome of knowledge, science and
technology evolved by the Muslims. Of the first galaxy of Muslim intellectuals,
some are mentioned below in a very brief scale.
MEDICINE
Muslim contribution to medical science is unforgettable. Muslim contribution to
medicine is at the background of modem medical science. Those among the
Muslims who took medicine to its highest peak of development, some are - Abu
Bakr Al-Razi, Al-Biruni, Ibn Sina, Ibn Rushd etc.

Model Lives 215
ABU BAKR MUHAMMAD IBN ZAKARIA AL-RAZI

His name is Muhammad, surname is Abu Bakr, and his father's name is Zakaria.
He is commonly known as Al-Razi. He was born in 865 AC. He was the greatest
medicine scientist and surgeon. He served as principal of the government
hospitals of Jundeshahpur and Baghdad for long. As his goodwill and fame
spread in all directions, many patients from far-off places of west Asia and
Eastern Europe used to come to him.

In the domain of surgery, Al-Razi was the greatest person of his time. His
surgical operation technique was superior to that of the Greeks. In all he wrote
about 200 books. Of them about one hundred are on medical subjects. He wrote
a book on small-pox and measles named 'Al-Judairi wal Hasbah'. Medical
experts were struck with awe in view of its originality. Another book by him
bears the title 'Al-Mansuri’. It is written in 10 volumes. These two books have
immortalized him in medical science. He introduces new theories on the
treatment of Miseales, Paediatrics, Neuro-psychiatry, etc. In his work Al-Mans-
uri, mentions such diverse topics as anatomy, physiology, brain, medicine
principles of hygiene, dermatology, cosmetic items, surgery, poison, fever, etc.
He died in 925 A.C.

AL-BIRUNI

Burhanul Hug Abu Raihan Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Al Biruni is shortly known
as Al-Biruni. He was born in 973 A.C. in a place called Al-Birun near
Khwarizm. Al-Biruni was the greatest Muslim scholar, highly learned and a
devoted researcher. He was a great philosopher possessed of extremely original
and profound thought. He was adept in Mathematics, Astrology, Physics,
Chemistry and other natural sciences. Besides, he was a famous geographer,
historian, almanac expert, physician, linguist and a dispassionate critic of
comparative theology. He won recognition as the greatest savant for freedom of
thought and intellect, courage, undaunting criticism and upright comments. He
earned fame also as 'Al-Ustad' (great teacher). He fixed the measurement of the
axis of the globe. He has authored many books. The most famous among them
is 'Al-Asarul Bagiyyah Anil Qurunil Khabyyah'. He discussed in this book many
topics such as Almanac, Mathematics, Geography, Meteriology, Medicine, etc.
Al Biruni died in the year 1048 Ac.

216 Islam and Moral Education
IBN SINA
His full name is Abu Ali Al- Hussain Ibn Abdullah Ibn Sina. He was born in 980
A.C. in the village called Afshana near Bukhara. He memorized the holy Quran
at the age of 10. He was a philosopher, physician, mathematician, astronomer as
well as a famous scientist of the Muslim world conversant with all other branch-
es of knowledge. He is regarded as the pioneer of modem surgery, medicine
and techniques of treatment. There are many books written by him. However, his
‘Qanun Fit Tib' is an immortal work in the field of medicine. Dr. Oslar has men-
tioned this book as the Bible of Medicine. No other book comparable to
it has so far been produced. Even in this modem age his book in various transla-
tions is being taught as a prescribed textbook of medicine. It may be termed as
an encyclopedia because of a wonderful concentration of various categories of
information on medical science. He passed away in 1037 A.C.
IBN RUSHD
His full name is Abu Wahid Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Ibn Rushd. He was born at
Cordova in Spain. He belongs to that genre of Muslims of medieval times who
had earned fame in knowledge and science. The highly gifted person Ibn Rushd
was an expert not in a single subject, rather he surveyed all disciplines of
knowledge. He acquired equal command over such diverse fields as philosophy,
physics, chemistry, astronomy, medicine, etc. As he had translated Aristotole's
works in Arabic, so also he himself wrote many books. One of these is 'Al-Jami'.
He presented in this book various aspects of astronomy, philosophy and
medicine. His books have been translated in Latin and Hebrew. His book on
medical Science goes by the name 'Kulliat'. It has been translated in different
languages and widely acclaimed in Medical Science.
Modem medical science is indebted to Muslim medical science. Medical science
today could not come this far without the Muslim contributions. We shall also
deeply study the medical science to render it more intelligible.

LESSON 14

Chemistry
Muslim contribution to Chemistry also is as immense as in other branches of
science. Muslim scientists such as Jabir Ibn Rayyan, Al-Kindi, Zunnun Misri,
Ibn Abdul Malik Al-Qashi made special contribution to Al-Cherny (Chemistry).

Model Lives 217
Chemistry has reached the climax of development due to their untiring efforts
and genuine achievements.

JABIR IBN HAYYAN

Abu Abdullah Jabir Ibn Rayyan was born in the Ibn Azd Tribe of Southern
Arabia in 722 A.C. His father Rayyan too was a physician. He received
introduction in medical science on completion of his study of mathematics.
While practising medicine in Kufa he acquired higher knowledge in Chemistry
too. He had set up a science laboratory at Kufa and carried on research there till
his death in 804 A.C.

He was the first to have established chemistry as a self-sufficient discipline in
science. Some important chemistry and science such as filtration, liquefaction,
calcination, evaporation, melting are inventions of his. He discussed in detail in
his book purging of metals, dilution, evaporation, rules and process of making
steel, varnish resistant to rust, hair dye, glass, etc. As he perfected chemistry,
Jabir Ibn Rayyan has been regarded as the ‘father of Chemistry’. He died in 815
AC.

AL-KINDI

Abu Yaqub Ibn Ishaq Al-Kindi was born at Kufa in 801 A.C. His father was
Governor of Kufa during Al-Mamun's Khilafat. He translated Aristotle's
theology into Arabic. His fame spread in all directions during Al-Mamun's Khi-
lafat as an astronomer, chemist, physician and philosopher. Al-Kindi was an
adherent of Neo-Platonism. He was the first to attempt a synthesis of the ideas
of Plato and Aristotle. He enriched the treasure of science and knowledge by
writing not less than 365 books. He is of the opinion that science is not
maintainable without mathematics. Besides Philosophy, he wrote books on such
diverse fields as medicine, astronomy, chemistry, mathematics, music, etc.
Besides his mother tongue Arabic, he was well-versed in Pahlawi, Sanskrit,
Greek and Syriac languages. He died in 874 A.C.

ZUNNUN MISRI

His name is Sawban while his father's name is Ibrahim. He is popularly known
as Zunnun Misri. He was born in 796 A.C. in a place called Akhmim in Egypt.
Although he is more famous as a Sufi (mystic), he is one of the pioneering
Muslim scientists who are noted to have conducted research in Chemistry at its
Forma-28 : (Is. & Mo. Education, 9-10, xv)

218 Islam and Moral Education
dawn. He researched and wrote on different elements of chemistry. His writings
contain descriptions of such metals as gold, silver, etc. He could understand the
spirit of the Egyptian heiroglaphics. He died at Al-Gijah in Egypt in 859 A.C.
IBN ABDUL MALIK AL-QASHI
His full name is Abdul Hakim Muhammad Ibn Abdul Malik Al-Khwarizmi
Al-Qashi. He was born at Baghdad sometime in the 11th century and used to live
there. His book bearing the title 'Ainus Sanah Wa Aiwanus Sanah' (Essence of
the Art and Aid of Worker) is a valuable addition to the discipline of Chemistry.
He summarily discussed in this book the simple and easy techniques of every
essential branch of chemistry. The uses and differences of both white and red
objects have been elaborately discussed in it.

LESSON 15

Geography
Acute necessity of maps was badly felt both from the urge of knowing the
unknown and determining the Qibla (the direction of prayer or salat).
Knowledge of geography was badly needed for the preachers of Islam and
traders and travellers to different lands. With a view to meeting this need Muslim
scholars such as Al-Mugaddasi, Al-Masudi, Yakut Ibn Abdullah and Ibn
Khaldun made tremendous contributions to geography.
AL-MUQADDASI
His real name is Muhammad while his father's is Ahmad. Because of his birth at
Baytul Muqaddas in 946 A.C., he is styled as Muqaddasi. He was a renowned
traveller and geographer. He travelled the whole Muslim empire except Spain,
India, Sijistan. He wrote a book extending over 985 pages in the light and with
the experience of his 20 years of travelling. The title of his book is 'Ahsanut
Taqasim Fi Marifatul Agalim'. This savant passed away in 1000 A. C.
AL-MASUDI
His full name is Abul Hasan Ali Ibn-Hussain Al-Masudi. He was born at
Baghdad. He was a traveller, historian and geographer- all in one. He has put
forward his travelling experiences in his historic Geographical Encyclopedia.
He drew the map of the world. He has given in it descriptions of the shape, size,

Model Lives 219
and principal divisions of the earth. He mentioned the cyclone situations of the
Indian Ocean, the Persian Gulf and the Arabian Sea. He wrote an article on
earthquake in 955 A.C. He died in Egypt in 957 A.C.
YAKUT IBN ABDULLAH
Yakut Ibn Abdullah Al-Hamabi was born in Persia. His book bearing the title
"Mujamul Buldan' is a standard work on geography. Here he has given
description about the historical, racial and natural settings of every place along
with introduction of historical personages and events. He died at Baghdad in
1228 A.C.
IBN KHALDUN
His original name is Abdur Rahman while that of his father is Muhammad. He is
familiar as Ibn Khaldun. He was born in Tunisia in 1332 A.C. His world-wide
fame is due to his book on Geography which he styled as 'Kitab Al-Ibar Wa
Diwan Al-Mubtada Wa Al-Khabar Fi Ayyam Al-Arab Wa Al-Ajam Wa Berber".
It is shortly known as Al-Mugqaddima. The theories, ideas and information which
he has furnished here have immortalized him in the domain of geographical
literature. He passed away in 1406 A.C.
LESSON 16

Mathematics
Mathematics is regarded as the base of science. The contributions of the
Muslims to the conception, growth and development of Mathematics is
unforgettable. Many Muslim savants such as Al-Khawarizmi, Ibn Haitham,
Umar Khayyam, Nasiruddin Tusi have acquired fame in this discipline.
MUHAMMAD IBN MUSA AL- KHAWARIZMI
Muhammad Ibn Musa Al-Khawarizmi was born in 780A.C. in Khawarizm. He
is the most famous scholar in mathematics. He is called the 'Father of
Mathematics’. He is also the inventor of Aljebra. The Europeans later on
introduced the term Aljebra in conformity with the title of his book on this
subject 'Hisab Al-Jabr Wa Al-Mugabalah'. He accumulated in this book more
than eight hundred examples. He evolved the six formulas of solving equations.

220 Islam and Moral Education
Its translation in Latin was read as a textbook in European universities from the
12th Century C.E. onwards. His book 'Kitab Al-Hisab Al-Adaad Al-Hindi' is on
arithmetic. Many later mathematicians such as Umar Khayyam, Leonardo,
Feronassi, Master Jacob and many others have been deeply influenced by his
innovative genius.

HASAN IBN HAITHAM

Hasan Ibn Haitham was on ophthalmologist. He was born in 965 A.C. He wrote
more than one hundred books on such diverse subjects as philosophy, astrono-
my, medicine, mathematics, etc. His seminal book on optic science _ bearing the
title 'Kitab Al-Manazir' has immortalized him. It was the only book in the middle
ages on the science of light. Scientists and researchers such as Roger Bacon,
Leonardo,, Kepler and others based their research on this book. He refuted the
wrong conception of the Greeks on the refraction and reflection of sight. He has
shown it with proof that it is from external objects that rays of light are reflected
in our eyes. The rays from the eyes do not make things visible to us. It was he
who invented the magnifying glass. Ibn Haitham had extremely discussed the
science of Light long long ago, although modem scientists lay their claim on it.
There occur variations in the weight of matters depending on the atmospheric
weight, pressure and heat. He discussed gravitation in his books. It is believed
that it is Ibn Haitham who first presented the idea of gravitation, although
Sir Issac Newton (1642-1717 A.C.) is regarded as the profounder of the Theory
of Gravitation. He passed away in 1044 A.C.

UMAR KHAYYAM

His name is Umar Bin Ibrahim Al-Khayyam and he is shortly known as Umar
Khayyam. He was born in Persia in 1048 A.C. He was a Mathematician of the
first rate. His 'Kitab Al-Jabr Wa Al-Muqabalah’ is an immortal work in the
domain of mathematics. Umar Khayyam brought about extra-ordinary
advancement in Aljebra by analyzing the formulae of cubic equation and other
equations of advanced level and by categorizing them in conformity with their
respective definitions. He displayed in this field much more skill than the
Greeks. He wrote many books on arithmetic and astronomy also. He died in
1122 AC.

Model Lives 221
NASIRUDDIN TUSI
Muhammad Nasiruddin Tusi was born in 1201 A.C. at Tus in Persia. He wrote a
total of sixteen books on geometry, trigonometry and astrology. He separated
trigonometry from astrology and discussed plain and circular Trigonometry. His
books on Mathematics include 'Mutawasitat Bayn Al-Handasa Wa Al-Hayiya'
(The Middle Books between Geometry and Astronomy), Jami Al-Hisab Bit
TakhtutWaTurab (Summary of the whole of Computation with table and Earth),
Qawaid Al-Handasah, Tahrir Al-Usul, etc. He passed away in 1274 A.C.
We shall strive to make contributions in different disciplines of knowledge and
science like the Muslim scholars of the past. We shall build up our life
accordingly and bring our country and nation on the road to progress.
Task: Students will write a paragraph on Muslim contribution to Science.
EXERCISE

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS:
1. Who is the author of the book 'Al-Qanun Fit-Tib'?

a) Al-Biruni b) Ibn Sina

c) Al-Razi d) Ibn Rushd
2. To whom did Khalifah Al-Mamun offer the post of Chief Justice?

a) Imam Al-Ghazzali (R.) b) Imam Shafi (R.)

c) Imam Bukhari (R.) d) Imam Abu Hanifah (R.)

222 Islam and Moral Education
3. Justice means-
i. To adjudicate according to law
ii. To respect the respectable men
iii. To establish truth and justice
Which one of the following is correct?
a) iandii b) ii and iii
c) i and iii d) i, ii and iii
Read the Following Paragraph and Answer the Questions from 4 to 5
Hafiz Sahib's son Zayid took his friends along and beat Khaled. As Khaled
complained to Zayid's father he meted out exemplary punishment and promised
that his son shall refrain from such acts in future.
4. The ideal of which Khalifah has been manifested in Mr. Hafiz Sahib’s
action?
a. Hazrat Abu Bakr (Ra.) b. Hazrat Umar (Ra.)
c. Hazrat Uthman (Ra.) d. Hazrat Ali (Ra.)
5. As a result of Hafiz Sahib’s judgment there will be established in the society —
i) Fraternity
ii) Peace
iii) Regulation
Which one of the following is correct?
a.i & ii b.i & iii
c. ii & iii d.i, ii & iii

Model Lives 223

Creative Questions:

1. Mr. Shihab Chowdhury physically assaulted and mentally tortured Mr.
Lugman in a bid to gain command over the society. Some days later Mr.
Luqman got a golden opportunity to retaliate but he abstained from it. Such
generosity on the part of Mr. Luqman brought significant change in Mr.
Shihab Chowdhury. He promised that he will never misbehave with any one.
He will develop fraternal bond with all by forgetting the differences of clan
and colour. He further pledged to follow Al-Quran and Sunnah in all
dealings.

a. How many clauses are there in the charter of Madinah?

b. Why have the holy Prophet (Sm.) life ideals got to be followed?

c. The ideal of which important trait of the Prophet (Sm.) has been reflected
in Mr. Luqman’s conduct? - Explain the issue.

d. Review the changes in Mr. Shihab in the light of the holy Prophet
(Sm.) sermon during the farewell pilgrimage.

2. Mr Jamil is an Industrialist of the Tongi region. He installed a water pump at
a cost of taka 10 lac for removing the acute water crisis of the inhabitants of
that locality. In addition to that he arranged for the expansion of the mosque
which could not cope with the rise of the local people. His wife Mrs. Nabila
tries to observe the fundamental regulations of Islam alongside offering the
regular Salat. In her private life she performs all domestic obligations with
her own hands.

a. Which one of the Sahabi’s spent all his resources in the battle of Tabuk?

b. "Hazrat Umar (Ra.) was the personification of fairplay and justice.’
Explain the comment.

c. Which great Muslim woman’s ideal Mrs. Nabila tries to emulate?
Explain.

d. Evaluate Mr. Jamil’s activities in the light of Hazrat Uthman’s ideals of
life.

The End

AA COMA CNPC AeA fala Fa
wx SICA ACA fla Fa
TIRUTTS Seems AST Aer PB aad PATS A
— SAAT Seal Ot AAT
dod FRA-4 (CIT AR, 28 WT HSA) CHT PAT
AN
Uy:
Treenrca®
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh

