ducation,
ce and Sports
Nine-Ten
» rill
ND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a textbook for classes nine and ten from the academic year 2013
Physical Education, Health Science
and Sports
Classes Nine-Ten
Written by
Abu Muhammad
Md. Abdul Haque
Edited by
Professor A B M Faroque
Translated by
Dr. Md. Arafe Zawad
Md. Abdul Mannan
NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka
[All rights reserved by the publisher]
First Edition : November, 2012
Revised Edition : July, 2015
Reprint : August, 2017
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh
For free distribution by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Printed by :

PREFACE
The aim of secondary education is to make the learners fit for entry into higher
education by flourishing their latent talents and prospects with a view to building the
nation with the spirit of the Language Movement and the Liberation War. To make the
learners skilled and competent citizens of the country based on the economic, social,
cultural and environmental settings is also an important issue of secondary education.
The textbooks of secondary level have been written and compiled according to the
revised curriculum 2012 in accordance with the aims and objectives of National
Education Policy-2010.Contents and presentations of the textbooks have been
selected according to the moral and humanistic values of Bengali tradition and culture
and the spirit of Liberation War 1971 ensuring equal dignity for all irrespective of
caste and creed of different religions and sex.
The present government is committed to ensure the successful implementation of
Vision 2021. Honorable Prime Minister, Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina expressed her firm determination to make the country free
from illiteracy and instructed the concerned authority to give free textbooks to every
student of the country. National Curriculum and Textbook Board started to distribute
textbooks free of cost since 2010 according to her instruction.
The subject Physical Education, Health Science and Sports is developed on the
basis of the philosophy of sound health and fresh mind. Basically it is a practical
oriented subject. So it has been tried to co-orient between both the theoretical part and
the practical part for learning practically and also for life-oriented and realistic
education. Student will achieve clear idea about their health care, knowledge of
nutrition, personal security and reproductive health. Learners will be conscious about
the dreadfulness of drug addiction. AIDS and therefore they will be free from all these.
Besides, they will be able to develop themselves to be a healthy and active citizen by
learning the rules and regulations of different kinds of physical exercises and games
I thank sincerely all for their intellectual labor who were involved in the process of
revision, writing, editing, art and design of the textbook.
Prof. Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh.

CONTENTS
Chapter One Physical Education for Healthy Life 01-12
Chapter Two Physical Fitness 13-24
Chapter Three Mental Health and Fatigue 25-33
Chapter Four Health Science and Health Service 34-47
Chapter Five Nutrition for health 48-57
Chapter Six Drug Addiction and AIDS 58-74
Chapter Seven Puberty & Reproductive Health 75-92
Chapter Eight Team game 93-140
Chapter Nine Athletics and Swimming 141-167
Chapter Ten The Accidents during Games 168-184

Chapter One
Physical Education for Healthy Life
In the past people used to think that physical education is related to only
human body. The education practised for health is called physical exercise. In
fact, when your body is not fit, you do not feel mentally well and cannot
concentrate in any work. Thus relationship between body and mind is
intertwined and they cannot be studied separately. The old saying, a "sound
mind in a healthy body" has been regarded as a universal truth in all ages. At
present acquiring of physical development, mental growth and social skills is
physical education. We can get sound life by regular practising the programmes
of physical education. A student of physical education will develop a sound
mind in a healthy body so that they become a good citizen of the society.
can hy
EAE ronictzincion | AT
S Physi i ;
ey ¢ ‘Acound mind ins | \2EAa)
cy (| ce
/ / | —_—— \

At the end of this chapter we will be able to -

@ Explain aims and objectives of physical education.

@ Explain the necessity of physical education for healthy life.

@ Discuss principles and foundation of physical education.

@ Explain concepts of physical education programmes,

e@ Discuss current status of physical education in Bangladesh.

e@ Observe different physical education programmes such as interclass,
interschools, intermadrasah sports competition, programme of national
day properly.

@ Be habituated to healthy life style by realizing the importance of physical
education.

2 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

e@ Be inspired with patriotism through observing physical education
programmes.

e Be habituated to leading a discipline life; participate in various physical
education programmes.

Lesson- 1: Physical Education
To say something about physical education or to define it first we need to know
what education is. Physical education is an integral part of the total education
process. Without physical education, education remains incomplete. A
definition of education will make it easy for us to understand what physical
education is. Different scholars have defined education in different ways,
which are related to different situations. Education is not only intellectual
development, it also includes physical, social, and emotional and all round
development of other areas. Education is not limited to a specific point of time
in an individual life but it takes place throughout the life. Education is not
confined to the boundary of a school but it may be acquired from family,
society, playground and so on.

A few relevant definitions of education-

e According to Plato- "Education helps in the body and soul of the pupil all
the beauty and all the perfection he is capable of ".

e Another scholar defines education as the creation of a sound mind in a
sound body.

e@ Itis also defined that education is the harmonious development of body,
mind and soul.

e According to Charles A Bucher, "physical education is an integral part of
the total education process and its aim is the development of physically,
mentally, emotionally and socially fit citizens, through physical activities
which have been selected with a view to realizing their outcomes".

From above definitions it is clear that education and physical education are

complementary to each other.

In the past it was traditionally thought that physical education means physical

activities. But it was a wrong conception. Physical activities do not necessarily

mean physical education rather they may be called physical exercise. Issues of

physical education not only deal with physical activities but they help in 2

attaining mental development and social virtues as well. S

Phisical Education for Healthy Life 3
D.K. Matthews says, "Physical education is the education which is acquired
through physical activities".
Hop smith and Clifton says, “Physical education refers to scientific and
systematic movement of limbs”.
According to J.B. Nash, physical education is that part of the whole field of
education that deals with big muscle activities and their related responses that
bring changes in an individual’s body and personality. From the above
definitions it is found that the essence of physical education is all-round
development of an individual’s personality. As a result of physical education
one becomes physically fit, mentally sound, emotionally balanced, socially
adjusted, morally true and spiritually up-lifted. All this outcomes are achieved
by means of recreational activities of games and sports.
display it on the wall.
Lesson-2: Aims and Objectives of physical Education
Generally we do not differentiate between an aim and an objective in most
cases. We often use them interchangeably. But these two terms are not
synonymous. There are differences between them. Aim is the final goal
whereas an objective is a short and specific step towards the goal. For example,
in case of your climbing the stairs to reach the roof, the roof is the aim and
every step of the stairs is an objective. An aim exists in human imagination
which can not be depicted in reality. But an objective is real. Man can achieve
the objective and even it is possible to measure. Physical educationists have
mentioned several interim measures to attain the aims. These measures are
known as the objectives of physical education. According to Williams, the aim
of physical education is all-round development of personality through
development of physical, social and other areas of an individual. Book Walters
states that the aim of physical education is the optimum development of the
- physically, socially and mentally integrated and adjusted individual. This aim
S can be achieved through participation in selected sports, rhythmic, and

4 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
gymnastic activities conducted according to social and hygienic standards.
Though experts have agreed upon some objectives, there are different opinions
about some other objectives as well. From the opinions of the majority of
experts about some primary objectives, we can identify common objectives of
physical education. Considering the opinions of various thinkers, the objectives
of physical education can be divided into four groups. They are-
1) Physical fitness.
2) Mental development.
3) Character development.
4) Social adjustment.
1. Physical fitness
a) To play well, maintaining the rules and regulations of games and sports
b) To achieve specific objectives through hard work
c) To improve human capacity through neuro-mascular coordination
d) To ensure balanced development of body and mind
e) To attain physical strength maintaining good health
f) To develop tolerance and self-confidence
2. Mental development
a) To develop quick thinking ability
b) To acquire knowledge about ethics & morality
c) To be motivated for service and self-sacrifice
d) To foster friendly and competitive attitudes among different teams
3. Character developments
a) To develop a sense of obedience and morality
b) To develop respect for law through games and sports
c) To develop sports-man-like and friendly attitudes
d) To show respect for opponents
e) To help control emotions and become self-disciplined
S

Phisical Education for Healthy Life 5

4. Social adjustment

a) To acquire leadership qualities

b) To know constructive ways of passing leisure time

c) To develop ability to participate in various cultural programmes

d) To maintain friendly relationship with others and to participate in welfare
activities

From the opinions of the physical educationists as mentioned above, it can be

said that the objectives of physical education are very similar to that of general

education. It also focuses on optimum development of personality of

individuals and also on helping them master the art of games and sports through

systematic guidance and participation in sports.

Activity-1: Write the aims and objectives of physical education on a poster

paper and display it on the wall.

Activity-2: In groups explain what can be acquired through the objective-social

adjustment.

Activity-3: Write down the objectives of physical fitness on the board.
Lesson-3 :Need and importance of physical education
Physical education maintains co-ordinated development of body and mind.
Any education is not complete without physical education. Physical education
plays a vital role in inculcating those qualities into people, which help
individuals to grow as healthy, emotionally-balanced and responsible citizens.
Men loves recognition by society. It is through recognition that an individual’s
personality is developed. Therefore, physical education has a significant role in
developing leadership and personality. Our body is a combination of some
organs. Again, each organ consists of different types of muscles, bone, artery,
vein etc. In order to keep the body fit a number of systems are functioning
inside the body. Physical fitness is a must to keep these systems functional. As

x a result of lack of balanced nutrition, lack of necessary physical movements,
& and required rest and sleep, the body does not develop properly and fails to

6 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
keep fit. In fact, modern education puts equal emphasis on physical and mental
development. The necessity of physical education at school is described
sequentially.
A school is a social institution, so a school is committed to the society and the
country for social conservation, social reforms, and positive social changes.
School is responsible for the proper development of human resources to
develop the children of today as the good citizens of tomorrow. In this respect
the school plays dual roles. First, the prime duty of a school is to help its young
students develop their personality, which includes physical, mental and
spiritual aspects of students. Secondly, schools help the students transform
biological entities into social ones. It includes development of character, social
values and social adjustment.

Out of these two tasks, the first one is direct responsibility whereas the other

one is the indirect responsibility of a school. Physical education is necessary

for all-round development of a student. According to Maslo, these needs of a

student are divided into three stages.

1. Biological needs

2. Psychological needs

3. Social needs.

1. Biological needs: Physical education has direct contribution to fulfilling a
student's biological needs. In this respect the role of physical education is
as follows-

a) Physical education fulfils biological needs of quick movement of body by students.

b) It makes beautiful and strong physical structure of a student.

c) It develops physical ability and capacity of students.

d) It develops immunity to diseases of students.

e) Students acquire expertise in sports through learning skills of various
games.

f) Physical education develops a sound body for a sound mind.

2. Psychological needs:

a) Physical education builds mental and intellectual foundation of children.

b) It removes monotony and boredom of everyday life of students. 6

c) It develops character of students. 8

Phisical Education for Healthy Life 7

d) It develops self-awareness, self-dependence, self-realization and self-respect
among the students.

e) It helps student adjust with environment.

f) It develops a sense of creativity among the students.

g) It keeps students away from harmful addictions.

h) It helps students choose the means of recreation and enjoy pastimes.

3. Social needs:

a) Physical education helps students to develop co-oparative attitude through
competition.

b) It helps develop mental qualities which reflect social relationships through
games & sports.

c) It develops the leadership qualities.

d) It makes students familiar with social norms and culture.

e) It prompts national and international fraternity.

f) It creates liberal attitudes and a sense of social responsibility among the
students.

Activity-1: Discuss biological needs in small groups.

Activity-2: The class will be divided into three groups and each group will

discuss and explain at least two of the psychological needs.

Activity-3: Show the social needs on the board.

Lesson-4: Programmes of physical education

Programmes of physical education in an educational institute include games

and sports, physical exercise and all other health related as well as recreational

activities. A physical education teacher helps students perform all these

activities in physical education programmes.

Physical education programmes are divided into three categories:

1) Compulsory Sports programme

2) Intramural Sports

S 3) Extramural sports

8 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
1. Compulsory Sports programme: In an educational institution sports
programme of physical education includes government instructions about
physical education, physical education class, competition, assembly and local
instructions etc. A physical education teacher has to observe all these
programmes. By government instructions we mean all the orders and circulars
issued by ministry of education relating to physical education programmes
such as compulsory daily assembly, three classes a week, participation in inter
school sports competition and games and sports on national days and so on. By
local instructions we mean the rules and regulation of an institution such as
maintaining cleanliness of campus, participating in annual sports competition,
participating in cultural programmes, participating in physical development
test and running tiffin programme etc.
2. Intramural sports: Intramural is a Latin word. Intra means inside and
mural means wall. So intramural sports mean all the games and sports taking
place within the boundary of a school. For example, annual sports
competitions, class ix vs x cricket match, or class vi A section vs vi B section
competition of any type etc. If there are different houses in the school,
competitions between them are also called intramural activities. Besides,
competitions between departments or first year vs second year are also
included under intramural sports. In short, all the sports or competitions that
take place within the institutions are called intramural sports.
3. Extramural sports: Extra means outside and mural means wall. So all the
games and sports competitions taking place outside the boundary of a school
are called extramural sports. The games and sports or any type of competition
of one school or college with another school or college are commonly called
extramural competitions. For examples, inter school, inter college, inter
university, inter club etc. By participating in an extramural competition the
strength of one’s own team can be tested. Players of different standards
participate in such types of competitions. As a result of coming in close contact
with good players, one can learn good behavior and better technique from
them. Through these competitions students can develop team spirit, mutual
understanding, competitive attitude and good relationship.

ES

8

Phisical Education for Healthy Life 9
Activity-1: Discuss in groups the programmes of physical education.
Activity-2: Write on the board what you understand by compulsory sports

programmes
Activity-3: Show the differences between intramural and extramural sports
programmes on poster paper.

Lesson-5 : Physical Education in Bangladesh

Physical education is related integrally to general education. For making

education complete, effective and meaningful, physical education works as one

of the complementaries. Before the renaissance in Europe, education was
chained with regulations. At that time, there was no such thing as physical

education in educational institutions. Physical education was considered to be a

context in military power. A major change took place during the age of

renaissance to build up a citizen for the improvement of the country. Physical
education programmes were introduced in the educational institutions to build

a nation both physically and mentally sound. After many experiments, the

modern physical education was introduced in Europe. After proving its

usefulness in educational institutions, it spread out in the whole world.

The European physical education system was introduced in the then British

India on a limited scale. After the partition of the country in 1947, physical

education programmes were introduced in the educational institutions of the

then Pakistan. At that time the appointment of teachers, arrangement of
playgrounds, sports instruments, inter-school, inter-college and inter-university

tournaments were introduced for physical education by the government. As a

continuation of this programme, physical education was introduced in

Bangladesh, which achieved its freedom by the liberation war in 1971.

In Bangladesh activities based on the management and programmes of physical

education have been continuing. The Ministry of Youth and Sports administers

the management of physical education. Under its jurisdiction, the Directorate

of Sports inspects the administrative and training programmes in the six
goverment physical training institutes of the country. After getting training from
these institutes, teachers are appointed in different educational institutions as
physical instructors. These physical instructors are conducting the physical
education programmes or arranging the sports tournaments. Besides that, the

District sports officer working under the Sports Department provides help for

10 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
conducting the sports programmes taken by the government. On the other hand,
the Directorate of Education under the Ministry of Education arranges the
National School and Madrasah Sports Tournament twice every year under the
charge of one Deputy Director and one Assistant Director. Also under their
arrangement, the refreshers' course for the school level physical instructors is
conducted.
Considering the importance of physical education, the government has made
the subject ‘Physical Education and Health’ compulsory from classes 6-8 and
“Physical Education, Health Science and Sport’s for classes 9-10. For this
purpose, necessary books have been written by National Curriculum and
Textbook Board. Teachers of primary level give the idea and knowledge of
physical education to the children by teachers guide of physical education.
The physical education programmes have been made more dynamic by the
age-based tournaments and trainings at school level. It is expected that, by
expanding and developing the physical education programmes, better results of
physical education will be achieved in national life.
Activity-1: Discuss the status of physical education in Bangladesh.
Activity-2: Write down the different programmes of physical education in
Bangladesh.
Exercise

Multiple choice questions
1. Who said 'The knowledge acquired through physical activity is called

physical education’?

a. J.B. Nash b. D.K. Matthews

c. C.A. Bucher d. Hopsmith and Clifton.
2. What is the objective of physical education?

a. Development of leadership b. Developing personality

c. Building up character d. Social development
3. Under whose guidance the students gain slowly their humanitarian

qualities? 20

a. Family b. Society R

Phisical Education for Healthy Life 11
c. Teachers d. Friends
4. The objective of gaining the qualities of character in physical education is -
i. to be respectful to the laws.
ii, to develop friendly mentality.
iii. to increase loyalty and ethics.
Which one in the following is correct?
a. i&ii b. ii & iii
c. 1& ili d. i, ii & iii
Read the stem and answer questions 5 & 6.
Mehnaz is a good student of class eight. She does not participate in any games
at school. And she does not have friends. Her mother asks her to read all day
long. Mother frequently tells her that good results cannot be done by wasting
time in playing or mixing with relatives and friends. So, by reading all day
long, one can become successful. If any guest comes to their house, she keeps
herself alone in a room. Thus, after several years, she becomes a bit worried
about her life.
5. In the case of Mehnaz, which development has been obstructed?
a. Physical b. Mental
c. Character d. Social
6. What to do to solve the mentioned condition of Mehnaz?
i. Practicing physical exercise
ii. Socialisation
iii. Training
Which one in the following is correct?
a. 1&ii b. ii & iti
c. 1& ili d. i, 1i & iii
Read the stem and answer question no 7
Daily assembly
Teachers - Teachers
Physical excersice teacher Head master
Classteacher Classteacher Classteacher Class teacher
Captain Captain Captain Captain
ES Es & R
2 R Q Q
g R a R
a Es BS R
2 2 S 2
= R R R g
8 Assistant Assistant Assistant Assistant
Captain Captain Captain Captain

12 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

7. In which programme is the picture included?

a. inner-sports b. compulsory

c. inter sports d. local sports

Creative Question

1. Rayhan's grandfather became very happy seeing the playground, physical
instructor, their physical exercises and sports programmes at Rayhan's
school. Coming back from school, Rayhan described to his grandfather
some more features of physical education, such as sports instruments,
indoor and outdoor games, inter-school sports tournaments, etc. Through a
few visits to Rayhan's school, Rayhan's grandfather observed that most of
the students of Rayhan's school are sound in health.

a. What is the first duty of an educational institution?

b. Explain - Education is a lifelong process.

c. Which programme is running at Rayhan's school to build up both body

and mind?

d. Explain - Through the above mentioned programme student's 'sound
body and sound mind’ can be built up.

2. Two periods are reserved every day at Nalanda High School for physical
exercise and sports. The school authority provides nutritious foods to the
students while they are at school. They are provided with a daily routine to
follow. Besides, the school authority organises various events including
debate competitions, cultural and national day's functions. For this, they
can easily mix with everyone at any situation.

a. What is inter-sports programme?

b. Explain - What is meant by compulsory programme?

c. What is the first work of Nalanda High School? Explain in the light of
the stem.

d. Through the development of the values of having good character and
social qualities, the school students, in fact, have become social
beings.Evaluate.

=
§

Chapter Two
Physical Fitness
The main objectives of physical education are gaining physical fitness. So it is
important for students to have a clear idea about components of physical
fitness their relation with games and sports and ways of evaluating physical
fitness. Students can develop physical fitness through physical exercise though
there are differences in types of physical exercise for boys and girls. They
should know the role of specific games and sports in developing strength,
endurance, speed, power, agility, and flexibility. Students will be able to lead
healthy and disciplined life by gaining physical fitness.
( |
| Bivis;
H q

At the end of this chapter we will be able to- a
e@ Explain importance of physical fitness.
e@ Explain ways of attaining physical fitness.
e Discuss positive aspects of physical exercise for attaining physical fitness.
e@ Describe and practise which physical exercise is suitable for boys and

which is suitable for girls to have physical fitness.
e@ Realize effects of strength, speed, endurance, power, agility, flexibility in

attaining physical fitness.
@ Practise appropriate physical exercise through appropriate games suitable

for boys and girls to develop physical fitness.
@ Do the appropriate exercise to develop strength, speed, endurance, power,

agility, flexibility for physical fitness.

« @ Be habituated in living healthy and disciplined life through physical fitness.
8S

14 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

Lesson-1: Importance of physical fitness

Generally physical fitness means ability to do work. In broader sense physical

fitness refers to ability to maintain health and normal life relating biological

existence. Physical fitness includes ones physical mental and social fitness.

Therefore it is thought that physical fitness and wellness are a holistic

approach. A man with physical fitness can also maintain mental health,

emotional balance and social relationship beside physical health to explain

physical fitness as a holistic approach. A sports journal named AAHPER

(American Association of Health, Physical Education and Recreation) has

included the followings as physical fitness.

a) Physical health according to genetic inheritance

b) Strength, speed, endurance, coordination and techniques required to perform
day to day activities and to face emergency

c) Proper attention and values for performing day to day activities

d) Necessary emotional balance to manage stress of complex lifestyle

e) Capacity to adjust with team and required social awareness

f) Required knowledge and analytical power to solve the problems faced in life

g) High morality and strong personality to perform duties and responsibilities
as a good citizen of a democratic country.

Therefore the concept of fitness includes total fitness of an individual. In fact,

fitness is based on the concept of totality of a human. Among all the

components of total fitness the most practical, the most essential and the most

primary component is physical fitness. This aspect of fitness is vital for

maintaining biological existence. Physical fitness is the ability to perform

physical activity. So the degree of physical fitness level varies depending on

nature of physical activity. For this reason, physical fitness of a common

person for walking, moving, sitting and doing other day-to-day activities and

the physical fitness of a player are not the same. A clear defined physical

fitness is "The ability to carry out everyday task with vigor and alertness,

without undue fatigue and with ample energy to enjoy leisure time pursuits and

to meet unforeseen emergencies. Many people think that in this technology iS

based modern life where physical activity has been decreased remarkably the “%

Phisical Fitness 15
above definition of physical fitness is not fully applicable in our context. The
capacity of physiological organs and the systems and ability to adjust to
environment are some important dimensions of physical fitness.
Importance of physical fitness
A student who acquires physical fitness will be able to live a healthy life
overcoming all the odds and dangers of life. For example:
1) To perform any physical activity smoothly.
2) To be able to face any emergency situation.
3) To develop immunity to fight diseases
4) To be attentive in study with fresh mind through attaining physical fitness.
5) To develop skills required for any types of game.
Activity-1: What is meant by physical fitness. Write on a poster paper and show
to the class.
Activity-2: In groups discuss the importance of physical fitness.

Lesson-2: Variation of games for gaining specific
physical fitness
There are different types of physical exercise for different games. A single type
of physical exercise is not applicable for all games. For example, the strength
of hands is more required in some games whereas the strength of legs is more
important in some other games. Game specific physical exercises are essential
for doing better in that game. For example:
Football: In football most important components of physical fitness are
strength, endurance and agility. Therefore football players should take exercise
more to develop their strength, endurance and agility.
Swimming: Swimmers need to do more exercise to improve their strength of
hands and legs and higher endurance.

co Basketball: The basketball players should give emphasis to the development

& of endurance, agility and strength of legs.

16 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Volley ball: Good strength of hands helps volleyball players smash the ball. So
volley ball should take physical exercise to improve the strength of hand.
Handball: Handball players require explosive power of hands and legs agility
and endurance to do well in the game. So physical exercise is suitable for
improving explosive power of hands and legs. Endurance and agility are
important for them.
Kabaddi: The kabaddi is known as a game of strength, but only strength is not
enough to do well as a kabaddi player. In kabaddi, strength and agility are more
important than other components. Kabaddi players should take special care to
improve strength and agility.
The following chart shows types of physical fitness for specific games.
Requirement of physical ability is shown in the table below:
abdomen | hand and
arm
Football
Handball
Volley L M H 30 years
ball
Hockey |H [HH [MH 30 years |
Basketball
Long- H L H M 40 years
distance
running
Kabaddi
H-Highly necessary, M- Moderately necessary, L-Less necessary
Activity-1 : What types of physical fitness are required for a football player?
Activity-2 : Write down on board the differences of physical fitness between a| x
sprinter and a long distance runner. &

Phisical Fitness 17
Lesson-3: Importance of physical exercise according to
age and sex

According to Age: Physical education is applicable for people of all ages. But
programmes of physical education will be different for different age-groups.
Not only physical exercise but also food, likes and dislikes and physical
abilities are different for different age-groups. For example, physical ability of
children is not equal to that of adults. So for development of their abilities
exercise through games should be introduced accordingly. Frog jump, touch
and back, crow jump or recreational games are some physical activities that
can improve physical ability of children. Selection of exercise and games for
adolescent should be done systematically. Standing in a line, exercise of hands
and legs, running with a ball, touch and play, etc. and games and physical
exercise can be used to develop physical abilities of children. Remember,
children and adolescents should not participate in weight lifting exercise. It
causes harm to the body. Youths should take part in exercise systematically. So
they can learn skills of different games which will build foundation in sports.
We should keep in mind that exercise may cause fatigue among students.
Selection of physical exercise for specific part of the body is essential. Physical
ability may be acquired in this way. For elder people light physical exercise is
required for maintaining physical ability.

According to Sex: Though physical education is equally important for all, in
reality it depends on how much we can implement it. And though it is different
for man and women, it cannot be so for childhood. Physical structures of boys
and in their childhood are more or less the same. Priority should be given to
recreational games, imitating activities, jumping and running etc. at the time of
designing physical education programmes for children. To ensure mental
development of children, physical education programmes for children should be
implemented through games and sports. There is very little difference between
boys and girls during 7-12 years of age. This time girls do not participate in any
heavy games. Boys show more interest in team games though both boys and
girls participate in individual games. For example, badminton, table tennis,
running etc. are a few individual games. From this stage, physical education
programmes should be seperated to develop their physical capacities. After the

18 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
reach to puberty, physical changes take place among boys and girls. For this
reason their activities are also different. Boys like athletics, swimming etc.
beside team games. Most of the boys do not hesitate to take a risk at this stage.
In the behavior of girls hesitation and shiness appear due to their physical
changes. This is why physical education programmes of girls differ from that of
boys in games and sports competitions such as swimming, athletics, badminton,
table tennis etc. For boys and girls, there being big differences in physical
strength and tolerance, physical education activities are different. Therefore, as
children grow up, difference in their physical activities become distinct. Boys
and girls participate in these activities separately.

Activity-1: Make a list of physical education activities suitable for children

and adolescents according to their age.
Activity-2: Discuss why physical activities of girls are separate from those of
boys during puberty.

Lesson-4: Effect of exercise on physical fitness

Exercise is essential for physical fitness. Without physical exercise no one can
develop physical fitness. People of all ages should take regular specific exercise
systematically and also follow the methods of sports training. Many changes take
place inside the body due to exercise, which develops physical fitness. The
changes that take place due to exercise are given below-

Heart muscle

1. Develop strong cardiac muscle: Blood circulation increases due to physical
exercise or games. As a result, efficiency of heart developes. Heart muscle
becomes strong. Heart volume increases and becomes disease-free as
efficiency of heart increases. The heart of this type is called an athletic heart.

2. Pumping capacity of heart increases: Heart of common people pumpes 130
mililitre of blood. Blood circulation increases due to exercise. So pumping
capacity of heart increases. And heart becomes strong, efficient and develops ~
immunity. BS

Phisical Fitness 19
3. Pulse rate: Pulse rate increases if common people take exercise/do work. It
usually takes time to become normal. Tiredness can not disappear easily. On
the other hand, pulse rate of a good player increases and becomes normal faster
after he/she takes part in exercise or participate in games and sports. Therefore
players recover faster from fatigue than common people.

4. Blood circulation: One takes part in exercise or participates in games and

sports to increase blood circulation. So, the efficiency of heart muscle increases

more and becomes stronger than that of common people.

5. Blood cell: There are three types of blood cells.

a) Red blood cells (Erythrocytes)

b) White blood cells (Leukocytes)

c) Platelets (Thrombocytes)

a) Red blood cells: The amount of red blood cells in blood is high. The
amount of red blood cells in male is about 50,o0000 per cubic mililitre of
blood and about 45,00000 per cubic mililitre in female. It produces in bone
marrowand damagesin spleen after 120 days. The number of red blood cells
increases and live long due to effect of exercise. Red blood cells with the
help of haemoglobin supply oxygen to differents parts of the body and
control body temperatures.

b) White blood cells: The amount of white blood cells is less in our body and
6000-8000 per mililitre of blood. White blood cells are round, colorless and
with nucleus. Generally they live 12-13 days. If we take exercise it will live
more and the number will also be increased. White blood cells kill germs
by surrounding and digesting them. Therefore physical efficiency becomes
strong.

c) Platelets: Platelets also known as thrombocytes, are disc like structures that
help stop bleeding. They are the smallest form of elements. If a blood
vessel is cut, platelets stick to the edges of the cut and to one another,
forming a plug within 3 minutes.

6. Respiration: During taking part in games and sports the rate of respiration

increases. As a result of this, oxygen absorption and the removal rate of carbon

dioxide increase. The expansion of respiration also increases. Therefore
physical efficiency increases.
x 7. Muscle: There are different types of muscles in our body. The number of
& muscle fiber does not increase but the size of the muscles increases, tissue

20 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
becomes thick and strong. So this improves physical efficiency. Many
changes take place due to the effect of exercise that helps in improving
physical efficiency.

Activity-1: What changes in heart take place due to physical exercise? write

on poster paper and hang it on a wall.
Activity-2: Explain what changes in red blood cells & white blood cells take
place due to physical exercise.

Lesson-5: Exercise to improve speed, strength,
endurance, agility and flexibility for physical fitness
Everybody should have knowledge about their own body before taking any
physical exercise. This knowledge is also essential for the sake of maintaining
health. The knowledge about anyone's organs and systems helps them select
required physical exercise to develop the organs. By taking appropriate
physical exercise we can develop our body to its optimum level. Physical
fitness depends on its five components namely-

1) Strength 2) Speed
3) Endurance 4) Agility

5) Flexibility

1) Speed: Speed means quickness of movement. The faster one can move, the
more speed they have. We should take physical exercise to improve strength of
leg muscles in order to gain speed.
a) In supine position move your legs up and down.
b) In gymnesium move the iron weight in and out, using legs.
c) Practice 25 m and 50m sprint again and again.
d) Practice running, using treadmill.
e) Run on sand to strengthen muscles. If we practice above-mentioned

physical exercises, it will ensure strength and growth of leg muscles. So, it S
increases our speed. “

Phisical Fitness 21
2. Strength: Strength is the ability to overcome resistance or act against
resistance. For example, by developing muscles of hands we can increase
strength of the hands. Some physical exercises to develop strength of hands are
as follows.

a) Move dumbell up and down, closing hands.

b) Lie in supine position and push barbell up and down with hands.

c) Put hands on floor parallel to shoulder and push up and down. Slowly raise
one leg and push up.

d) Throw the medicine ball.

e) Different types of exercise of hands in multigym. We can develop strength
of hands and shoulders by doing above mentioned physical exercises
systematically as per instruction of the trainer.

3. Agility: Agility is the ability to perform a series of movements in rapid

succession with balance of body in a small area. The following physical

exercises can improve agility.

a) Run fast and stop with whistle.

b) Practise 10-meter shuttle run. Do this exercise for a specific period.

c) Practise 20-meter shuttle run for two minutes. The one who can run for the
highest number will be the champion. Thus agility will be improved.

4. Flexibility: Flexibility refers to the ability to achieve one extended range of

motion with being impeded by excess tissue. The following physical exercises

are important to develop flexibility of our body.

a) Stand up on a bench with your legs straight bend your forward slowly
keeping hand attached to ears the one whose body bends more than other is
more flexible.

b) Lie in supine position, keep hands closer to the ears and fold legs at knee
and move the body up and down. It is called aching.

c) Sit on the ground keeping your legs straight and try to touch your toes
while your hands are attached to the ears.

co 5. Endurance: Endurance is to overcome resistance under the condition of
§ fatigue. Endurance is a must for games and sports. It is to mention that games

22 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
like football, long distance run, marathon, basketball etc require high level of
endurance. Here are some physical exercises to develop endurance.

a) Run slowly and continuously for a long time.

b) Run across uneven places.

c) Run one kilometer on the 1St day, one and half kilometers after 3 days and
2 kilometers after 7 days. Gradually increase the distance. Any student by
acquiring (5) five virtues can develop physical fitness and these increase
concentration to studies.

Activity-1: Write down the physical exercise in a poster paper and hang it on wall.
Activity-2: Write down the exercises of increasing stamina sequentially and explain.
Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. Where are the red blood cells produced?
a. in the spleen b. in the liver
c. in the bone marrow d. in the lungs
2. Which sports require breath and rapidity?
a. Cricket b. Volleyball
c. Football d. Handball

3. Which of the following happens to our body when we breathe

continuously?

a. Carbon dioxide comes out of the body.

b. Germs in the blood are destroyed.

c. The number of red blood cells increases.

d. Big cells of the body get broken.
=<
8

Phisical Fitness 23
Observe the chart below and answer questions 4 and 5.
a (CR
F , damage in spleen |,;

Blood freezes in 3 minutes after 120 days Lives 11to 13 days
[7 [over _______Prsen transportation [Desa the enemy |
4. Whose characteristics do the column A indicates?

a. Red blood cell b. White blood cell

c. Platelets d. Plasma
5. In the above chart the dissimilarities between column B and C are -

i. Differences of colour

ii. Presence of nucleus

iii. Increase of age
Which one of the following is right?

a. i&ii b. ii & iii

ce. iG iii d. ii & ili
Observe the images below and answer questions 6 & 7.

. T= ae aoe
16 years old Rupom 16 years old Sohel
The images show that Sohel's pulse rate is more than Rupom's pulse rate.
6. What is the cause of Rupom's normal pulse rate?
co a. Young age b. Study
8 c. Having nutritious foods d. Sports

24 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
7. Though both of them work hard, why does Sohel get more tired?

a. Sohel's platelets increase.

b. Sohel's white blood cells decrease.

c. Sohel's platelets decrease.

d. Sohel's white blood cells remain inactive.

Creative Question

Read the stem and answer the questions below:

1. Two friends, Abir and Arif of class nine participate in Kabaddi and
basketball in the sports competition of the school. Abir does well in
Kabaddi but he does not play well in basketball as his hands lack strength.
On the other hand, Arif displays excellent skills in both games.

a. What is strength?
b. Why are there differences of the physical education activities of the
boys and the girls during adolescent period? Describe.
c. Explain how Abir can do well in basketball.
d. Will Abir perform well in basketball if he increases the strength of his
hands? Analyse.
ES
8

Chapter Three
Mental Health and Fatigue
Before we discuss anything about mental health and fatigue, we need to know
what health is. Usually by health we mean physical healthiness or a state of
body free from any diseases. But in a broad sense, mental health is also
necessary beside physical health. Mental health is largely dependent on
physical health. Whatever may be our business, we do not feel good and
motivated to work and also our performance falls if our body is not fit. Mental
fitness is maintained through harmonious coordination between personal and
environmental demands. Thus, an individual who can maintain a good balance
between personal demands and social demands successfully is called a
mentally fit person. It is the mental health of an individual that shows full and
harmonious coordination between physical and mental activities of the whole
personality. Temporary fall in performance capability is seen in an ordinary
person or an ordinary player as a result of excessive workload or stress. Again,
as a result of prolonged engagement in the same job, people experience
changes in physical and mental behaviors toward the job. Consequently, the
performance capability of individuals decreases. This change in a person’s
physical and mental state is commonly called tiredness or fatigue.
ac £>
i WY a Wy
Mentally healthy children vs. fatigued children
At the end of this chapter we will be able to-
@ explain the role of mental health for healthy lifestyle.

26 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
e@ discuss the nature of mental behaviors.

@ explain human behaviors depending on different situations.

e explain different ways of reducing mental stress.

e@ explain the concept of fatigue and its various categories.

e explain causes of being fatigued and its consequences.

e@ discuss the means of removing fatigue.

e be habituated in healthy lifestyle by removing fatigue.

Lesson-1: Mental health and its importance

At the very start of this chapter, discussion on mental health is held. Generally,
mental health means “full and harmonious functioning of the whole
personality”. Games and sports help keep our body and mind fit by
maintaining physical as well as mental health. As malfunctioning of a body
organ creates physical illness so is the case with mind. When mind does not
function properly, we call it mental illness. In the context of games and sports,
the students develop competitive attitudes and consequently they suffer from
mental illness. Games and sports require not only physical exercise but they
are also the causes of happiness of victory and pains of failure. Since sports
persons maintain physical fitness, they are required to be mentally fit as well.
Physical health and mental health are complementary to each other. Once a
student wins in any sports competition, they become more confident to do
better in future events. With a view to retaining this success and performance,
they now spend more time for training and practice, and thus become more hard-working.
As a result of such victories, the winner may develop negative attitudes such as
over-confidence, self-pride and tendency to belittle others. Therefore, there may be both
good and bad results of a player’s competitive attitudes.

On the other hand, when a player experiences defeat in any competition, it
creates disappointment and they try to accuse others for the defeat. Many
players may give up playing as a result of utter disappointment and mental
tiredness. If a player cannot take the normal phenomenon of ‘win and loss’ of
any competition easily, there appears inconsistency in their activities as a result
of mental stress. In this respect, sports teachers or trainers should work
together and try hard to maintain mental health or mental balance of the .
players and students. S

Mental Health and Fatigue 27

Activity-1: A group of students will write on the board how physical fitness
impacts upon the state of mind and then will discuss. Another
group will write on the board how physical illness affects mind
and then will discuss. The teacher will correct the mistakes in the
discussion held by the students.

Activity-2: How does victory or defeat in a competition affect and influence a
player? Students will write it at home to discuss in the classroom next
day.

Lesson-2: Mental behavior, its classification and ways of
removing mental anxiety
Human beings, have to pass through various biological steps before they reach
maturity. These steps are childhood, puberty, youth and old age. At each stage
when physical changes occur, every human is influenced by specific types of
behaviors. These types of behaviors are controlled by direct action and chemical
stimulants. Besides this, such behaviors are also influenced and instigated by
reflex actions and inherent reactions. So, as life proceeds there appears
complexity in the nature of behavior and humans solve all the complexities by
dint of natural intelligence, reasoning and power to achieve the targets.
Classification of mental behaviors: To know much about human nature
makes us speechless in surprise, thinking that there exist wonderful
dissimilarities between individuals’ characteristics and behaviors . For
example, someone is extremely jolly but another is sad; one is fond of fun but
one is grave; one is lively but another is serious; one is intelligent but the other
is dull; one is cautious but the other is adventurous; one is soft and polite but
the other is rough and rude. There are many such examples of contradictory
characteristics which vary from individual to individual. When these
characteristics are evident in a person, we call them personal characteristics.
By means of this personal uniqueness, one person can be distinguished from
another. We need to know the reasons of this personal uniqueness. It is found
that all the children who were born and brought up in the same environment of
a family do not share the same characteristics. They differ in their personality
traits and behaviors . Some scholars say that these differences are due to
x physical structure but some others think that due to genetic uniqueness or
& environmental condition all these differences in personality occur.

28 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Ways of removing mental anxiety: By health we mean physical and mental
fitness. Body and mind are complementary to each other. If there is mental
unhappiness, it naturally affects physical health as well. Mental illness may
cause a lot of failure and distress in human life. Mental illness may initiate
mental perversion in children. That's why parents and guardians should be
especially careful to remove any anomaly from children’s behaviors .
Mental condition and rules of mental health are the subject matters of mental
health science. It includes subjects like psychology, mental diseases, herbal
botany, zoology, social expansion etc. Child psychology and education, and
mental health science help to prevent different types of mental anxieties,
mental perversions and disorder. Mental disorder includes mental diseases,
shortage of intellect, neurosis, obsession, mental morbidity, crime-proneness
etc. In order to remove or prevent mental anxiety from children, good
education for them, bringing them up in a healthy style, good care, good family
environment and positive attitudes of parents are essential. Again, patient
behaviour with children, education for them, child-friendly environment,
nutrition, care, and all other facilities necessary to live a happy life should be
made available with a view to managing complex nature and mental anxieties
of children.

Activity-1: In groups students will discuss and show arguments on the
subject of contradictory behaviors and characteristics visible in
human personality.

Activity-2: In groups students will make a presentation and discuss harmful
aspects of mental anxiety and ways to remove it.

Lesson-3: Mental fatigue, its classification and effects on

students

It is usually seen that when someone is engaged in the same job for a long

time, there occur physical and mental changes towards the job. The person who

experiences physical and mental changes towards the job also naturally
experiences a fall in their performance. This physical and mental change is %

known as tiredness or fatigue. So, fatigue refers to sloth in the working persons S

Mental Health and Fatigue 29
and reduction in their performance. Reduction in performance of individuals is
the universal cause of fatigue. Psychologists have defined fatigue in various
ways. Some said, “Reduction in performance is fatigue.” Another scholar
defined, “In work situation a fall in working capacity or performance is
fatigue” An analytical definition is, “As a result of continuous engagement in
the same type of job for a long time, there appears a decrease in working
capacity of individuals and this decrease of working capacity may be termed as
fatigue.”
Classification of fatigue: Psychologists have classified fatigue into two types-
a) physical fatigue, and b) mental fatigue.
a) Physical fatigue: The fatigue that occurs as result of physical labour for a
very long time is called physical fatigue. This type of fatigue is related to body
muscles and senses. Every individual has got a limit or borderline of their
capacity to work or labour and when they cross their limit, fatigue occurs. In
normal situations, the body fulfils all the physical needs required at work. For
example, body meets the demands of additional oxygen by breathing quickly.
Again, in case of rise in blood pressure and heart beat, body discharges
additional starch. But fatigue occurs in an individual when the job is highly
labourious, or if the person is less endurable, or if the physical balance is
affected due to very cold or hot weather.
b) Mental fatigue: Mental capacity decreases and fatigue occurs when
someone does any mental work for a long time. For example, if we solve
mathematical problems for a very long time at a stretch, we see that our
thinking power, logical power and power to correct the results of the problems
gradually fall and thus we experience a decrease in our mental capacity. This
change of mental state or decrease of mental capacity is known as mental
fatigue. Besides, fatigue may also occur due to differences in personal likes
and dislikes, change in mental condition, and environment. As physical and
mental work cannot be isolated fully, so is the case with physical and mental
fatigue. Therefore, mental fatigue may occur as a result of long physical
activity and similarly, physical fatigue may be caused by long mental work as
well.
Effects of mental fatigue upon students: Here, by students we mean the
participants in activities under physical education programmes. The physical
fatigue that occurs in students participating in physical education programmes
« depends on the volume of physical activities they do. As a result of physical
S labour, huge amount of sweat is discharged from their body and it has impact

30 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
upon movement of body-organs and concentration in the activity. While
performing physical education programmes, the students often suffer from
mental fatigue which is visible through the following symptoms:

1. They may make mistakes in their performance of physical education

programmes.

2. They may lose self confidence.

3. There lacks coordination among their activities.
4. They lose rhythm of work and take wrong decisions.

5. They become inattentive and cannot understand the techniques of

implementing the programmes.

6. There decreases attentiveness to duty.

7. They become mentally weak.

Activity-1: Students will write on the board and discuss what fatigue is and

what factors cause fatigue.
Activity-2: Students will prepare a list of the effects of mental fatigue on
mind and then they will discuss in groups.

Lesson 4: Causes of mental fatigue and their remedy
Physical or mental, whole or in part- whatever may be the nature of fatigue,
there must be some reasons behind it. We have just discussed the causes of
fatigue occurring in human beings due to programmes related to physical
stress. There are many other reasons why fatigue may occur. Psychologists
have divided the causes of fatigue into three classes: 1) causes related to
body or physique, 2) causes related to mind or psyche, and 3) causes related to
environment. Causes of physical fatigue include generation of lactic acid in
muscles, decay of body muscles, discharge of salt from body, significant
shortage of oxygen, excessive body movement etc. In this lesson we will
discuss mental fatigue. We can analyse the causes of mental fatigue in the
following manner.

1. Lack of mental preparation: Before doing anything we should do mental
preparation. If the performer does not have any adequate and clear idea about
the activity, fatigue may occur more quickly than usual.

S

Mental Health and Fatigue 31
2. Lack of practice and habit: If the students practice the programme
regularly and get habituated to the activities required for the programme,
fatigue will not occur soon. Thus, fatigue occurs due to lack of practice and
exercise in advance.
3. Lack of motivation and love for work: When you are motivated and you
love the work, fatigue does not occur even after you have worked for a long
time at a stretch. On the other hand, where there is no motivation, the work
becomes simply a burden. In such coercive work, fatigue appears very easily.
4. Lack of mental willingness: In implementing any physical education
programme, if a student is unwilling, fatigue occurs in them very quickly.
Strong willpower can make very difficult tasks possible. Hence, lack of mental
willingness is considered as one of the causes of fatigue.
5. Environmental causes: Apart from physical and mental causes, there are
also some factors that may cause environmental fatigue. Unhealthy
environment e.g. damp and shabby environment, very hot, very cold or damp
weather is not congenial for any work. In such an environment there is high
probability for any individual to get fatigued. In the same way, lack of adequate
light, air, wide space and clean environment creates fatigue in the workers.
Ways to remove mental fatigue: As loss of physical and mental strength is
the root cause of fatigue, fitness and energy of the both can remove it. In order
to remove mental fatigue, we can put emphasis on the following subjects:
1. Generating love for programmes: When the students love physical
education programmes, fatigue cannot overpower them easily.
2. Avoiding monotony of programmes: The monotony of boring programmes
makes the students fatigued. On the contrary, a little rest in work makes the
programmes enjoyable and effective by removing monotony and fatigue.
3. Motivation: Programmes should be full of motivations and it will ultimately
lead to spontaneous participation in the activities. Thus, motivations can
remove fatigue.
4. Avoiding stressful programmes: Students should not be compelled to
implement any programmes that go beyond their capability.
5. Rest and sleep: As nutritious food essentially prevents physical decay,
similarly rest and sleep help remove fatigue and tiredness. Rest and sleep

ws remove physical and mental fatigue and thus people can work with new

S enthusiasm and fresh energy.

32 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Activity-1: Students will prepare a list of the causes of mental fatigue as
homework. In the classroom, they will write the causes on the
board and discuss in groups.
in the class. Then discuss the subject.
Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. What is fatigue ?
a. Decrease working ability b. Physical weakness
c. Lacking of energy towards work d. Nervous weakness
2. If defeat in sports is not taken lightly -
i. It creates mental stress.
ii. Inconsistency in work is observed.
iii. Negative mentality grows up.
Which one in the following is correct?
a. iii b. ii & iii
c. i& iii d. i, ii & iii
Read the passage below and answer questions 4 and 5.
Shamim is a student of class eight. Both his parents are job holders. As there
are no fields beside Shamim's home, he does not participate in sports. He
becomes depressed.
3. Reason for Shamim's illness -
a. Physical b. Mental
c. Familial d. Social
4. The way to get over Shamim's present condition is -
i. Arrange entertainments
ii. Company of friends
iii. Participate in games and sports S

Mental Health and Fatigue 33
Which one in the following is correct?

a. i&ii b. ii & iii

c. i& iii d. i, ii & iii

Creative Questions

1. After the sudden death of her father, the responsibility of running the family
along with her younger brother's education and treatment of her mother
comes upon Ritu, a meritorious student of class nine. So, by tutions in the
morning and in the evening and by sewing cloths at a tailor's shop at night,
she earns money. Her confidence breaks down because of her poor results
in the annual examination of the school. For this, she decides to leave
study. But the encouragement of her mother and the school teachers
brought her back to study.

a. What is motivation?

b. What is the reason of abnormality in the child's mind?

c. Explain the reasons of Ritu's poor results?

d. What factor do you think works to remove Ritu's mental problems
away? Present logically.

2. Nilima practised mathematics for the whole day. In spite of her mother's
request to go outside, she didn't go. In the evening, Nilima became tired.
The mathematical problems, which she could solve in a little time at day,
are now taking a long time. Nilima is worried about it. Her mother tells her
to take a break for a while and watch television.

a. What is mental fatigue ?

b. Explain that body and mind are complementary to each other.

c. What causes Nilima to take a long time for solving mathematical
problems at night? Explain.

d. Analyse the appropriateness of Nilima's mother's suggestion to
overcome her situation.

Chapter Four
Health Science and Health Service

The branch of Medical service that discusses and analyses scientific ways of
living individually and collectively is generally called health science. Now
what we mean by health may be discussed first. Let's start with a famous
quotation from Socrates. In the “Republic” Plato quoted that Socrates said
“Now to produce health is to part the various parts of the body in their natural
relations of authority or subservience to one another, whilst to produce disease
is to disturb this natural relation”. If we simplify this definition we understand
that health means physical fitness or healthy state of body. But in broad sense
only physical fitness does not mean health; it also includes mental health. In
order to be healthy we should have very good knowledge about health science.
Health science gives us ideas about how to maintain health and it also shows
the way how to get rid of diseases. Health science gives us a clear idea about
health services, so we should identify the common health problems and be
aware of maintaining individual and collective health. We still develop healthy
environment at school and at home. School Tiffin programme to fulfill
under-nutrition and regular health service programmes at schools will play a

significant role as complementary to student's education.

v
fe nitions: |S
i . he
=< observeable health rules Y
Z

Hea;th Science and Health Service 35

At the end of this chapter we will be able to

e@ Explain importance of health science.

e Explain concept and techniques of maintaining personal health.

e Take preventive steps for common health problems.

e Explain the coverage of health services.

e@ Discuss necessity of Tiffin programme at school.

e Have an idea about health card and explain its usefulness motivate

others in preventing discuses.

Lesson 1 : Health science and its importance

The objective of the study of health science is to have knowledge about health

and its principles. Again the objectives of following health principles are to

prevent diseases, The more we find out the reasons of diseases, the more we

will be able to prevent them. The ultimate objective is to get rid of diseases and

has a long healthy life. Therefore by studying health science we can learn how

to have good health and long life. We should acquire knowledge of health

science to understand the essence of the proverb “health is the mother of all

happiness." Environment and society have influence on our health. Dirty

environment causes harm to our health. Communicable diseases cause

contamination from one body to another. How germs of communicable and

contagious diseases are transmitted from one person to another and what we

should do to prevent such diseases, are all the topics discussed under health

science. From health science we also know about drinking safe water, avoiding

polluted air, eating nutritious balanced diet, living in a well-lit and

well-ventilated house, keeping school building healthy, travelling safely,

ensuring self-defense from ferocious animals, like mad dogs and mad foxes,

managing sewerage and garbage etc. Prevention and cure of diseases are two
_ major objectives of health principles. But prevention of diseases and nature of
S prevention depend on types of diseases. For example, different diseases like

36 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
cholera, T.B. pox, typhoid, etc. require different preventive measures and
curative treatment. Polluted air, water, rotten, stale and open food, problems in
managing domestic garbage and sewerage and dirty environment contribute to
the spread of all this diseases. Similarly two major aims of health policy are
reduction of the death rate of mothers and children through better management
and medical facilities, and ensuring “First AID” for accidents. The main barrier
to build good health is ignorance of indifference to health instructions. Proper
education, wide publicity for good health etc, play an important role to remove
this barrier. We should remember that every individual is a member of the
society they live in. So, people at every sphere of society should be aware of
health science. They should be advised to follow the principles of good health
for collective welfare.

Activity-1: What do you understand by health and health science? Write
these separately and present in the class.

Activity-2: Pure water and air save our life but if that water and air are
polluted, they also spread diseases. Discuss elaborately and
explain with relevant examples.

Lesson-2: Concept and technique of personal health care
Physical fitness is a precondition for happy life. When a student is not
physically fit, they can’t concentrate on study and do not find interest in any
activity. So they cannot accomplish any task properly. It is essential to keep
oneself physically fit in order to do anything successfully and live in peace and
happiness. It is difficult to restore a person's health to its healthy condition. To
lead a healthy life everybody should take care of health and follow health
instructions. What is health care? Health care refers to maintaing physical
structure and natural growth and keeping free from diseases. The personal
health care includes being aware of one’s own health, taking necessary
measures of health care and following all health instructions. The issue of S

Hea;th Science and Health Service 37
health care is related to both physical and mental health. An individual’s
physical growth and mental development take place, starting from childhood
until youth. During this period they have to follow age-specific health
instructions. So besides maintaining physical health, we should maintain
mental health relationship as the mind and the body are very close.
Techniques of personal health care: We should develop health habits to live a
healthy life. The foundation of developing health-friendly habits is following
health related rules. Health rules include cleanliness of oneself and their house,
schools, surroundings, roads etc. necessary and adequate physical exercises;
rest and sleep; sufficient intake of balanced diet and regular participation in
games and sports. We can keep our body and mind fit by following these health
tules. One of the main aspects of health care is doing all necessary tasks related
to health in time. A fundamental means of maintaining mental health is keeping
oneself cheerful and perky. In this regards recreational activities such as
playing games, travelling, practicing cultural activities, observing religious
activities etc. are important. Punctuality is also one of the important issues of
maintaining health. We should complete all activities in right times. Habit of
regular and natural exertion, keeping away from drugs etc.are some important
techniques of maintaining personal health. Knowing the technique of
maintaining personal health and following them are very essential to lead a
healthy life.
Activity-1: Fill in the table below with activities rules and instructions
relating to physical and mental health care.

Physical health related activities/rules Mental health related activities/rules
1. 1.
2. 2.
3. 3.
4. 4.

= | 5. 5.

So

AQ

38 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Activity-2: What do you do for personal health care every day from early in
the morning to bed time at night? Show them in the class
through action.
Lesson-3: Common health problems and remedies
Disease or sickness is a part of life. None can live without any disease in life.
But one can avoid and prevent diseases. Common health problems refer to
one’s becoming sick. Therefore in order to keep oneself free from disease, one
should know about the nature of a disease, its germs and how the disease
spreads.
Causes of diseases: Various types of germs cause various diseases. We come
into contact with a lot of germs of different diseases every day. The germs enter
our body in many ways. When the immunity of body decreases the body cannot
fight against germ attacks and it becomes sick. On the other hand germs can not
easily attack the person whose body is strong and stout and who remains healthy.
Nature of diseases: There are some diseases that infect other nearby people.
Such diseases are called communicable diseases. Apart from human body,
diseases can be transmitted through other objects like water, food, air, etc.
Some communicable diseases causing health problems are cough and cold, eye
infection, diarrhoea, influenza, whooping cough, diphtheria, measles. pox,
malaria, tuberculosis, typhoid and jaundice Diseases that are not transmitted
from one person to another are called non-communicable diseases. For
example, cancer, high blood pressure, diabetes, etc. are some non
communicable diseases.
Common health problems: We have so many health problems in our country.
Despite control in pox and malaria, the outbreak of cholera, typhoid, dysentry
and many other stomach diseases has spread widely. Malnutrition, lack of safe
water, health issues. homelessness, shortage of doctors, unavailability of
medicine, high mortality rate of mothers and infants and unawareness of
personal healthcare etc. have made common health problems more «
complicated. 8

Hea;th Science and Health Service 39
Remedies for common health problems: Self-awareness play the most
important role in perverting diseases. We should always be careful so that germs
of diseases cannot be communicated. We should take all possible measures of
personal health care to keep our body free from diseases. Our immune system
become stronger when our body is healthy and strong, We must know the ways
of preventing each and every disease if we have to prevent communication of
germs. There are specific ways to prevent specific diseases. But some common
measures can help us prevent spread of most of the diseases. They are-
1. Vaccination: Children and adults should take vaccines for those diseases
which can prevented by the vaccines. Diseases that can be prevented through
vaccines in our country are pox, typhoid, tuberculosis, influenza, polio,
diphtheria, whooping cough, tetanus, measles, hepatitis, etc.
2. Personal cleanliness: We should always maintain cleanliness of our own
body, clothes, furniture, kitchen untensils, crockery, living places, bathrooms
and surroundings.
3. Habit of washing hands with soap: We should wash our hands with soap
every time after using toilet , before cooking and serving food, before taking
food, after nursing sick people, after cleaning stool and urine of children and
each time after returning from outside.
4. Cooking, preserving and serving food: We should take care in cooking,
and the preservation and service of food. It is very essential for us to prepare
food in a healthy way, to be careful about food preservation and to cover food
all the time.
5. Pest and insect: We should consider issues of remaining careful about pest
and insect attacks, drinking safe water and washing with it etc as remedies for
common health problems. Usually the spread of diseases takes place due to our
ignorance and carelessness about health, which causes many deaths in our
country every year.
6. Awareness building to prevent diseases: We should build extensive public
awareness about prevention of diseases. So public awareness can be raised by

so means radio, television, poster, cinema, newspaper, public speech etc,

S

aq

40 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Activity-1: Fill in the following table by making a list of five persons from
your family and people you know who were attacked by
diseases last year.
Name of the Name of the Diseases Which one is
Personal they suffered from
PT ommuniable| non communiabi

1.

2.

3.

4,

5.

Activity-2: Select three tasks from your daily household activities (e.g. cutting fruits,
cooking food, boiling water, sweeping and wiping floor) mention measures
to be taken to prevent them from contamination

House hold activities Measures to prevent contamination

1. Cutting fruits 1.To wash fruits in safe and pure

water and to clean knife well to keep
cut fruits in clean pot and cover them.

2. 2.

3. 3.

°9
Ss

Hea;th Science and Health Service 41
Lesson-4: Students health service and health cards
People who go to educational institutions to have education or knowledge are
known as students. Students stay at school from 6-16 years. They have to stay
at school for 7 to 8 hours a day. 6 days a week and 7/8 months a year. The time
of their stay at school is highly important for them to grow as good citizens of
the country. School should give special attention to the health of the students
for their all-round development. If furniture, teaching materials etc are
congenial for students’ health, their body and mind will develop properly. It is
the school which is the best place for mental development and for building
moral character. Students can gradually acquire good qualities under the
guidence of an ideal teacher. Similarly for all round physical development with
good environment, clean school building, pure water, nutritious mid-day school
meal, healthy sanitation system, classroom with sufficient light and ventilation,
open play ground and gardens is called healthful school. Following areas
should emphasize the better health service of students-

a) School building: School building should be located in such an open place
where light and air can enter from all sides and where people can move easily.

b) Playground: Student life without games cannot be imagined. There should
be a play ground adjacent to school. So students can participate in various
games and sports throughout the year.

c) Healthful sanitation system: There should be arrangement for healthful
sanitation little away from school building and there should be sufficiant
supply of water.

d) Pure water supply: The supply of pure water is one the components of health
service. In towns people should boil supplied water before they drink it; in
villages the water of deep tube wells is pure and people can drink it directly.
Water from any other source like ponds, river, etc, should be boiled before

e) Classroom and furniture: Necessary steps to be taken so that classrooms
and furniture are not unhealthy.

42 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
f) School Health Programme: School Health Programme is a very important
issue to ensure health service for students, Students are attacked by various
diseases in summer, rainy session and winter. Precaution in this respect
helps keep away from those seasonal diseases. Students can remain free
from common diseases through participation in school health programmes.
Salient features of School Health Programme are as follows:
Medical examination: Every school should have a systematic medical
examination of students, first aid facilities and healthful school environment. A
doctor can work as a inspector of this programme. Under the supervision of
civil surgeon of each district such health inspector can examine student’s health
and advice treatment for different diseases.
School authority will help the school’s inspector with all possible assistance.
The health inspector will examine age. weight, blood group, blood pressure,
pulse rate, physical structure, eyes, teeth, heart, lung, etc of each student and
record them in a card. This card is called student health card.
Health Service Centre: In a school where there is no school health
programme a general teacher should be given training on health service to
solve common health problems. If a student is seriously sick they can be sent
to the nearest health service centre or be admitted to hospital. At present one
can get health service from the union health and family welfare center, upajila
complex, district sadar hospital or a specialized hospital.
Students health card : A health card is a thick paper with health related
information printed on it.
The health card will carry the following information.
20
S

Hea;th Science and Health Service 43
Name & address of school
Sample Health Card

1. Name of Student
2. Name of father/Name of mother
3. Address
4. Date of Birth ----------------------------------------------------- Age
5. Class --------------------------------------------------------------- Roll no
6. Height ------------------------------------------------------------- Weight
7. Body Structure

8. Blood pressure
9. Eye/Nose/Ear/Throat/Lung/Heart

10. History of sickness

11. Present health problem

12. Next date and time of medical examination

Signature of health inspector
Activity-1: Students will write about a discussion of a healthful school
building and present in the classroom.
Activity-2: Make a list of the tasks of a school health inspector and prepare a
20 . :
S sample health card. students discuss in groups.

44 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

Lesson-5: Midday school meal for students

World education conference 1990 was held in Jomtien, Thailand with the

theme universal education. Based on the decision of this conference a

programme named ‘Education for all’ was launched. According to this

programme, a policy was declared that all the participating countries would

take necessary initative to make primary education compulsory. It set its target

to remove illiteracy from their respective countries. Without education at

primary level most of the children will not be able to read and write. As a result

a country will not be able to come out of the vicious circle of illiteracy.

Backwardiness in primary education seriously affects the education at

secondary level. In Bangladesh a huge majority of its population is poor and

they live in rural areas. Schools in rural areas are not able to fully implement

the education for all programmes as declared by government. Dropout rates in

this schools are high and they cannot complete the course of education fully.

There are many reasons for this situation. One of the reasons of the dropout

problem is that during their stay at school most of the students remain hungry.

They cannot concentrate on study in the classroom. The school authority has

taken initiatives to get rid of this problem by launching the mid-day school

meal programme.

The majority of the people of Bangladesh are poor and they cannot afford

sufficient food for their children. Many of the students come to school half-fed

or unfed. They suffer from mal nutrition, cannot concentrate on study and are

affected by other problems.

To solve this problem the mid-day meal programme for students has been

introduced in schools.

Objectives of mid-day meal programme : Some of the main objectives of

this programme are as follows.

1. To mitigate hunger during school time.

2. To prevent dropouts and to increase the number of students gradually.

3. To enhance interpersonal good relation and friendship, co existence,
sympathy among students inside classroom and outside.

4. To prevent malnutrition and participate in different health programmes.

5. To participate actively in games and scout programmes.

6. To remove pressure of providing food for children of the poor guardians FS
and ensure their regular attendance in the classroom. x

Hea;th Science and Health Service 45
Healthy Tiffin: A student has to stay at school for 7-8 hours. Naturally they
get hungry during this long period. They can concentrate on their lessons if
they can gratify hunger during this time. It helps them remove fatigue and
tiredness. As a result of this programme their standard of education goes up.
The higher the quality of the Tiffin the better they will feel physically and
mentally. Hence the school authority has to arrange nutritious tiffin regularly.
Through implementing mid-day Tiffin programmes for students, education for
all programmes will be carried forward, literacy rate will be increased and
finally it will contribute to building a strong nation.

Activity-1: Asked by the teacher students will write on board the main

obstacles to fully implementing “Education for all” programme
Then students willbe divided into two groups and show their
arguments for and against.

Activity-2: As homework, students will write the main objectives of mid-day
school meal/iffin programme with arguments and present them in
the classroom.

Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. What is health protection?
a. Sleeping more b. Remain free from disease
c. Enjoyable journey d. Taking foods with fat.
2. The purpose of following health rules is -
i. To protect oneself from the attacks of diseases.
ii. To follow a healthy routine.
ili. To eat more
Which one of the following is right?
a. iii b. i & iii
c. ti & iti d. i, ti & iii
3. The purpose of tiffin program in schools is -
i. To increase the attendance of students in schools
oo ii. To create meritorious students.
8 iii. To develop the standard of education.

46 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Which one of the following is right?
a. i&ii b. 1 & iii
c. i & ill d. i, ii & iii
Read the stem below and answer questions 4 & 5.
The Upazilla Education Officer during his inspection of the school in Sonapur
village saw that the rate of absence is high. The Head teacher informed him
that most of the students of that area are poor and suffer from sickness. There is
lack of pure water in this village. The Education Officer discussed the matter
with the management, arranged to plant a tubewell in that area and also
conducted campaigns to raise mass awareness about the means of purifying
water.
4. What kind of disease are the students of Sonapur village suffering from?
a. Diabetes b. Asthma.
c. Diarrhoea d. Anaemia.
5. Which one of the following is helpful to protect the students from this
situation?
a. Health awareness. b. Increase the standard of education
c. Take costly meal d. Development of the environment.
Creative Questions
rw Z he ar
Va LN LN al IN
ap ue \WS% Ei a.
1. Conversation between two persons -
Fuly: Would you get flowers, sister, flowers? Only ten taka for one bunch.
Please, take one sister; I will have rice.
Antora: Come here. (after buying the flower), Why don't you go to school. S
Don't you have any parents? “

Hea;th Science and Health Service 47
Fuly: We have no food to eat- how can I go to school!
Antora: (showing the picture of Mina cartoon) Primary education is free. There is
also an arrangement for mid-day meal at school.

a. What are the fundamental topics in maintaining mental health?

b. What is meant by personal health rules?

c. Explain the reason why Fuly does not go to school.

d. Is it possible to implement successfully the "Education for All"

programme by keeping the hungry children at school? Explain.
2. Nilu and Adiba are two friends. They are in class nine.
| Sesh Aen
— aN < a << =
Adiba's home Nilu's home

Adiba comes to school regularly, but Nilu is often irregular. After a long
absence when she came to school the teacher wanted to know why she was
absent for such a long time. In reply she said, 'she often had a pain in the
abdomen along with vomiting and diarrhoea’.

a. What is the pre-condition of a happy life?

b. How can the dropout of students at school be prevented? Explain.

c. What type of disease attacks Nilu? Explain.

20 d. Which factors act in favour of Adiba's being sound? Analyse
§ according to the stem.

Chapter Five
Nutrition for Health

We need to understand what health is. Generally, by health we mean physical

fitness or keeping free from diseases. But in a broad sense only physical fitness

is not the parameter of healthiness as mental health is also important. So both

physical and mental fitness together make healthiness of a person. Human

beings need food to live, maintain health, and physical development. The food

should be full of nutritions. The foods that keep our body healthy and strong is

called nutritious food. Balanced diet supplies nutrition to body. Balanced diet

includes those items of food in which all ingredients of food are available in

proper proportion and quantity.

Si
ihe A
le
fs aa |
gy
COVE
Balanced diet

At the end of this chapter we will be able to

e Explain concept of nutrition and its necessity for students

e@ Explain necessity of nutrition for players

e@ Explain concept of malnutrition and its effect on humans.

e Explain effects of malnutrition on games and sports

e@ Prepare a list of food with required calorie for different age-groups

e@ Take cautionary measures to prevent food contamination es
Ss
N

Nutrition for Health 49
Lesson-1: Concept of nutrition and its importance

At puberty the adolescents experience very quick physical development. To
support this physical growth and development they need adequate nutrition.
They should take proper quantity of food with all necessary ingredients to
supply energy, repair decay and to prevent diseases at the growing stage. Lack
of nutritious food causes mental and physical retardation and reduces immune
system. Therefore compared to other stages of life, people need more nutritious
food at puberty. At this age children remain busy with study, games and sports
etc. Due to their physical activity they need more calories. The intake of low
calorie food hampers physical and mental development.

Food ingredients: There are a number of ingredients of food namely protein,
carbohydrate, fat, vitamin, minerals and water. Any food rich in any of the
ingredients is known as such, for example any food that contains protein is
known as proteins and the food that contains carbohydrates is known as
carbohydrates.

Sources of nutrients and its functions: Protein is necessary for body
building, development and growth of body and to repair physical decay.
Proteins are required for body energy and immunity. Fish, meat, milk, eggs,
cheese, curd, pulses, beans etc are common sources of proteins. Carbohydrates
are the main source of energy for all activities. Rice, wheat, corn, potato, sugar,
honey, arum roots, sweets etc are sources of carbohydrates. Fats generate heat
and energy for body. Butter, ghee, fat, soya bean, milk, fish oil, coconut oil etc
are the sources of fat. Vitamins are essential to prevent diseases, maintain
different activities inside the body and protect it from decay. Fish, meat, egg,
milk, mustard oil, fish oil, green and red vegetables, fruits, beans, oil seeds,
coarse rice, wheat with fiber, sprouted seeds are the sources of vitamins.
Minerals are very important for internal functions of body. There are many
minerals in our body and every time they are discharged with urine, stool and
sweats they causes body decay. Some common minerals of our body are
calcium, phosphorus, iodine, sodium, potassium etc.

In order to compensate the loss of minerals we take salt, milk, milked food,
small fish, meat, yolk, beans, vegetables, pulses, lime, banana, green coconut
water etc. 70% of our body consists of water. Water helps in maintaining the
body structure, keeps the body cool and active, helps digest food, helps in
blood circulation, transpiration of nutrition inside the body and also it helps in
exertion. Timely intake of sufficient amount of food is necessary for
maintenance and development of body. By appropriate food we mean a

50 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
balanced diet. Balanced diet supplies required calories to the body. A balanced
diet contains the proper amount of each of the six nutrients mentioned above.
The required amount of balanced diet varies, depending on the age of people.
For example, the requirement of carbohydrate, protein, fats and other nutrients
by an adolescent is higher than that of a child. Therefore the requirement of a
balanced diet varies according to age, sex, and body structure.

Activity-1: In the table below column-1 and column-2 respectively show the
name of food and their function in the body. Match column-1 with
column-2 using arrow:

Lesson-2: Causes of malnutrition and remedies

We need food to live and maintain health and physical development. Food
supplies nutrition to the body. Symptoms of proper nutrition, are enthusiasm
and hard work. We need energy to work.Nutritious food supply us with energy.
Six nutrients of food supply us with energy to our body.

Functions of nutrients: Different nutrients have different functions. Functions

of these nutrients include body building, growth and development, repair of
decay, heat and energy supply, heat and energy production, development and
maintenance of organs, blood circulation, nutrition supply, discharge of urine
and stool, cooling of body etc.

Requirement of balanced diet: Foods containing all the six nutrients
proportionately are called a balanced diet. But its requirements vary according

to age and sex. For example, requirement of proteins, carbohydrates, fats and
other nutrients by an adolescent is higher than that of a child. Again, amount of
food required by a player/labor is even higher than that of an adolescent. §

Nutrition for Health 51

Malnutrition related diseases: Muscles will decay instead of development in

case there is deficiency of proteins in a child’s food. Due to protein deficiency

fluid volume increases in the body and a child becomes very weak. This

disease is known as Kwashiorkor. On the other hand, a child will suffer from a

disease called Marasmus as a result of deficiency of proteins, fat etc. Iron,

protein and other nutrients produce haemoglobin in blood. Due to deficiency of

these nutrients in food a disease called anaemia takes place, Deficiency of

calcium, phosphorus and vitamin-D causes children suffer from a disease

called rickets. Deficiency of iodine is responsible for Goiter. Deficiency of

vitamin-A reduces eyesight at night, which is called night blindness. Beriberi

for thiamine deficiency, mouth sore for riboflavin deficiency, scurvy for

vitamin-C deficiency are some diseases related to malnutrition.

Causes of malnutrition: The main cause of malnutrition is ignorance and lack

of awareness. It is a serious mistake to give fish-head, cream, cheese, big piece

of fish and meat to the senior members of the family leaving the growing

children aside. Adult people require less protein and fat whereas growing

children and teenagers require much more protein and fat in their food. Lack of

proper distribution of food according to requirement of specific age group is

also a major cause of malnutrition in our society.

Remedy for malnutrition:

1. Family heads should know about the low cost food with the same nutrition
as the costly food items.

2. We should avoid superstition and wrong perception about some food such
as considering duck eggs, Boal fish, Gojar fish, pumpkin etc as bad food.

3. Parents should know about necessity of nutritious foods.

4. Mothers should know that cooking for a long time spoils food value of
many vegetables and greens.

5. Vegetables should be washed before cutting them, not after.

6. Guardians should be encouraged to rear poultry and cows in the house
address the deficiency of proteins.

7. We should try to eat small fish if big fish is expensive.

8. We should prepare a list of food according to food value and select daily
meal to ensure nutrition for the family.

o 9. Wide publicity for nutrition, malnutrition and remedies through radio, TV,
s and newspapers should be ensured.

52 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Activity-1: Make a list of a balanced diet with the name of low cost food

items available in your locality.

remedies for malnutrition serially and discuss in groups.
Lesson-3: Calorie requirement of players according to
age
Food is required to maintain health. Symptoms of proper nutrition includes
good health, sound mind, enthusiasm, and hard work. We need energy to work.
Any instrument like the cutter, axe, knife, cleaver, etc. grow blunt due to use.
Wood erodes and shoes become old and torn out if we use them again and
again. But whatever work we do with our fingers and whatever movements we
make with our legs, they never become out of order like others. Actually food
repairs decay of body and provides energy to work. In shorts food keeps our
body functional and active. Six food nutrients supply nutrition to our body. So
food in which six nutrients are present in proper proportion and quantity is
called balanced diet. The functions of these nutrients of balanced food are
different from person to person according to their age, body weight and nature
of work. For example, requirements of proteins are the highest in childhood.
Any person engaged in physical labour requires food that produces heat.
Pregnant and lactating mothers need more nutritious food than common
women. Again requirement of nutrition is higher at the time of recovery from
any diseases than at normal time. A player who participates in games and sports
involving huge physical labour needs more calorie than others.
Calculation of calorie and energy: Proteins, carbohydrates and fats produce
heat in the body after digestion. Calorie in a food item is measured through
measuring heat being produced from that food. Food value is measured in
kilocalorie. For example, 250 grams of milk produces 165 kilocalories and a ~
tea-spoonful of sugar produces 16 kilocalories of heat. Heat absorbed in food S$

Nutrition for Health 53
keeps body active and provides energy to work. The higher the body weights the
more calories the body burns. Required energy is expressed in terms of heat
whose unit is kilo-calorie. A list of how much energy is required for doing light,
medium and heavy activities is shown in the table below. In this table energy
required for sports and running is also mentioned. The amount of calorie loss per
hour according to body weight is given below.
Amount of calorie required per kilogram of body weight per hours
routine work,
heavy work

Measurement of kilocalorie: What amount of calories one will need to do a
specific task can be calculated from the table above. For example, the amount
of calories will be burnt for a player with 55 kg body weight to play for two
hours is 55 kg x2x4=440 kilocalories. So amount of calories required to do a
job depends on the body weight and the nature of job. Excess amount of
calories causes fat accumulation in body. The requirement of calories varies
according to sex. Daily calorie requirement for a man and a woman can be
calculated multiplying their body weight in pounds by 21 times and 18 times
respectively. In order to gain or lose body weight one should take 123 less or
more than daily calorie requirement. We should remember that we should
ensure calorie intake of daily requirement from three meals of the day.

2

&

54 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Age specific daily requirement of calorie
ity” eat an at
(Kilocalorie) | (gm) mg microgram) Bi(mg) | B2(mg) | mg
a ee
Adolescent | 2500 55 | 650mg) 18 |725mcg} 1.3 1.4 30
(16-18)yrs | 2200 50 | 550mg | 24 | 759 | 11 | 12 | 30
“Aduitman [2400 [38 [450me | 9 | 750.) 125 | 13 | 30_|
Adult 50 28 1.0 30
See om Ae
Daily requirement of food for growing boys and girls
ee ee ee ee
gm gm gm
Activity-2: Prepare a table to show the daily food requirement of growing boys and girls} s

Nutrition for Health 55
Lesson-4: Food contamination and its prevention
Everything that repairs physical decay and maintains physical development
and heat is called food. Our body is undergoing decay all the time due to
physical activities. It is food that repairs this decay and keeps our body active.
Of course, all the food items should be nutritious and balanced. Even nutritious
food may cause harm to our body if the food is not safe. For example, anybody
can fall sick by eating any contaminated food stuff. Contaminated food
becomes poisonous and creates serious threats for health and life. Any
contaminated food or drink that causes bacterial infection in the gullet and
stomach is called poisonous food or drink.
Causes of food poisoning: Usually food poisoning is caused by bacteria or toxin,
a special type of organic poison. Bacteria contamination can occur in many ways.
For example, keeping cooked food for a long time, before it is prepared and also
during its preparation through harmful pests and insects etc. Again proteins if not
properly preserved get rotten and produce toxin. Taking such toxic food items
may cause food poisoning. Besides, flesh of poisonous animals, food
contaminated by poisonous animals, food prepared with dirty and unhygienic
hands, meat of poisoned poultry etc.are also some causes of food poisoning.
Symptoms of poisoning: Food contaminated by bacteria makes stomach upset
and as a result, nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, loose motion and
dehydration take place. Food poisoning caused by toxin creates terrible
situations. Symptoms like vomiting, constipation, vision problems, palsy,
weakness etc.are visible in such a situation. Food poisoning by toxin is called
botulism. Symptoms appear within 12-24 hours after taking contaminated
food. The patient may die in a few days if proper treatment is not given in time.
Preventive measures
1. We should wash our hands well before preparing food.
2. We should take necessary measures to prevent contamination during its
preparation and preservation.
3. We should drink safe and pure water.
4. We should keep cooked food away from raw fish, meat and vegetables.
5. We should preserve our cooked food at appropriate temperature for a
certain period of time.
6. We should use safe water in cooking and food related washing.
Treatment: For the nausea or vomiting problem we should take the right
medicine. In case of dehydration we should take oral rehydration solution
< (ORS). In any emergency situation caused by food poisoning, we should
“consult doctor and get admitted to hospital without delay.

56 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Activity-2: Prepare two different lists on what symptoms appear due to food
poisoning and how to prevent food poisoning respectively.
Exercise

Multiple choice questions
1. When does the human body grow rapidly?

a. Childhood b. Boyhood/Girlhood

c. Adolescent period d. Youth
2. Which one provides work-power in a body ?

a. Carbohydrate b. Vitamins

c. Minerals d. Fat
3. On which basis does the need of nutrition vary?

a. Body formation b. Easily available

c. Reasonable price d. Mental growth
4. How does mutton become toxin?

a. Due to lack of preservation b. By keeping in the open space for a long time

c. By cooking with excessive heat d. By keeping in untidy place for a long time
Read the stem answer the questions 5 & 6.
After school, Rahimur of class nine take Fusska from a chatpati shop beside
the road. A few hours later after reaching home, he feels pain in the abdomen
and suffers from vomiting and loose-motion. As his body becomes cool and
feeble, his father takes him to the doctor. Observing him well, the doctor gives
him necessary treatment.
5. What is the nature of Rahimur's disease?

a. Diarrhoea b. Food poisoning

c. Jaundice d. Dysentery
6. What type of instructions may the doctor give as a result of the above disease?

a. Taking nutritious food b. Avoiding open-food from outside

c. Taking care of physical exercise d. Washing hands before eating
Read the following stem and answer questions 7 & 8.
Four years old Mina takes food at her own choice. She loves to take vegetables
only. Sometimes water comes in her body and the body swells up. She goes to
the doctor and the doctor gives the necessary suggestion. The doctor also advises 2
her to change the food habit. g

Nutrition for Health 57
7. What is Mina suffering from?
a. Rickets b. Anaemia
c. Marasmus d. Kwashiorkor
8. What type of food does Mina need to prevent this disease?
a. Fish, meat and milk b. Rice, wheat and potato
c. Butter, ghee and fat d. Fruits, pulse and coarse rice
Creative Questions
1. Both Jarif and Ahnaf are 7 years old. Their height is 3ft and 4ft respectively.
Recently water comes in Jarif's body and the body swells up. So, he
becomes sick. Though he looks healthy, he is physically very weak. On the
other hand, Ahnaf goes to school regularly. But reading and seeing become
a problem for him at night. As a result, he lags behind in study compared to
others.
a. How many elements of food are there?
b. How does poison occur in food? Explain.
c. Which disease has attacked Jarif ? Explain.
d. State the nature of the disease ahnaf has been suffering from. Give him
some necessary suggestions to solve his problem.
Wa aa.
Reg SE) Siena = hee a
S ~ ee
Ss
A B
a. What type of disease a person gets because of deficiency of vitamin 'D'?
b. What may happen because of wrong policy of keeping and serving food?
c. Describe the elements of food in picture A.
d. Are the elements of the picture of B as described above essential for
saving life? - Give reasons in favour of the answer.

Chapter Six
Drug Addiction and AIDS
Drug addiction has a harmful mental and physical effect on human beings. It is
created through mutual actions between living beings and the drugs he/she
takes. A substance that brings about remarkable negative changes in physical
and mental state is called a drug.The drug gradually increases its users’
dependence on it. It also increases their eagerness for taking it more and more.
Such a condition of a person is called drug addiction or intoxication. Thus,
intoxication refers to addiction to drug substances. Cigarettes, tobacco, cigar,
alcohol, marijuana, opium, heroin, morphine, phensedyl, yaba etc are addictive
drugs. This addiction is dangerous. If anybody gets addicted to it they do not
get relief from it easily. Our body has its own disease prevention capacity or
immunity system. For this immunity system, any germs entering our body
cannot harm it easily. But there are some harmful viruses that can destroy the
whole immunity system of our body. HIV (Human Immunodeficiency Virus) is
such a virus. HIV can be transmitted through blood, semen, breast milk etc.
Once this virus enters a human body, people fall sick and they are not cured by
traditional treatment. The contaminated status of HIV is known as AIDS
(Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome).
\e@ «&
vals np 4h is i agp ag
Nh Pr AIDS causes
Say ‘NO’ to Drugs P \ death
a |</ :
iy Bs 2B Psa'e
At the end of this chapter we will be able to
e discuss the causes and symptoms of drug addiction.
e explain the bad effects of taking tobacco and drugs. ~
Ss
nN

Drug Addiction and AIDS 59

@ discuss the techniques of how to keep away from smoking and drugs.

e explain the role of others to keep individuals and society free from drug
addiction.

e@ explain the concept of HIV-AIDS.

e@ explain how HIV-AIDS is transmitted.

e explain the ways and means to prevent the spread of HIV-AIDS.

e discuss the ways of keeping themselves free from the risk of HIV-AIDS.

e@ know about the nature of services provided by different service
organisations working prevent HIV-AIDS.

@ avoid smoking and drug carefully by realising their bad effects.

@ raise public awareness to keep individuals, family and society free from
drug addiction.

@ be motivated to lead a disciplined and sophisticated life by realizing the
fatal consequences of HIV-AIDS.

Lesson-1: Drug addiction, tobacco and intoxicating

substances and their bad effects

Drug addiction means strong attraction for or addiction to any drug or

intoxicating substances. The substances whose intake creates intense addiction

are generally called drugs. There are some medicine items that are also

considered as drugs for their use. Without prescription by a doctor if someone

takes a medicine again and again, and if that medicine causes addiction, the

medicine will be categorised as a drug. Therefore,the substances that cause

harmful effects on human body and mind, and the users of those items feel

strong attraction for or addiction to them, are called drugs. For example,

cigarette, cigar, wine, marijuana, cannabis, heroin, opium, pethidine,

phensedyl, sleeping pill etc are commonly known as drugs. People, who take

drugs, gradually develop unusual dependence upon them. They cannot restrain

themselves from taking drugs. In any case, if they cannot take drugs, there

appear serious physical symptoms in them. Such as they become irritable; they

may experience lack of appetite, low blood pressure and problem in breathing;

they may also suffer from insomnia and develop aggressive attitudes.

Difference between medicine and drug

2 1. The use of medicines cures people from diseases but the use of drugs
& causes various diseases in iainanl body,

60 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

2. There is a defined dose for a medicine but there is no dose specified for a
drug.

3. One need not take medicine when disease is cured but a drug addict cannot
give up drugs easily.

Common drug items known in Bangladesh are heroin, opium, pethidine, phensedyl,

marijuana, cannabis, yaba, sleeping pills, alcohol and tobacco-made items. From

tobacco leaves tobacco-made items are prepared. In tobacco leaves there is nicotine
which is a drug. Drug items like biri, cigarette, chewing tobacco, snuff-tobacco etc
are made from tobacco leaves.

Methods of taking drugs: Drug users take drugs in different ways and

methods. For example, some drugs are taken into body through injection while

some others are taken as a tablet, powder or syrup. Similarly some drugs are
taken by drinking them as liquid though some others are taken by smoking.

There are different methods of smoking as well. For example, cigarette, biri,

cigar, hookah etc.

Bad effects of drugs and tobacco: There are many bad effects of taking drugs

and tobacco. Taking tobacco mainly refers to smoking. Smoking is

dangerously injurious for health. According to a report of World Health

Organisation (WHO), in every 8 seconds one person dies from tobacco-related

complications. The smokers and the people who inhale tobacco smoke

passively suffer from many types of diseases. The bad effects of taking drugs
are as follows:

1. Drugs affect mental health. For example, drugs reduce capability to learn
and work, hamper power to manage stress and take decision and aggravate
mental anxiety.

2. Drugs cast painful impacts on family and social life. A drug addict behaves
with family members rudely and destroys family peace.

3. Drugs have very harmful effects on physical fitness as well. Drugs cause
damage to brain cells, lack of appetite, and reduction of eye sight.

4. Some drugs increase the probability of HIV-AIDS and Hepatitis-B
contamination. Drugs cause oesophagus and lung cancer, kidney diseases,
high blood pressure and many other diseases.

5. Drugs incur financial loss. The drug addict creates unhappiness and causes .
want in the family in order to manage money for buying drugs. s

Drug Addiction and AIDS 61
Activity-1: Drug addicted people develop high dependency on drugs.
Mention the consequences of such dependency:
1.
2
3.
4.
Activity-2: Write down four bad effects of drugs.
1,
2.
3.
4.
Lesson-2: Ways of keeping away from smoking and
drugs and the role of others in this respect
The previous lesson has elaborately discussed the bad effects of smoking and
taking drugs. But merely knowing about the subject is not enough to live a
healthy and happy life. We should draw up a practical action plan immediately
so that we can give up such harmful habits. The first and foremost thing is firm
conviction of not smoking or taking any other drugs in any situation in future.
At puberty the adolescents naturally feel very curious about the unknown and
the forbidden. As a consequence of such curiosity and excitement or being
influenced by friends or others, the pubescent may take up smoking or use
drugs. Such curiosity or excitement may prove to be a cause of regret and
remorse for the rest of life. Before quenching these excitements, the pubescent
should think what problems smoking and alcohol may cause. If they consider
the bad effects of alcohol and smoking, it is natural that they will not develop
this bad habit. The following activities are to be followed if we like to be away
from smoking and drug abuse.
1. We should bear in mind what bad effects smoking and drug abuse cause to
our health.
2. We should also remember that for our smoking habit and drug addiction our
parents, brothers and sisters, or guardians will feel embarrassed and
20 ashamed. Teachers will never take it easy. We should always be careful so
& that such unwelcome situation does not take place.

62 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

3. Then we should take a firm decision about this. If we can do that from the
very beginning, we will be able to keep away from such disastrous habits.

4. At the time of taking a decision we should first analyse situations, identify
problems and probable risks, and then collect required information on this
subject. We have to gather information through various channels such as
personal source, family source or social source. Finally, based on the
information we should find out possible solutions to the problems and take
necessary initiatives to implement.

5. Refraining from smoking and drugs is not enough. We should raise
awareness and motivate our friends, classmates, relatives and
acquaintances to keep far away from these fatal addictions.

6. We should work actively to create public awareness about harmful effects
of drugs. Being aware of the evils of drug addiction, we all should keep
ourselves, our friends, classmates and acquaintances away from smoking
and drugs.

Role of others in keeping free from drug addiction: In getting addicted to

drugs, bad influence of already addicted friends plays a crucial role. But all

friends are not drug addicted and therefore, all friends are not harmful. Only a

few friends get drug addicted whereas most of the friends are free from drug

abuse and they are good. These good friends can motivate and influence others

to not taking any drug. Apart from friends and peers, there are many others

who also play significant role in keeping us drug-free. For example, the careful
eye of guardians upon their children acts as the most effective measure in this
connection. Also the role of teachers at school is very important. Teachers are
tole models to students. Students obey the advice and instructions of teachers
with highest sincerity and care. Following the advice and orders given by the
teachers in classroom or outside, students can avoid drugs. Similarly, relatives
and neighbours by means of their love and affection can also help children
keep aloof from the clutches of drug addiction. Furthermore, different mass
media such as newspapers, radio and television through their anti-drug
campaign and publicity can create wide public awareness too. On the other
hand, taking legal steps and leading social movements against drug abuse, we
can build a society free from drug addiction. Ss

Drug Addiction and AIDS 63

Activity-1: Write down four most heinous effects of drug addiction whose

remembrance that will remind you to naturally restrain you from
smoking and taking drug.

1, 2. 3. 4.

Activity-2: What steps should you take to keep your school smoking-free?
Lesson-3: Risks of drug addiction and techniques of
tackling them
Like in many other countries, in Bangladesh, the number of drug addicted
people is increasing gradually. Significant portions of the drug addicted people
are teenagers and adolescents. Again, many of the street urchins, working
children, and people of various occupations such as labourers, business persons,
rickshaw pullers, bus-truck drivers, other professionals and sex workers are
also drug addicted. One of the many causes of spread of drugs among these
people is the easy availability of drug. Other causes of drug addiction include
frustration, unemployment, family unhappiness, curiosity and influence of bad
friends etc.
Risks of drug addiction: There are various influences from different corners
on the teenagers to take drugs. Those friends or classmates who are already
addicted to drug may influence the teenagers by proposing to take drugs.
Besides, the drug peddlers or sellers of drugs may also instigate children to try
their item in many ways. Thus, the teenagers find themselves in a very risky
situation. Disaster occurs if anyone surrenders to the bad proposals of friends
and starts taking drugs with them. On the contrary, refusing the proposals of
friends to take drugs may cause coldness in friendship. Again, the rejection of
proposals by people other than friends may also create a situation where there
are risks of being harmed by them. We should always be careful so that such
risky situation does not take place.
Tackling risky situations: We should first observe the behavior, power and
influence of the people who provoke us to take drugs. Considering all these
aspects we should reject their proposals to take drugs so that there does not
take place any risky situations to get harmed. We should keep ourselves very
cool at the time of rejecting their proposals. If we cannot say ‘no’ directly, then
we should leave the place tactfully in order to avoid risks. If the
influencing person is a friend or relative, we should handle the situation

% carefully so that friendship or relationship does not deteriorate. When the
& situation is not that much risky, we should not only simply refuse their

64 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
proposals but also try to motivate them to come out of the evils referring to
harmful effects of drugs. If the people proposing for taking drugs create any
pressure, we should inform our parents or guardians at home and teachers at
school without delay. We should never take drugs even out of curiosity,
otherwise disaster will ensue. We should realise that undoubtedly any type of
drug is bad for an individual, family and society at large. Above all, we should
have determination not to take drugs.

Activity-1: What are the bad effects of drugs on individuals and family?

Activity-2: An individual by taking drugs experiences physical, mental,

social and financial harms. Mention one of these problems and
discuss in brief what will be the possible solutions.

Lesson-4: Building public opinion against drug addiction
Drug addiction is one of the biggest social challenges nowadays. As in many
other countries, in Bangladesh, the number of addicted people is alarmingly
increasing day by day. Though drug addicted people do not die immediately,
they invariably encounter various types of physical, mental, social, and
economic problems. The drug addicted people not only harm themselves by
taking drugs, they also affect others such as their parents, brothers and sisters,
children, relatives, friends etc. The drug addicted people get involved in many
antisocial and illegal activities including theft, robbery, murder, banditry etc
which are very harmful for individuals, family, society and the nation at large.
We should try our best to create awareness and raise voice against drug
addiction in order to save our young generation and society from the terrific
consequences of drugs. Enforcement of existing laws should be ensured so that
drugs are not easily available in society. We should build public opinion
to make everybody aware of the dangerous effects of drugs.
Other than slogans in mass media, the following ways can be used to build
public opinion against drugs-

1. To highlight the bad effects of drug addiction through radio, television,

newspapers etc.
2. To broadcast information about drug abuse and dangers relating to it.
3. To hold anti-drug events like meetings, conferences, street dramas, singing,
songs, reciting poems, stage dramas, opera-shows, rally etc. Ss

Drug Addiction and AIDS 65

4. To highlight religious doctrines against drug addiction in mosques, temples
and churches, discuss its harmful aspects and motivate all to keep away
from drugs.

5. To observe anti-drug and anti-tobacco days in schools and organise various
other programmes like group discussion, debate competition, leaflet
distribution, poster display etc.

6. To declare educational institutions, different offices, organisations,
departments as tobacco-free and drug-free zones.

7. To make everybody aware of the evils of drugs by printing anti-drug
slogans on book covers and notebook covers.

At the time of building public awareness we should run anti-drug campaigns

with the slogan “DRUG gives nothing but takes away everything”. Drug

addicted people believe that drugs help people forget pains and give pleasure,
which is fully wrong. Certainly , drugs beget more pains. If we find any of our
acquaintances addicted to drugs, we all should try sincerely to help them return
from the dangerous path of drugs.
Activity-1: Write such a slogan by which people can be motivated and made
aware of the bad effects of drug addiction.
Activity-2: Write down what you will do to run an anti-tobacco campaign in
your locality?
1.
2.
3:
4.
5.

Lesson-5: HIV-AIDS-Concept and out break

There are a few fatal diseases by which people are getting attacked more and

more. HIV-AIDS is one of them. Though there are medicines and treatments

for many serious diseases, unfortunately the world is still waiting for any
treatment that can fully cure AIDS. So, the consequences of AIDS are definite
death. We have immune system in our body to fight against germs. Due to this
immune system, any germs entering our body cannot harm easily. But there are

66 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
certain viruses that can gradually weaken our immune system and ultimately
destroy it completely. Such a virus is known as HIV.

What is HIV-AIDS? HIV and AIDS are two abbreviations. Full forms of these
two words are Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and Acquired Immune
Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). HIV is a special type of virus that can enter a
human body in a number of ways. HIV damages white blood cells and thus
destroys immune system of the body. When the virus enters a human body, the
patient frequently suffers from various other diseases such as diarrhoea,
tuberculosis, pneumonia etc and no treatment and medicine work to cure them.
Such a health condition of an HIV-contaminated individual is called AIDS. If
HIV enters any human body, its symptoms are not visible immediately.
Generally it takes time from 6 months up to a few years to be exposed as AIDS
symptoms starting from the day HIV enters the body. In some cases it takes
5-10 years or more to detect AIDS from the date of HIV contamination. This
time is called talent period. During this period HIV can spread to other’s body
from the people who have already acquired HIV.

Symptoms of AIDS: AIDS does not have any specific symptom. But when an
AIDS patient is attacked by other diseases, the symptoms of those diseases are
visible in the patient. Even there are some common symptoms of AIDS. They
are- (1) Cough prolonging more than a month at a stretch, (2) Skin disease all
over the body. (3) A kind of ulcer in face and throat, (4) Swelling of lymph
glands, (5) Decrease of memory and intelligence etc.

Main symptoms of AIDS

1) Quick loss of body weight.

2) Loose motion for more than a month.

3) Frequent fever or over sweating at night

4) Excessive tiredness or fatigue

5) Dry cough etc.

We should remember that if any or more symptoms from the above list are
visible in any individual, we cannot call them an AIDS patient for sure. HIV
can be detected from blood examination reports under the supervision of an
experienced doctor.

Spread of HIV-AIDS: HIV is a silent killer. In order to take cautionary
measures against this fatal disease we need to know how HIV and AIDS are
communicated from one person to another. HIV is not transmitted through air,
water, food or general physical contact etc. Basically HIV lives in various body x
fluids such as blood, semen, vaginal serum, breast milk etc. When blood or g

Drug Addiction and AIDS 67

semen or vaginal serum of an AIDS patient enters the body of another person

or when a child sucks breast of mother, they are contaminated by HIV virus.

Specifically speaking, HIV spreads in the following ways-

1) Illicit and unsafe physical union: The most common cause of spreading

HIV-AIDS is unsafe sexual relationship. According to statistics, it is found that

80% of HIV-AIDS affected people have acquired this virus as a result of unsafe

sexual union. HIV-AIDS virus enters the body of sexual partners via semen or

vaginal serum of the affected people.

2) Taking blood of affected people: HIV-AIDS can be communicated through

limb transplantation and needle and syringe already used by an AIDS patients.

Drug-addicted people frequently use the same needles and syringe to take drug

by many people together. Healthy people will be contaminated by using

needles syringe used by an HIV-AIDS affected person.

3) From mother to children: The virus of HIV-AIDS can be transmitted from

an affected mother's body to her children in three ways. They are-

a) During antenatal period

b) During delivery of children

c) During giving breast milk to children

The activities for which HIV-AIDS does not spread are mentioned below-

1) Through sneeze, cough, spit or breathing

2) Living in the same house or eating together from the same plate etc

3) Playing together and studying in the same class

4) Shaking hands, embracing or using clothes

5) Through mosquitoes or other, insects

6) Nursing the affected people and

7) Using the same bathrooms or toilets

We must know all these things can take preventive measures in order to save

ourselves and our society from a deadly disease like HIV-AIDS.

Activity-1: Write down the symptoms of HIV-AIDS on the board and make a
presentation in the classroom.

2
R

68 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
write ‘T’ for true and ‘F’ for false statements.
eames [ites
mothers

2 Nitaeced pope ||" pie ES
with affected people people

Spene SE abyattcedpete |
people used by affected people

S tetadyattetiy geen || attendpeis |
the body of a healthy person affected people

te
and insects with affected people

Lesson-6: Risks of HIV-AIDS in Bangladesh and ways to

remain free from risks

AIDS is a socio-economic and public health problem. Bangladesh is also

experiencing the outbreak of AIDS. Fortunately, it has not spread widely

among common people of the society. It is a matter of great concern that

HIV-AIDS may take serious form in course of time. Since there is no cure for

this disease we all should be very cautious about it especially the teenage girls

should be more careful about the fatality or such a disease.

Actually, in Bangladesh girls are more vulnerable to AIDS than boys. The

causes of girls’ vulnerability are as follows-

1. Weak position of girls in socio-economic structure in Bangladesh

2. Girls being less aware of AIDS than boys

3. Violence against women due to gender discrimination in the society

4. Girls inability to prevent males from establishing unsafe sexual
relationship.

5. Distinct physiological traits of girls.

6. Curiosity for sex and unsafe physical union etc.

One- fourth of the total population of Bangladesh are boys and girls of 11-19

years. Due to physical and mental changes at puberty, boys and girls have high

curiosity in their thinking and activities. But in our culture, they cannot ask the

senior members of the family anything about this. As a result, they become &

Drug Addiction and AIDS 69
very emotional and in order to satisfy their curiosity they feel interested to
establish physical relationship. In such a situation, they run the risks of
HIV-AIDS contamination.

Risky bahaviors for HIV contamination: In human body viruses live in

semen, vaginal serum, blood and breast milk. HIV-AIDS contamination takes

place through exchange of these four types of body fluids. That means when
blood or semen or vaginal serum or breast milk enters one’s body from the
affected people, HIV-AIDS contamination occurs. The risky behaviors of

HIV-AIDS contamination include-

a) Taking drugs or using the same injection needles and syringes by more than
one person.

b) Injecting blood into body without examination.

c) Using unsterilised equipment in surgical operations.

d) Giving birth to children by HIV-AIDS affected mothers

e) Establishing unsafe physical relationship etc.

Ways to keep free from HIV and AIDS risks

1. Avoid risky behaviors : We should avoid risky behaviors .

2. Control emotion: Adolescents mainly get engaged in risky behaviors as a
result of curiosity and emotion. We should control curiosity and emotion to
avoid risks of HIV-AIDS.

3. Reject risky proposal: We should be tactful and skilled in saying ‘no’ to any
unwanted and immoral proposals.

4. Follow religions and social customs: No religion or society supports drug
addiction, illicit physical or sexual relationship and other immoral activities.
Therefore, following religious regulations one can keep away from risks of
HIV, AIDS contamination. Being religious helps reduce HIV-AIDS risks.

5. Building awareness about HIV-AIDS: We should take necessary steps to ensure
wide public awareness about HIV-AIDS. In this regard we should make
publicity through mass media, organise rallies and make use of electronic media
as well. People should be motivated through traditional folksongs, ‘palagaan’ by
rural bards, street dramas and cultural programmes to be aware of the dangers of

x HIV-AIDS. All these programmes will play a very significant role in raising self
a awareness of individuals and ultimately public awareness in society.

70 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Activity-1: Students will divide themselves into groups and make a list of
tisky behaviours of HIV-AIDS contamination. Each group will

discuss on a risky behaviour in the classroom.

Activity-2: What is the most effective strategy for raising awareness of
HIV-AIDS? Show your argument in favour of your answer and
make a group presentation in the classroom.

Lesson-7: Risk of HIV-AIDS in Bangladesh

Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STD) and AIDS are two talked about issues of
the present day world. In America AIDS was first detected in 1981. AIDS is
such a dangerous disease that it decreases human life and hampers economic
growth of a country. AIDS is seen as one of the barriers to human civilisation
and development. According to the latest statistics of UNAIDS, there are about
33300000 HID-AIDS patients all over the world. At present approximately
6.800 men and women are getting affected by HIV-AIDS and the number of
affected people is increasing day by day. According to UNAIDS reports, 50%
of people who are getting affected by AIDS every year belong to the age group
below 25 years. Various socio-economic factors such as lack of opportunities
for education and health service, and economic incapacity compel the young
generation of poor countries to take risks of HIV-AIDS contamination. In
Bangladesh, there are cases of HIV-AIDS outbreak but it has not spread among
mass people yet. Even then due to world situation and regional circumstances,
we cannot remain inactive. It has been observed that HIV-AIDS is spreading
widely in many countries such as China, Cambodia, Vietnam and Nepal and
Myanmar, two neighbouring countries of Bangladesh. So, we have to take
appropriate steps before Bangladesh becomes more risky in this regard. In
Bangladesh, the rate of HIV contamination among high-risk-people such as
drug users, male and female sex workers, homosexuals, professional blood
sellers, floating people etc. is quite high. According to the statistics of 2010,
the probable number of HIV-AIDS contaminated people is 7500, the number of
identified HIV carriors is 2871, the number of people died of AIDS is 390. The
HIV-AIDS contamination among the drug users has taken an epidemic form
due to taking drugs by many people using the same needles and syringes.
Though the current rate of HIV contamination in Bangladesh is below 1%
there is no guarantee that the scenario will remain the same in future. AIDS S

Drug Addiction and AIDS 71
does not break out as epidemic at the beginning. That HIV explosion will not
take place in Bangladesh cannot be said for sure. There is no effective cure for
AIDS as yet, so its prevention is recommended all over the world. The
countries of the world observe the 18t of December every year as ‘World AIDS
Day’. On this special day all the countries from their respective position take
various programmes to prevent AIDS.

Activity-1: Students will divide themselves into a few groups and make a list
of risky behaviors that may lead Bangladesh to take an epidemic
form of HIV contamination and make a presentation in the
classroom.

Activity-2: Prepare an activity plan in order to observe World AIDS Day and
make a presentation.

Lesson-8 : Role of service-providing against HIV-AIDS
AIDS is an incurable disease in the present-day world and it's consequence is
definite death. There are cases of AIDS in Bangladesh and the number of
affected people is increasing gradually. Since there is no cure for AIDS as yet,
prevention is the only way to control it. Therefore we have to put emphasis on
preventive measures. In 1985 the Government of Bangladesh formed a
committee called National AIDS Committee to control the outbreak of AIDS.
In 1988, Bangladesh drew up short-term programmes to control AIDS under
financial support by World Health Organisation (WHO). But the Government
has been undertaking various programmes and steps to fight AIDS in
Bangladesh. These programmes are being implemented by the Government
and Non-Government ogranisations. Side by side with Government
organisations, the Non-Government service providers are also playing
significant roles in this regard. In every Government medical college and
hospital, services like blood-screening, counseling and limited treatment are
available for HIV-AIDS patients. Among NGOs Ashar Alo Society, Jagorani
Medical Clinic, Mukto Akash Bangladesh, HASAB (HIV-AIDS and STD
Alliance in Bangladesh), CAAP (Confidential Approach to AIDS Prevention)
etc and HIV-AIDS-related service providers have set up extensive programmes
= as well. Service-related programmes mainly include (1) counseling and (2)
“rehabilitation.

72 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Counseling : As yet there is no vaccine or medicine for HIV-AIDS. But
psychological support and strength, proper medication and nursing can help
HIV-AIDS-affected people live long healthily. Therefore mental support and
counseling services are very crucial for them. At the initial stage,
non-Government service provides collect required information about
HIV-AIDS victims, then they hold yard-meetings near the houses of the
victims. In the yard-meeting, experienced doctors and experts are invited for
open discussion on what HIV and AIDS are, how HIV spreads, how to deal
with the victims etc. Different NGOs taking expert counselors with them
regularly to visit the HIV-AIDS patients at their houses. They provide various
treatments to the patients along with required services.

Techniques of counseling: HIV-AIDS can be detected by examining blood of
a patient. Counseling is necessary before and after blood examination.
Counseling is very important because any person found with HIV positive gets
seriously afraid. They think about the fatal end of AIDS when there is no cure
for it. But the AIDS victims can live long provided they get required care,
proper food, mental support etc. by others. We should follow the following
steps in counseling patients.

1. Counseling after blood test: Anybody detected with HIV positive in their
blood gets mentally very weak. So, counseling after blood test report is very
vital. Only through advice and counseling the victims can be brought back to
normal life. The victims should take care about regular intake of nutritious
food, sufficient rest and sleep. Their mental strength can be enhanced through
giving them doctor's advice regularly.

2. Beware of other diseases: HIV positive patients gradually lose their
immunity. As a result, various diseases like diarrhoea, tuberculosis, high fever
etc. take the opportunity of the patient’s vulnerability. In such cases, patients
should take medicine and treatment as per the experienced doctor’s advice.

3. Treatment as per doctor's advice: There is no treatment for AIDS till
today. Medicines of antiretroviral group can be used to make the patients
remain quiet well and thus live long. But these medicines are extremely
expensive.

Rehabilitation: There are many Non-Government organisations that provide
different types of vocational training to the AIDS victims in order to make
them self-dependent. Furthermore, in special cases, there are services like
financial donation for their rehabilitation. &

Drug Addiction and AIDS 73
Activity-1: Suppose you are an officer of an NGO, working for HIV and
AIDS victims. Write how will you provide counseling services to
them?
the family members of an HIV victim.
Exercise
Multiple Choice Questions
1. What is made from Tobacco leaves?
a. Opium b. Marijuana
c. Cigar d. Cannabis
2. Because of taking drugs
i. abnormal behavior is observed.
ii. unrest occurs in family.
iii. appetite for food gets reduced.
Which one is correct?
a. i&ii b.i & iii
c. if & iii d. i, ii Beclit poate
3. Which system is the best against drugs addiction?
a. Controlling b. Penal
c. Cooperative d. Preventive
Read the stem below and answer questions 4 & 5.
As Shamim was wounded at the collapse of Rana Plaza, the authority took him
to the hospital quickly. Seeing his excessive bleeding, the doctor suggested to
donate him blood as fast as possible . To save Shamim, a man present there
donated a bag of blood. After receiving the blood and some other treatments,
Shamim got round and returned home two weeks later. After six months he
started suffering from itching and dry cough. Besides, he also suffered from
as possible continuous fever and diarrhoea.When he went to the doctor, after
some tests the doctor prescribed him some medicine and also told his
family to behave sympathetically with him.
4. By which disease was Shamim affected?
a. Diabetes b. Asthma
c. AIDS d. Typhoid

74 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
5. The need for Shamim's normal life is
i. mental peace
ii. appropriate nursing
iii. staying away from family.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. i&ii b. iG iii
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iti
Creative Questions
1. Shajal is a good student of class ten. For a few days, he has not been
attending school regularly. He is often seen to be loitering with bad street
boys. His class teacher informed his father about the matter. Shajal's father
himself observed the matter and said that recently he had been returning
home late at night. If anything was asked, he became angry. He became
aggressive. Shajal's father asked for the help of his teachers, neighbours
and friends to cure Shajal. His friends started taking him to different
cultural programmes. Sometimes he participated in games and sports and
went to visit beautiful places. After a few days, Shajal became well.
a. What is a drug?
b. Explain why the ability of learning and working is reduced.
c. What type of problem did Shajal face? Explain.
d. Whose role do you think is the most important for Shajal's getting well?
Analyse according to the stem.
=
Rg

Chapter Seven

Puberty & Reproductive Health
Affer birth, a baby gradually grows up. We call the various stages of growth as
Stage or Phase. A baby up to the age of five is called to be in its infancy or
babyhood. A boy or a girl during their infancy is called a baby. The age
between 6 to 10 years is called childhood. If a child is male, he is called a boy
and if it is female, she is called a girl A boy or girl from I to 19 years is
called a teenager or adolescent. This very time is called puberty.
During this phase, their body starts the
process of emerging into the body of a girl as ‘
or a boy with the distinction of gender. Ney Dp
Puberty is a stage or phase between 4, ‘9
childhood and youth. The knowledge on (") , KYA
the specific organa of the body directly 4 \ \ ibs
related to reproductive functionalities is \ oe
called the issues of reproductive health. Be ai
ita boy or girl, the reproductive health of {4 V) P
a boy or gitl is associated with the general * 7.
health for the various phases of human \) \a ee y
to adolescence and to a grownup person. \
So, everyone should know about (\A
reproductive health and the ways and ees Ks
means to preserve it as well. —

A boy and a girl during puberty
At the end of this chapter we will be able to
@ explain puberty and the various changes taking place during thi period/time.
@ identify the do’s and don’ts of the physical and mental changes during
puberty,
@ explain the strategy of how to face the various mental pressures and
@ describe the necessity of nutritous food at puberty.
@ explain the reproductive health and the possible measures for the sound
% maintenance of the same.
&

76 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
e@ explain the rules of reproductive health.

e explain various health tips and services during pregnancy.

@ have ideas about autism and explain it.

Lesson-1: Puberty and the Related Changes during
Puberty

A human being undergoes various stages/phases with the advancement of age.
These are sequentially infancy, childhood, adolescence, youth, middle age and
old age. The age of a baby from 0 to 5 years is called infancy. Again, age
between 6 andl0 is childhood, while the age between 11 and 19 is
adolescence. A boy or girl during adolescence is called adolescent. The
process of changing into male or female starts during adolescence. This very
nature and functionality of adolescence is called puberty. The puberty of a girl
starts earlier than a boy. The puberty stage begins during the age range of 8-13
years in case of girls. On the other hand, the puberty stage of boys usually
starts during the age range of 10-15 years. But in some cases, puberty may start
earlier than the stages mentioned here for some boys and girls.

The Changes during Puberty: The physical or physiological changes are
prominent during the evolution stage of puberty. On observing these changes, it
can be perceived that someone is passing or undergoing the puberty stage. The
changes that usually take place during puberty are of three kinds such as 1.
Physical or physiological, 2. Mental or psychological, 3. Behavioral.

The physical or physiological changes during Puberty

The changes that are prominent in case of adolescent boys are

1. Weight and height increase.

2. The body tones and tightens and the shoulder and chest widen.

3. Moustache and beard sprout.

4. Vocal cord becomes strong, harsh and crude/coarse.

5. Nocturnal emission and ejaculation take place.

The changes that are prominent in case of adolescent girls are

1. Weight and height increase.

2. The bone becomes harder, wider and fatter.

3. Menstruation or period starts.

Various adolescent boys and girls may not experience the same kind of changes 2
or growth during their puberty. As for example, some adolescent girls start 8

Puberty & Reporductive Health 77

menstruation earlier or later than the benchmark set against the age range. In

case of a boy or a girl adolescent, the height of everyone might not always

increase equally .

The Mental or Psychological changes during Puberty: During puberty,

certain mental or psychological changes also take place side by side with the

physical or physiological changes. These changes are natural and the

adolescents try to accommodate these changes with the passage of time. The

mental or psychological changes that happen during puberty are-

a. One becomes inquisitive about things unknown and unfamiliar.

b. Confusion, hesitation and shyness become pervasive in movement and
daily activities during physical changes.

c. One feels the urge to be independent or egalitarian.

d. The urge for attention and love of the dear and near ones becomes intense.

e. The tendency to be moved by emotion becomes dominant and strong.

f. The girls and boys feel attraction towards each other.

g. The stage of mental maturity starts.

Behavioral Changes during puberty: The behavioral changes that we notice

among the adolescents are-

a) To act like the grown ups.

b) To prove or establish him or herself as a distinct individual through various
regular and natural activities.

c) To form one’s own opinion and idea in every matter.

d) To increase interest on brave and risky work.

Activity-1: Form a group of 5/7 students according to the instruction of the
teacher. Think about your classmates or year mates. Fill in the
table below with the things that have commonly happen to all.
Give the title, “General Changes”. Then make another list of those
changes that are uncommon and give its title, “Other Changes.”

General changes during Puberty
1. 1.
2. 2.
3. 3.
<9 4. 4.
S|] 5. 5.

78 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Other changes during Puberty

1.

2.

3.

4.

5:
Lesson-2: To adapt with the Mental or Psychological
changes during puberty
We have learnt it earlier that generally the time or period of the boys and girls
during the age range of 11-19 is called puberty. During this time, the boys and
girls develop numerous changes in their physical structure and physiological
aspects while mental or psychological changes also prominently increase. But
due to a variation in climate, geographical location, topographical elements,
food intake and mental makeup, one might differ in starting the time of puberty
with the other one. The ingredient or element solely responsible for various
changes during puberty is actually a kind of chemical substance/matter called
‘Hormone’. Estrogen and Progesterone are two hormones responsible for
various mental or psychological and physical or physiological changes among
girls. Physiological and psychological changes that happen to boys are due to
the emergence of a hormone called Testosterone.
The mental agony or pressure during puberty: Due to physical and
physiological changes among the boys and girls, mental agony or pressure
takes place at the same pace, because these changes happen with a sudden
intensity. Not being familiar with these changes, one becomes frustrated or
worried sometimes. If a girl or boy is well briefed about the do’s and don’ts
during this stage, He or she will not be worried or lost or at a fix. They will not
have even the sense of guilt in them. These sort of guilty feelings and mental
agony are injurious to health. Some sort of discomfort and instability works
among the boys and girls during puberty. They face severe mental torments and
often cannot concentrate on their studies and regular chore of life.
To adjust with the psychological changes during puberty: If the adolescents
are aware of the changes during puberty and have preconceived ideas and
knowledge on the same, they would have the mental preparation for such
happenings. Consequently, they can take things easily and their regular
activities may also remain unhampered. At the same time, they can also &
prevent some possible diseases associated with these. While changes take place 8

Puberty & Reporductive Health 79
during puberty, one can discuss the issue with his or her parents, elder brothers
and sisters or anyone reasonable, responsible and guardian-like and form ideas
and get rid of unnecessary ill-feelings and a sense of guilt. As a result,
confusion and frustration will be overcome and a tendency towards leading a
solitary lifestyle would also be minimised. During puberty, the boys and girls
also develop some sort of emotional changes. At this stage, to help the
adolescents adapt with the mental or psychological changes, the parents and
guardians have to be very sympathetic and friendly with them. They need to be
encouraged and supported in terms of their mental or psychological changes
including all other changes. The adolescents themselves have to be careful and
attentive as well to ensure their sound mental health. Their first and foremost
task is to adjust with the physical or physiological and mental or psychological
changes happening inside them. Reading good story books and playing with
inmates, classmates and year-mates can naturally keep them jolly and jovial
and help them reduce such mental pressure or agony.
Activity-1: Teacher will ask the students to write down in groups some ways to

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.
Lesson-3: The necessity of nutrition during puberty
During puberty, boys and girls need nutritous food because during this period,
they grow abruptly and the activities of the body also increase rapidly. This is
why they need to take nutritious food. But many boys and girls and even their
guardians do not pay much heed to this matter. Some hold the opinion that

%© nutrition and rich food values are only found in expensive food and fruits. But
& such ideas are grossly mistaken and misleading as well. If one is cautious and

80 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
selective, one can derive rich food value and nutrition from easily available
and less expensive food and fruits.
The necessity of nutrition according to age, physical structure and nature
of job
A balanced diet is one that includes all the six essential elements of food value
and nutrients. According to age-diversity, the amount of balanced diet for an
individual may vary. As for example, an adolescent of 13/14 years old requires
more nutritional package than a child of 8/9 years old. There is no variation in
the nutritional intake between a baby boy and a baby girl; between an
adolescent boy and adolescent girl or male youth and female youth. Again, if
among two youths of the same age, where one is quite tall and healthy and the
other is undersized and of ordinary health, the food intake would drastically
vary and the one who is well-built and hardworking would consume more food
due to his or her health and body structure while the other one’s intake will be
reasonably lower. This disparity in food intake may even happen between two
girls or females of the same age and body structure. This is how the food intake
varies depending on the variation in age, body structure and job nature. All the
six elements of food are essential for each individual during the puberty period
or stage both for the physical and mental growth. These foods provide essential
nutrients to the body necessary for balanced and proportionate growth.
Besides, malnutrition among the adolescents may cause various diseases.
é )
fel] Green coconut i com pale
NK AM- aD SX Fish
Rice bread Meat ~~!
Six essential elements of food
Activity-1: Prepare a list of balanced diet for the adolescents. This list should
include all other items that are cheap and easily available. FS
Ny

Puberty & Reporductive Health 81
nutritious food and also about the necessity of food and its
variation according to age, body structure and job nature and
discuss those in class.

Lesson-4: Reproductive Health and Preservation of the

same

The reproductive organ and the process associated to reproduction, are called

reproductive health. So, reproduction in its original sense means to give birth

to babies. The safe and healthy birth of future generation actually depends on
the healthy lifestyle and reproductive organs of the present generation. So, for

a healthy, safe and joyful lifestyle and livelihood, everyone should acquire

proper knowledge about reproductive health.

The necessity of reproductive health and ways and means: At puberty by

the hormonal changes, the girls and boys undergo certain physical and

physiological changes. If the boys and girls do not have any preconceived
ideas about such changes, they usually get worried and harm themselves being
misled by faulty ideas and conception. Cleanliness is the most vital part of
reproductive health. When menstruation happens, it is essential to be neat and
clean and take regular bath/shower. During this period, one needs to have
nutritous food and enough water. A girl should take advice of
the parents, health workers and close relatives about these issues. Keeping this
period in mind, the parents and guardians should be friendly and sympathetic
towards them. Supportive and friendly attitudes would help them to come out
of such worries and discomfort and consequently would make them happy and
facilitate their healthy growth. The biggest and worst risk of reproductive
health is to get married at an earlier age and be pregnant. Besides being
attacked by various diseases, there exist potential risks of death both for
mother and the baby. To protect reproductive health, one must be married at
adulthood. If one follows the government order, one can easily avoid such
risks. Disease in reproductive organs may break out for various reasons. One
should not hide if one is attacked by venereal or reproductive-organ-related
diseases. One should take medicine and instructions from a competent doctor.
This can help avoid infectious and venereal diseases.

82 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Activity-1: Write in the table what to do in order to preserve reproductive
health.

Things to be done
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Lesson-5: The Health Rules for Reproduction and the

Service Required during Pregnancy

One of the special parts of the whole human health is reproductive health.

Reproductive health does not necessarily mean the absence of diseases related

with reproductive organs. Reproductive health means and includes safe and

secure reproductive process through sound and safe physiological,

psychological and behavioral condition. Delivery is the process of begetting a

new human being. The healthy future generation largely depends on the

holistic approach initiated for the reproductive health of the present generation.

Various indispensible elements incorporated with reproductive health:

1. The reproductive health rules during puberty: During puberty boys and

girls need to abide by the rules and regulations of reproductive health.

2. Pregnancy at the proper time: A girl should not conceive before 20 years

of age. If conceived at the proper age, it becomes beneficial both for the child

and the mother.

3. Safe maternity: Safe maternity means and includes the maintenance of a

healthy state and condition of the carrying mother right from the pregnancy, to

delivery to post-delivery stage. The death rate of maternal morbidity is high in

Bangladesh. The main reason of such maternal morbidity is that the mother

during pregnancy is not properly taken care of.

She hardly gets adequate food, medicine and medical facilities. Besides, early

marriage and pregnancy also cause the illness and malnutrition for both mother

and baby.

4. Early care/pre-natal care for the baby: After being conceived, if the

pregnant mother does not take nutritious food, receive proper medical treatment,

take proper rest and sleep and keep clean and fresh, she is very likely to suffer ¥
from various complicated diseases. »

Puberty & Reporductive Health 83

5. The care of the nascent baby: A baby from its birth up to 28 days is called a

nascent child. Right after its birth, it is crucial to lactate the baby, provide

adequate food to the lactating mother and the baby as well as immunize the

baby by the right vaccination.

6. The nutrition of the child and the mother: Most of the babies and mothers

in our country suffer from malnutrition. Since the pregnant and carrying

mother suffers from malnutrition, consequently, the baby is also affected by

malnutrition. The main reason of such pregnancy is to be repeatedly pregnant

and having children.

7. The treatment and clinical care of various diseases relating to

reproductive organs and the prevention of such diseases: Among all such

diseases, some diseases are worth mentioning. These are infectious diseases,

venereal diseases, malignancy of the productive organs and HIV/AIDS. The

affected persons should contact with the various consulting agencies

responsible for the treatment of these diseases and take necessary consultancy

from them.

Healthcare during pregnancy: Pregnancy is a special kind of change in

human body. When a baby is conceived, this change in body only happens to

the mother. Some irritable syndromes are noticed or felt by the females/

going-to-be-mothers within a few months from the time of conception. The

common syndromes are menopause, vomiting tendency or vomiting, giddiness,

frequent urination. If someone is pregnant at an adult stage, she does not suffer

from serious complications relating to physiology or psychology or behavior.

The essential services and nursing cares to be rendered during pregnancy,

according to standardized norms of reproductive healthcare literature, are-

a. To be clean and fresh.

b. To take bath or shower regularly.

c. To take nutritious food, rest and sleep properly.

d. To be under direct supervision of a competent gynecologist.

e. To keep contact with the nearby clinic to combat pregnancy-related

complications.

f. To safeguard the reproductive organs from any sort of infection.

g. To abide by the religious and social norms and etiquette. So, one should keep
26 oneself busy or occupied with studying various books and various family or
s social activities.

84 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

Activity-1: Prepare a list for a pregnant mother for the various precautions
mentioned in this book.

Activity-2: Write chronologically the various irritating syndromes that are
observed among the pregnant mother within a few months from
the time of conception.

Lesson-6: Autism

We pass our day to day life through various odds and problems. Happiness and
sorrows are everyday phenomena of human life. When a baby is born in a
family, everybody becomes happy and excited. Parents keep planning so many
things for the bright future of the new-born. One of the issues of their planning
is healthy and normal development of the child. Physical, psycho-social and
intellectual development of a child takes place in a certain way but there are
some exceptions in this respect. Parents get worried when they see that their
child is behaving differently from other normal children or not following
normal rules of development or lagging behind its age group. Gradually there
prevails despair and frustration in the famiy. At first parents have to struggle
with their own minds to accept the difference in their child. At the same time,
parents have to face many odds due to negative attitudes of society and family
members towards the baby. Normal development of a child includes acquiring
physical skills (sitting, standing, walking, using hand etc), mental skills
(intelligence, emotion, memory, thinking, behavior, personality) and social and
communication skills with the growth of age. On the other hand, development
related problems are usually a longstanding condition of a child, which
happens at the time of brain development of a part or whole physical system.
Autism is one of the development-related problems of children.

What is autism?

Autism is not a disease. It is an extended form of neural development-related
problems which is known as autism spectrum disorder. Here ‘neuron’ means
neural system which is related to brain. Again by development-related, we mean
development process of children. The problem of autism is found in early
childhood and it impedes normal development process of a child. Generally
symptoms of autism are exposed from 18 months to 36 months after a child was
born. Abnormality in social relationship, communication and behavior is the
main area of this problem. Besides, autistic children also suffer from physical,
intellectual, learning process and sensitivity-related problems. We should bear =
in mind that all autistic children are not the same. There are some symptoms R

Puberty & Reporductive Health 85
common to all autistic children but there are some other symptoms which vary
from child to child. In autism spectrum, different types of autism are found.
Autism spectrum can be compared to a rainbow. Like many colours in the
rainbow spectrum, there are types of autism in autism spectrum. One of this
type is known as Asperger’s syndrome.
Asperger’s syndrome: It is one kind of autism seen on the autism spectrum.
Children suffering from this syndrome can naturally develop intellectual and
linguistic skills though they have problems with behaviors. In spite of having
normal language skills and adequate vocabulary, they find it difficult to
participate in social conversations. They repeat similar behaviors again and
again. Specifically they cannot understand minute details of communication
such as making eye contact with others, facial expressions of others, signs and
signals, body language and expression of emotions. They analyse words
literally and consequently they fail to understand idioms, proverbs, fun or
taunts. Such children do not suffer from retardation in development. In
education they do better and even their intelligence is higher than that of
common children. Asperger’s syndrome is detected much late even at puberty
or manhood. The rate of asperger’s syndrome is ten times higher in boys than
in girls.
Children with asperger’s syndrome can read and write properly and confidently
but they cannot understand the relevance of facts. Usually, students with
asperger's syndrome have huge stock of vocabulary, they can speak
systematically and often they can discuss on their favourite topics for long. But
the problem is that they hardly realize whether the audience is interested in the
subject.
It is difficult for them to maintain social communication through games and
sports as they have problems in neural system, difficulties in physical
movement, lack of attention to any subjects, lack in sense of time and problems
in muscles. Students with this syndrome may suffer from anxiety because of
their problems in organising power and concentration in work. They love to
follow rules and regulations, instructions and routines in life. Any break of rule
causes them mental uneasiness and confusion.
General behaviors of autistic children:
e Not making eye contact
e@ Not responding to calls

co @ Inconsistency in skills-related development

& @ Opposing any change in daily routine

86 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

e@ Showing hyperactivity or excitement

e Problems in expressing emotions

e Abnormal physical gestures

e@ Not being afraid of real dangers whereas getting scared in normal cases

e Irrelevant laughter or cry

e Unnatural attraction to something

e Abnormality in eating, sleeping, discharging urine and stool

e Harmful behavior for self or others

e Eating anything

Main characteristics of autism

For each child the characteristics and degree of autism are different. Main

identifying characteristics are social interaction, communication with others

and repetative behaviors . These three are known as main characteristics to

identify autism. Due to autism the feeling of senses, skills of communicating

with others and social interaction get retarded. As a result, repeatations of

behaviors or enthusiasm for inconsistent behaviors are seen. We should

know that autism is caused by neurotic problems and therefore symptoms of

two autistic patients are not exactly the same.

A. Social symptoms: Most of the autistic children find it very difficult to

maintain social interaction with others. In the first few months of their life,

they do not maintain direct eye contact with others. They are indifferent in

attitudes and like to be alone. They do not expect attention from others and also

do not like to be hugged. They do not show normal reaction to others anger or

affection. The autistic children take a long time to learn anything and they do

not react to the thinking or feeling of others. Common gestures such as

smiling, eye blinking, or facial expressions carry little meaning to them. The

children who do not understand the meaning of gestures cannot understand the

meaning of the sentence “Come here” in different situations. As they do not

realise the meaning of body gestures and facial expressions the social world

remains meaningless to the autistic children.

The tendency of the autistic children’s being excited and aggressive blocks

them from developing social relationships. When they go out and see

unfamiliar people, they get angry or frustrated; some of them lose control upon

themselves. At that time they may break things, hurt others or even their own

body. =
8

Puberty & Reporductive Health 87
B. Problem of communication: Language is the main medium of
communication. Due to language problems, autistic children face difficulties in
communication with others. From linguistic development aspects, autistic
children are different. There are some autistics children who never learn how to
speak and thus remain speechless for the whole life. Some other children do
babbling after a few months of birth but it also stops. Again for some others it
takes 5-9 years to learn language. But the autistic children can learn to
communicate with others by means of picture, signs, or touch. Many autistic
children show abnormality in language use. They cannot make correct sentence
by using correct words, some of them express their minds with a single word;
some others repeat the word they hear. Some autistic children listen to a word
and keep repeating the same like a parrot. It is called echo-lalia.
There are many other autistic children who have little problem in language use.
They can use many words and have conversations correctly. But they cannot
understand the differences in meaning of the same sentence in different
situations. Again they also cannot properly realise the changes of meaning
caused by changes in body movement and tone.
C. Repetative behaviors: Children with autism are physically normal and
almost all of them have ability to control muscles but unusual repetative
behaviors make them different from other children. This repetative behavior
may be either mild or acute. Many of them move their hands again and again,
stand up on the toes, or keep standing in a special style for long time. Often they
do not play with toys like cars and trains but they arrange them in a line. If any
one breaks the line of toys carelessly, they become worried and frustrated.
Children with autism want to see everything as it is around them. They do not
like change of any sort. They get very annoyed if there is a little change in
daily routine like timely eating, taking bath, following the same road to school
etc. Repetative behaviors keep them engaged in such as gating at moving fans
or lights for long time. Some of them take special interest in numbers, signs or
science.
Some distinctive qualities and strong aspects of autism
Some autistic children show outstanding skills and abilities in some specific
areas. The number of such gifted children is insignificant but such special
qualities make them different from others. It is not true for every autistic child.
The guardians should be careful about special skills of the autistic children and
co thus they will be able to help the children develop their preferred skills through
& proper care and attention.

88 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

It is found that autistic children can develop their talent in any area they pay

attention to. For example, by paying attention to calendar such children can

remember dates of births of many famous personalities and thus they can

remember losts of information at a time. Again by paying attention to a

difficult and technical task they can solve the problem by dividing it into small

parts.

Some strong sides of autistic children

@ Ability to observe minutely

@ Understanding and remembering discipline and routine, sequence pattern
ete.

@ Memorising mathematics, time table of trains, scores in a game etc.

@ Skills in computer and technology

@ Interest for music and musical instruments

@ Attention to special subjects of preference

@ Artistic skills

@ Reading written language at early age in spite of problems in understanding

@ Memorising spellings of words

@ Truthfulness

@ Skills in solving problems

Causes of autism spectrum disorder

In short, it can be said that why autism occurs is not known yet. But along with

increase in awareness and knowledge of autism, the search for its causes is also

going on more widely. Though its actual cause is still unknown, it is

scientifically established that autism may occur for many unidentified reasons.

From the complexities that arise from autism it can be inferred that there might

be a number of causes of autism. Any time during antenatal period, during

birth or postnatal period autism may take place due to genetic influence or

risky environment.

Only a few symptoms of autism in children do not prove that they are suffering

from autism. Only can a specialist doctor say whether any child is suffering from

autism or not. Doctors like child disease specialists, psychiatrists, child

psychiatrists, child neurologists, psychologists or doctors trained in autism are the

right persons to diagnose autism. x

g

Puberty & Reporductive Health 89
Inclusion of autistic children into mainstream education programmes
Education programmes for autistic children should be intense and elaborate. In
that case specialist professionals are needed to determine how many hours a
week autistic children will spend for study, based on their behaviors,
development, social and academic needs etc. Only a single method may not be
enough to educate autistic children and that is why more than one method may
be tried at a time or gradually. Based on applied behavior analysis principles a
number of methods may be applied to autistic children where necessary.

Side by side with normal education system, the teachers have to provide
necessary care for education and development of the autistic children. To
prepare guardians and others family members to take necessary steps to help
the autistic children in their strengths and needs, there should be good
communication among them regarding effective strategy, coordination and
assistance for the development of the children. Not only classroom education
for autistic children but also inclusion of them into mainstream education is
important. It may be for short time but effective inclusion into mainstream
increases the autistic children’s confidence and skills. For the success of
autistic students in their academic performance, others’ positive attitude
towards them is very essential. Therefore, their small successes should be
highlighted to encourage them. If the teachers as well as parents and other
family members know the characteristics of autism and qualities of a specific
student, they can make a practical plan to develop the autistic.

How you can help your autistic friends at your class

Classmates of autistic children are called ‘cooperative friends’. We should
tealise the concept of friendship and develop environment of being united so
that autistic children can grow with proper help and due respect. Compassion
and positive mentality for autistic children will benefit all of us because among
them some are our brothers or sisters or neighbours or relatives.
Autism-related education or training for compassion should not be based on
specific students but it should be universally applicable to all.

Role of classmates for autistic children in understanding instructions and
social interactions

1. Taking students from one class to another

2. Keeping classroom work and educational equipment tidy

3. Maintaining daily class routine

4. Encouraging interaction with other students

90 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
5. Retelling the gist of what the teachers teach in the class
6. Assisting the autistic children to participate in classroom discussions
7. Helping them express their answers made orally or with communication
machines in writing
8. Giving them required guidelines and motivation when they are frustrated
9. Rewarding autistic children for maintaining communication with others
10. Giving necessary instructions to understand classroom activities
Generally the symptoms of autism may be there in a person throughout their
life but proper care, assistance, guidelines and education may improve some of
the symptoms to some extent. Those who have minor problems may improve
remarkably and lead more or less a normal life. It is seen that children with
acute problems do not improve much in speech and cannot take care of
themselves even. Obviously, if the problems are detected in their early years,
intensive training and instructions may help the autistic children achieve
success in many fields.
A good number of voluntary organisations namely Proyash, Autism Welfare
Foundation, SWAC, Autistic Children Welfare Foundation etc have been
developed in Bangladesh to deal with the problems of autism. There are some
specialised schools for education and training of autistic children. Government
support and sponsorship will help these organisations develop more and
contribute effectively.
Activity-1: Write down the symptoms of autism.
Activity-2: Write on the board what should the classmates do with autistic
children?
Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. What type of food is rice?
a. Protein b. Sugar
c. Fats d. Minerals
2. One of the main reasons for malnutrition of mother and child is -
a. Early marriage b. Ignorance ~
c. Becoming mother in quick succession _d. Lack of treatment S

Puberty & Reporductive Health 91
3. What is reproduction?
a. Feelings during pregnancy b. Abortion
c. Taking care of the new born d. Giving birth to a child
4. The reasons for changes at adolescent period are -
i. Diferences of nutrition
ii. Hormone
iti. Reproductive health
Which one of the following is correct?
a. i&ii b. it & iii
c. i& iii d. i, ii & iii
5. What type of changes happen in a teenager's body due to hormones?
a. The body gets heavy. b. Bones get thick.
c. Chest and shoulders get broad. d. Height increases and weight decreases.
Read the stem below and answer questions 6 & 7.
Mr. Shafiq is a farmer. His daughter Nafiza is in class six. Due to his needs, he
was facing trouble in continuing her study. In this situation, he got her daughter
married. After a year, she became pregnant. After delivering the child, Nafiza
became ill. Observing Nafiza's condition, their next door neighbour, a school
teacher, made a huge campaign against early marriage. Many young boys of
that locality took initiative to make the campaign successful. As a result, there
was no early marriage in the last three years in that area.
6. What is the reason of Nafiza's condition?
a. Pregnancy at an immature stage b. Malnutrition
c. Ignorance and unconsciousness d. Neat and clean
7. Which factor is the first priority to prevent the early marriage of girls like
Nafiza?
a. Including in textbook
b. More propagation activities
c. Participation of parents in awareness raising activities
_ d. Reducing the age of marriage
S
x)

92 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Read the stem below and answer questions 8 & 9.
Shila is a student of class eight. Due to her depression, she stays alone in her
room all day. She doesn't get any fun from her activities and shows lack of
interest in her studies. When she was taken to the doctor, he said that, ‘It's not her
disease but it's the problem of her age.’
8. What is Shila's present period called?
a. Childhood b. Youth
c. Adolescence d. Infanthood
9. What Shila's parents did to Shila as mentioned in the stem is -
i. enforced strict rule
ii. behaved sympathetically
iii. behaved friendly
Which one of the following is correct?
a. iGii b. ii & iii
c. i& iii d. i, & iti
Creative Questions
1. Mr. Arif, after a few years of the birth of his daughter Tusu, observed that
her behavior is different than the other normal children and she has fallen
far behind for her age. She does not respond if called and repeats her
speech again and again. She does whatever she thinks. She can't get along
with others.
a. What is Echolalia?
b. Explain why Autism is.
c. What type of problem is Tusu facing?
d. What type of impression will Tusu's behavior leave upon the society?
Analyse according to the textbook.
ES
ES

Chapter Eight
Team game
Games are inevitable for students at School. Games help students develop
physically and mentally and acquire social qualities. The main aim of games
and sports is physical and mental development together with enjoyment.
Games and sports keep body and mind fresh and help build character,
Participation in team games helps grow as good citizens by acquiring social
qualities such as team obedience, law abiding, following the leader, a sense of
discipline etc.
j 7 Yh /, My
NS
&
Equipment of different games
At the end of this chapter we will be able to-
e@ Explain the rules and regulations of games Football, Cricket, Hockey,
Basketball, Volleyball, Handball, Kabaddi and Badminton.
e Explain skills and techniques of mentioned games.
@ Explain the qualities of players of different positions in different games.
@ Participate in different games maintaining rules and regulations.
@ Develop skills in a game by acquiring qualities and skills of good players.
@ Develop helping attitudes through team games.
@ Develop leadership qualities.
« @ Develop a sense of obediance to the law of the team.
Ss
N

94 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Lesson-1: Rules and regulations of games

Football- Football is an ancient game. In course of time this game has become
a modern game. Modern football originated in England. Again rules of football
were also formulated in England. Due to its huge popularity this game has
spread all over the world very fast. Though Bangladesh is a small country, still
football is a very popular game here. There is an international body to control
football namely Federation International Football Association (FIFA). This
organization came into being on 21 May in 1904 in Paris. With initiatives and
cooperation from this organization, football has spread in many countries. As a
member of FIFA, Bangladesh has popularised the game all over the country.
Football is the most popular game in the world. There are 17 rules to organise
and conduct the football game. FIFA ensures formulation and implementation
of these rules. Therefore this game is held all over the world maintaining same
tules. Players abide by the rules and the referee implements the rules properly
and neutrally. So, this game has become enjoyable and exciting. The rules are
discussed sequentially belows. comer maximumi00 yard 5g minimum. 0 yard

1, Playing field (rectangular): “Dp |, 7 °
Playing field is the first rule of a Fine

football. The maximum length L__sof _|

of the field is 130 yards. The

minimum length is 100 yards.

The maximum width is 100

yards and the minimum is 50 4% E
yards. a i
The measurement of playing ae ae lie oy Tt
field at international level will [ — fT econ
be- ag ttt
a) Length 120 yards, width 80 yards F|

b) Length 115 yards, width 75 yards 2

c) Length 110 yards, width 70 yards. :

Any one of the above mentioned *

measurements of field is used for =

competitions at national and

international level. But for school N A
children playing field may be in 6 eens 1 jie a
length 100 yards and width 50 om 7 ™ =
yards. Football field §

Team Game 95
1.1. Line marking width: The width of each line not exceeding 5 inches. The
name of the length line in touch line & width line is called goal line.
1.2. Goal area: 6 yards from each goal post and extended 6 yards in the
field of play are joined with parallel goal line. It's length is 20 yards.
1.3. Penalty area: 18 yards from each goal post and extended 18 yards into
the field of play are joined with parallel goal line. It's length is 44 yards. The
recfangular area within it is called penalty area.
1.4. Penalty mark: A 9 inch radius mark or which the ball is placed for a
penalty kick is called the penalty mark. This mark is in-between two goal posts
12 yards away from the goal line in the field of play.
1.5. Corner flag: 4 flags are put up in the four corners of the playing field.
The height of the flag is at least 5 feet. The top of the flagpole will not be sharp
and the flag will be on top. There will be two flags in the middle one yard
away from the touch line on either side of the field which is optional.
1.6. Corner area: From each flag pole or a quarter circle, having a radius of
one yard is drawn inside the field of play. The corner kick is made from this
comer area.
1.7. Goal post: The height of the lower edge of crossbar is 8 (eight) feet from
the ground and the distance between two goal posts is 8 (eight) yards. There is
a net to cover the goal post from the back side. The net is hung in such a way
that the goal keeper should not feel any disturbance or obstacle.
1.8. Center circle: There is a circle of 10 yards radius in the middle of the mid
line. This circle is known as center circle.
2. The ball: The ball will be spherical in shape, it will be made by leather and
similar kind of products. It will be filled with air.
3. The players: A football team is formed with 18 players. Eleven members
will play and seven members will be standbys or extra players and will stay
outside the playing field. But in a regional or interschool football competition
the number of players may be reduced.
4. Equipment of players: The compulsory dress for a football player is a
jersey or shirt, shorts or half pants, socks, shin guards and boots. Players
cannot wear a dress or a thing that can be dangerous for others.

20

Ss

XQ

96 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
5. Referee: A person who conducts the game is known as a referee.
6. Deputy referees: Two deputy referees help the referee in the field. There is
a fourth referee outside the field. He also helps the referee.
7. Duration of the play: In international or national games, for each half of
the play, the time is 45 mins with an interval of not exceeding 15 mins.
8. The start of play: Players of both teams stay in their own half and the
game will start with a kick-off with the whistle of the referee.
9. Ball in and out of play: When the ball crosses the touch line or the goal
line through air or ground it is said to be out of play. If the ball is on touch line
or goal line then it is considered to be in play.
10. The Goal: When a ball crosses the goal line completely may be in the air
or on ground a goal is declared.
11. Offside: If a player stays at the opponent half without ball and two
opponents are not in front of him, and in that position if he receives a ball from
his teammate, he will be considered as offside.
12.Fouls and misconduct: There are two types of kick for fouls and
misconduct.
a. Direct free kick b. Indirect free kick. A free kick will be given if a player
commits any of the following offense.
(a) kicks or attempts to kick an opponent;
(b) trips an opponent, i.e., throwing or attempting to throw him by the use of
the legs or by stooping in front of or behind him;
(c) jumps at an opponent;
(d) charges an opponent in a violent or dangerous manner;
(e) charges an opponent from behind unless the latter is obstructing;
(f) strikes or attempts to strike an opponent or spits at him;
(g) holds an opponent;
(h) pushes an opponent;
(i) handles the ball, i.e., carries, strikes or propels the ball with his hand or
arm; (this does not apply to the goalkeeper within his own penalty-area);
og,
An indirect free kick will be for following fouls: 3

Team Game 97
1. playing in a manner considered by the referee to be dangerous, e.g.
attempting to kick the ball while held by the goalkeeper;

2. charging fairly, i.e. with the shoulder, when the ball is not within playing

distance of the players concerned and they are definitely not tying to play it;

3. when not playing the ball, intentionally obstructing an opponent, i.e.

running between the opponent and the ball, or interposing the body so as to

form an obstacle to an opponent;

4. charging the goalkeeper except when he

(a) is holding the ball;

(b) is obstructing an opponent;

(c) has passed outside his goal-area.

5. when playing as a goalkeeper and within his own penalty-area:

(a) from the moment he takes control of the ball with his hands, he takes more
than 4 steps in any direction whilst holding, bouncing or throwing the ball
in the air and catching it again, without releasing it into play, or

(b) having released the ball into play before, during or after the 4 steps, he
touches it again with his hands, before it has been touched or played by a
player of the opposing team either inside or outside of the penalty area, or
by a player of the same team outside of the penalty-area, subject to the
overriding conditions of 5(c), or

(c) touches the ball with his hands after it has been deliberately kicked to him
by a team-mate, or

(d) indulges in tactics, which in the opinion of the referee, are designed to hold
up the game and thus waste time and so give an unfair advantage to his
own team,

13. Free kick: A goal that can be scored directly from a kick is called free kick.

A goal that is not scored from a kick is indirect free kick.

14. Penalty kick: If any player of defending team inside the penalty area

commits any fouls out of those ten fouls then opponents will get penalty kick.

But the law number 10 is not applicable for the goalkeeper if it is a direct free

kick.

98 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
- é
tr
Throwing
15. Throwing: If the ball crosses the touch line by the touch of any player the
opponent team will throw the ball from that place. This is called throwing.
16. Goal kick: If the ball crosses the goal line outside of two goal posts by the
touch of an opponent player, game starts with a kick. This is called goal kick.
17. Corner kick: When the ball crosses the goal line outside the goal posts by
own team, the opponent will get a corner kick.
Skills of game: Football is a speedy game. It requires good physical fitness
and also skills. A player having speed, stamina and skills will be a good player.
Basic skills of football are as follows. 1. Kicking, 2. Heading 3. Dribbling, 4.
Trapping, 5 Tackling, 6. Goal keeping.
1. Kicking: Football is played by legs. One who can acquire skills to control
the ball by their legs will be able to play football. There are three sides of leg.
They are inside, outside, instep. A player uses these three sides. Football player
can play different types of kicks using different parts of the leg. But an inside
kick that is easy and correct can give pass to the nearer player. Many times a
player uses outside kick while giving pass to the right side player. That means
giving pass by using the outer side of foot. Players kick hard the middle of the
ball using right foot placing in their left foot left side of the ball also keeping
an eye on the ball to send it straight rolling on the ground. Players maintain a
balance by spreading both hands, kicking foot going straight and forward.
Kicking the lower side of the ball will send it high. m
S
AQ

Team Game 99
Nd (sat A
{gf
a pry
4
OY
A/
kicking a
2. Heading: While heading the ball, keep in mind that you have to hit the ball
with forehead.
em &
= al
KR Ws
a
FY
Heading

Techniqus of heading

a) Hit the ball with forehead.

b) Keep eye on the ball.

c) Hit the ball with forehead bending upper limbs a bit backward.

d) Both hands will be spread a bit.
~ e) While heading left or right you have to hit the ball by forehead turning the
Ss head left or right.

100 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

3. Dribbling

Dribblings are two types.

a) Short dribble- to control the ball.

b) High dribble- to cover more distance.

Exercise: Dribble the ball from one end to the other end of field. First dribble

with right leg then dribble with left leg and afterwards dribble with both legs.

Exercise dribbling by using different parts of leg.

4. Trapping: To control or stop the ball by other than hand is known as

trapping. Trappings are many kinds such as-

a) Sole trap b) Shin trap

c) Thigh trap d) Chest trap

e) Head trap.

a) Sole trap: To stop a rolling ball or a high ball by sole of foot is called sole trap.

b) Shin trap: To stop a high ball with shin after it drops on the ground.

c) Thigh trap: To control a high ball with the thigh. After the ball touches the
thigh, the thigh has to be drawn downwards. As a result, the speed of the
ball will be lossened and it will fall in the front.

PO _, i

oN P Ps BN > 4 F- d

y) 3
* Zo t
Trapping
d) Chest trap: To control a high ball at shoulder level with the chest.
a9

e) Head trap: To control a high ball at head height level with the forehead. $

Team Game 101
Exercise: Two players/students will stand face to face. One student will throw
ball, the other student will stop it by trapping it. Trapping will depend on the
height of the ball in relation to the body i.e.,
head-height ball will be trapped with head 9)
thigh-height ball by the thigh etc. If the ball
drops in front of the player with low height PN
trapping will be the sole or shin. Students will , KS
practice in this way and developing expertise, , iF, bP Z S .
developing the mastery of the skill. Ree. HY ON
5. Tackling: Tackling is a very important iS ete
defensive skill. One can snatch a ball from ‘Par ¥ |
their opponent by using this skill. To take f\ a Vi}
control of the ball from the opponent is known i v7 |
as tackling. Je / \\
6. Goal keeping: The responsibility of a goal f MV fas a
keeper is very high in a football game. Goal Goal keeping "
keeper can stop the ball with any part of the
body. But goal keeper mainly uses his hand
for stopping the ball. For example,
a) Catching the low ball: When the ball is rolling on the ground or flying at a
low height, the goal keeper will go towards the ball from behind, and bending
the upper limb forward and keeping one leg one step ahead he will catch the
ball.
b) Catching low (waist) height ball: Firstly, the goal keeper will go to the line
of the ball will always keep an eye on it, catch the ball with both hands and
keep the ball near to his chest.
c) Catch the high ball: While catching a high ball you should jump up and
catch the ball with two hands keeping the palms behind the ball. Again the
balls which are out of range and cannot be caught should be punched out to
avoid the goal post.
Activity-1: Draw a football field with all necessary markings and present in
the class.
Activity-2: Draw and name the different parts of leg.
s | Activity-3: Demonstrate in the practical class which part of forehead will be
S used to head a ball.

102 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Lesson-2: Cricket

The birth place of cricket is England. It is called the king's game. Cricket is an
aristocratic game. Due to clean dress, day long match, lunch break, afternoon
tea, gentle behavior of players, cricket is called an aristocratic game.
Considering its huge popularity, there arose the need to form an international
committee to formulate rules and regulations to control its publicity
managment etc. The representatives of the test playing countries namely
England, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, West Indies, India, Pakistan,
formed a committee named International Cricket Council (ICC). in 1909. This
committee is the all in all in taking decisions about international cricket.
Bangladesh, Srilanka, Zimbabwe are also the test playing countries after those
seven countries.

Rules of cricket: There are 42 rules for cricket game. Out of them 24
important rules are discussed below:

1. The pitch: Length of the pitch is 22 yards, width 10 feet. There are three
stumps at either end of the pitch. Height of the pitch is 28 inches, and width of
three stumps is 9 inches. Two bells are kept on top of the stumps. The height of
stumps with bells is 28!/> inches.

2. Cricket field: Draw a half circle with a radius of 66-75 yards from the
middle of the stump. Then joined both the ends, which will be the boundary
line of an oval shaped field. Again draw a circle with a radius of 60-75 yards
from the middle of the pitch, which is known as a round shaped field.

3. The players : A team is formed of 14 players when the game is played in
home country and it is of 15 players when it is played abroad. Out of them, 11
players participate in the match in the field. The rest 3 or 4 players remain
extra. The extra players can do only fielding. But they can not do batting,
bowling and wicket keeping.

4. The ball : The ball will be approved both the umpire and the captain befor playing.
The radius of the ball is 8+ —9'-

5. The bat: The maximum length is not more than 38 inches and width not
more than 4!/4 inches. S

Team Game 103
6. Position of players in field: The _
players of fielding team take wee — “
positions at different places in the Lo ee fines
field according to the strategy of J sips Wcketheeper \
bowlers. So the players of the / sully oy & Gy icosio
fielding team stand in eleven Poin & nin £ \
places. But there are many ina Pome | Square Leg ro
positions in the field. Positions are Cover 8 Bande
as follows- Third man, deep fine extra Cover 5 gator
leg, long leg, backward point, & Wmdon om vavicte
second slip, third slip, first slip, leg oe / ,
slip squire leg, gulley, cover point, WP
short extra cover, silly mid off, silly ww Re
1 aid on ae sinks, Tome a Position of players in the field
long on.
7. Over: There are six correct bowls in an over.
8. Boundary: Hit by the batsman when a ball crosses the boundary touching
the ground is called boundary. Every boundary adds 4 runs to the score of the
batsman.
9. Over boundary: Hit by the batsman when the ball crosses the boundary line
in air is called over boundary. Every over boundary adds 6 runs to the score of
the batsman. If the ball falls on the boundary it will also be considered over
boundary.
10. By and leg by: If the ball crosses a distance and thereby run is collected
without the ball touching anywhere of the bats or body of the batsman the
umpire will signal by run. If the ball crosses a distance with touching the part
of the body or the jersey of the batsman exempting the bats and thereby run is
collected the umpire will signal legby.
11. No ball: When a bowler does not follow the rules of bowling or breaks any
bowling rules no ball occurs. Causes of no balls are given below-
a) Ifthe bowler bends his elbow
b) Ifdelivery astride (Stop) crosses the popping crease
c) Ifthe bowler causes harm to wicket while bowling
d) Ifthe ball drops before half the pitch white bowling

% e) Ifthe ball goes straight over the shoulder high of a batsman

8 f) Ifthe fielder position is not according to rules.

104 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
12. Wide ball: If the ball goes away from batsman, which means out of the
reach of bats man, it is called a wide ball. There is a difference of distance
between wide ball of one day and test cricket.

13. Run out: If the fielding side makes the bell fall on the ground before the
batsman who is taking runs fails to return to the crease, the batsman is called
run out.

14. LBW: When the umpire thinks that the ball could have hit the stumps if not
blocked by the batsman's legs, the umpire may declare the batsman out
following the appeal by the opponent. This is called leg before wicket (LBW).
15. Bowled out: When the ball directly or shot by the batsman hits the stumps
and displaces the bell the batsman is declared out. It is called bowled out.

16. Caught out: When the batsman hits the ball in the air and a fielder catches
it before touches the ground, that batsman will be out and it is called caught
out.

17. Stumped out: When the batsman goes outside the crease to play ball
excepting no ball and the wicket keeper breaks the stumps, the batsman is
declared out. This is called stumped out.

18. Timed out: When a batsman fails to take guard within 3 minutes of a
wicket fall, he will come under the rules of timed out. For T20 duration of
timed out is 11/5 minutes.

19. Hit wicket: While playing, if the batsman hits the wicket by his body, dress
or bat and the bell falls, the batsman will be out. This is called hit wicket.

20. Hit the ball twice: When the batsman hits or touches the ball with his body
or bat, he can’t hit the ball again to save his wicket. If he does so, he will be
out and it is called hit the ball twice out.

21. Hold the ball intentionally: If the batsman holds the ball or play the ball
or obstructs the ball with his hands intentionally, the bats man will be out under
the rules hold the ball.

22. Obstructing the fielder: If the batsman intentionally obstructs the fielder,
when fielding the ball, he will be out for obstructing the fielder.

23. Century and half century: When a batsman scores a hundred runs by
playing ball he is said to have made a century and if he scores a fifty he is said
to have made half century. 20
24. Maiden over: When a bowler bowls so perfectly and the batsman cannot 8

Team Game 105
score any Tun in an over, that over is called a maiden over and in that over if
the bowler takes any wicket, this is known as maiden wicket.

Skills: In cricket skills are mainly divided into four categories, they are

a) Batting b) Bowling

¢) Fielding or Catching d) Wicket keeping

a) Batting: Basic skills are--grip, stance, back lift, stroke, gloves, drive and
hook. The batsman can entertain spectators by the correct application of their
skills. The batsman can also score runs fast or hit boundary using these skills
and spectators enjoy the game.

1. Grip: In batting, grip is very important. Proper grip helps the batsman to
play stroke on both sides of the wicket. For the right handed batsman, the
position of the left hand will be on top of the bat and the right hand will be
under the left hand. The batsman grips the bat with both hands together side by
side and holds the handle of the bat with fingers and thumb. The shape of index
finger and thumb will be like English letter V.

2, Stance: A right-handed batsman stands, keeping the left leg facing the
bowler and the right leg inside the popping crease, knee will be flex. He will
stand comfortably, keeping his body weight on both legs. His left hand will be
his above left thigh and the left shoulder and the eye will be on the bowler.

3. Back lift: Lifting the bat back is very important for batting. The batsman’s
eyes will be always on the bowler and his shoulder and elbow should be facing
the bowler.

4. Stroke: The batsman has

to play different types of

stroke according to the merit » te

of the ball. Sometimes he ive, >)
plays defensive strokes and 84 r\ cg
sometimes offensive strokes. : 9 An, oi i /

A batsman puts his leg one Zar om (=

step forward keeping an Vid | / 1] —
angle of bat 30°-40°and a bed? —y
plays a defensive stroke. It is (4 Ss ="

known as forward defensive / —

stroke, The position of bat at Sids picture Feat pictnre
that time will be like the

English letter “v”. Forward defense

106 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Again the batsman plays a stroke putting one step backward known as
backward defensive stroke.

5. Drive: Offensive and attacking batting is always enjoyable to spectators. A
batsman usually puts one step forward outside the popping crease and hit the
ball hard to cover more distance. This is known as forward drive.

6. Hook shot: When the bowler bowls a short pitch ball, it drops away from
the batsman and bounces high. While playing a hook shot, a right-handed
batsman keeps his body weight on his right leg and hits that high-bounced ball
in the air Sending the ball to his on side. A batsman has to make use of his
eyes, hands and legs very fast in order to play a hook shot. But it is a risky shot
to play. Without expertise one should not play a hook shot.

7. Cut shot: When a bowler bowls a short pitch ball, the batsman puts his leg one
step forward or backward and plays the ball. This skill is known as cut. Beginners
should not practice this shot. Shot selection is very important while playing cuts.
A batsman should go to the line of ball when the ball passes two feet away from
off stump and plays a cut shot by cutting the ball.

8. Leg glance: In this stroke a batsman has to use his wrist and hand very
forcefully. After play, the shot leg glance ball usually travels towards squire leg
and fine leg. Leg glance is played in two ways: first, while stepping forward
outside the popping crease and second, stepping back, towards. This wicket leg
glance is played by moving legs leftward or rightward according to ball.

b) Bowling: In cricket bowling is one of the main skills. The batsman cannot
score or cannot do well against a very high standard of bowling. A batsman
may be out soon against attacking bowling and as a result, a team can easily
win in a competition. Some basic skills of bowling are given below.

1. Correct grip to hold the ball: The grip of ball will depend on the type of
bowling.The grip of fast bowling and of spin bowling are not the same. But the
grip of any type of bowling will be with the help of fingers not with the palm.
So, the bowler can control bowling.

2. Run-up: The bowler comes running to deliver the ball from bowling crease
towards the batsman. This process of running is very important. Bowling speed
largely depends on running speed. A batsman cannot easily play a ball with 20
high speed . A bowler uses his feet into a fix distance of run up. At the time of &

Team Game 107

tun up the body weight of the bowler is

inclined forward. Z aD)

3. Delivery: Leaving the ball at the end of MHS V

(} Cj

a run up is called delivery. A right-handed | Af \y \

bowler at the time of delivery jumps on his = Si IN

left leg and twists the body rightward and as 4 SS

lands on the right leg. He fondly delivers H Q aS

the body keeping an eye on the batsman. uC : V7,

4. Follow throw: After delivery of the —~ >

ball the bowler maintains the balance of a ( \ }

his body in a specific way which is known r / (

as follow throw. After delivery of the ball a ' Y,

bowler has to move his body fast from : a

tight side to a straight position, keeping his '

eyes on pitch, where the ball drops. \ |

Grip of fast bowling

Fast bowling

1, Fast bowling in swing: In fast bowling to do in-swing ball is easy. But to

maintain line and length every time is not casy. If a bowler cannot maintain

line and length he has to give more runs. The characteristics of a swing ball are

the ball falls slightly outside the off stump and swings inside towards the

stumps very fast. The thread line of the ball will be kept in between index and

middle fingers. At the time of delivery the thread of the ball faces leg slip and

the right hand (elbow) goes upward and the left hand goes downward. Usually

from swing back fielders get catches at short leg position.

2. Fast bowling out swing: The grip of fast bowling out swing is similar to

fast bowling in swing. The thread will be in between index finger and middle

finger and other three fingers will be under the ball. But the thread faces

towards first slip.

Spin bowling

1. Leg spin: Spin is mainly two types, (i) Side spin (ii) Top spin.

(i) Side spin bowling: In side spin ball, the bowler spins the ball clock wise and
cs anti clockwise both ways. When a right-handed spin bowler bowls a right
® handed batsman, the ball moves anti clockwise and the ball becomes leg break,

108 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Again when the ball moves clock-wise that is it an off break ball. Top spin is a
combination of leg break and off break. In spin bowling at the time of delivery,
wrist and the arm move in 90° angles. Usually in leg spin, ball falls on the
pitch on the line of leg and then turns towards off stump. In leg spin the grip of
the ball is on between index, middle and ring fingers and the thumb helps to
hold the ball. At the time of delivery left shoulder will not be downward. The
wrist will be flexing and the third finger will help to spin the ball.

Gi) Off spin: In off spin bowling the index and middle fingers will be placed
across the thread of the ball, while the tips of two fingers will be a little apart.
The thumb will be on the thread and two other fingers will be together below
the ball. The index finger will be on thread of the ball and moving downward
will spin the ball. Off spin ball will move clockwise. The function of wrist in
off spin bowling is similar to its function in opening the knob of a door.

(iii) Gugly : If the leg spin bowler delivers off spin in the same grip , it is
called gugly.

c. Fielding and catching: In cricket, fielding can also be attractive like batting
and bowling and it also can play an important role in win and defeat in the
game. When a fielder takes a catch of a batsman, spectators enjoy that
catching. Every cricketer has to be a good fielder. Positions of the fielder are
determined by the choice of the captain or the bowler. Usually a fielder sends
back the ball to the wicket keeper. In fielding, catching is a very important
skill. The fielder has to under the line of ball when the batsman hit the ball high
and always has to keep an eye on the ball. Both hands will be open and fingers
are placed side by side, palm and finger will be flexible. As soon as the ball
touches the hands, usually the hands will be pulled close to the chest and
fingers will be closed. Apart from catching a fielder has to stop pick and throw
the ball.

Throwing: In attacking fielding the fast and correct throw is very important.
As a result, even a good batsman can be run out. Also it can decrease the run
rate of the batting side. For a good throw, players have to use flexible wrist,
hand and shoulder. The technique of throwing after catching the ball is to take
the initiative only after the ball comes to the hand. For a throw, the wrist, the x
hand, the shoulder and two longs have to work together. “

Team Game 109
d. Wicket keeping: The position of the wicket keeper is very important among
all the players in the field. For this reason, while aclecting the beat wicket
keeper the selectors have to look for their qualities in him like sharp eyes, fast
reaction, strong hands, physical strengths and courage. Generally it is
considered that wicket keeper is born, he cannot be made. The dress and the
equipment’s of the wicket keeper is different from that of others players. They
are wicket keeping pad, gloves, inner gloves, cap, guard, shoes, this are the
dress and equipment of a wicket keeper. The wicket keeper has to take a stance
like a batsman, Because he has to be ready for all the time to catch the ball
coming from the bowler, or the batsman, has to stand or half-seat keeping legs
apart, place his body weight on both legs, keep his body a bit low and an eye
on the wicket. His left leg will be in front of middle stump hans, are side by
side together, fingers are downward and eye on ball.
uJ sg (A
—- Wicket keeping i

Activity-1: Discuss and demonstrate the differences between grip of fast
Activity-2: Demonstrate the stance of batsman in field.

Activity-3: Show the position of wicket keeper during fast bowling and spin

& bowling.
g

110 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Lesson-3: Badminton
There are differences of opinion on the birth place of badminton but most of
them agree that it was born in Pune of India. English soldiers at Pune in early
17th century observed and felt interested to see the local people playing the
shuttle cock with a short bat. They learned that game from local people and
went back to England during leave and started playing and introducing this
game at Badminton. Then according to the name of that place the game named
as Badminton. The game was introduced in many countries for all aged people
and classes both male and female.
a. Playing court: The floor of the court should be made of wood but it should
not be at all slippery. The shuttle is white in colour, so the floor of the court
will be deep coloured but not shiny. If the colour of the floor is other than
white marking of court will be black, otherwise the colour will be white.
Badminton games are two types (i) Singles and (ii) Doubles. Measurement of
single court length is 44 feet, width 17 feet. The court-Length for Doubles 44
feet and width 20 feet. The badminton net is hung on the poll outside, middle
point of both end lines. There are two parallel lines 6' 6" away from the
midpoint of both sidelines known as short service line. Again there are two
parallel lines 2 feet and 6 inches inside the court from end line which are
known as long service line. This is used in doubles game. A line from short
service line to the end line of both sides divided the court into two courts
named right service court and left service court. All the markings will be 4 cm.
in width.
b. Equipment
1. Post: Height of the court is 5' 1".
2. Net: The length of the net is 17(feet)and width 2' 6". The height of the net
from floor to both posts is 5' 1" and in the middle hight of the net is 5(feet). The
top of the net will be with a white tape of width 3"(nches)and there will be a
rope or string inside the tape which will be fixed with the post from both sides.
=<
8

Team Game 111
post
J 44 —______ >
1
o.
Z ; zg
of 4 8 I
B= \R g og —
FS : 8 z 1 & center line a 2
so a is I
2 '
2 !
se
al <\_———> | <—_ > _ [<> 16
2'-6" 13' 6'-6" 6'- 6" 13' 2'.6"
Measurement of Badminton court, singles and doubles
3. Racket: The length of the handle of the racket is 26 inches. The racket has a
net on the upper side of it. The net will be taut in its position.
4. Shuttle cock: The shuttle cock is made by duck’s feather.
All feathers are tied with thread. If a player hits a shuttle cock with the racket
and if it falls near long service line of the opponent court the shuttle cock is
considered standard one.
Rules
1. Toss: If the team of players win the toss they can take service or court.
2. Point: In singles and doubles the game will end at 21 points. But there
should always be a difference of at least two points to finish the game. For
example 19-21, 20-22, 22-24-this way. But not exceeding 30 points. The team
that gets 30 first, they will be the winner. In the third set, players will change
their court after scoring 11 points.
3. Service: In single games, for both male and female the player who will
commit a mistake will lose the service. In double games for male and female,
team first taking service will not get chance for second hand service. If a team
x the commits any mistake the opponent will get service which will be done
% diagonally-not straight.

112 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

4. Service fault: Service faults occur for the following reasons.

a. Ifthe shuttle does not travel diagonally

b. During service if a leg is lifted above from the court the service is faulty

c. Ifthe shuttle fall on short service or long service area

d. Ifthe shuttle goes out of the court

e. The shuttle should not be free from hand

f. The shuttle should not be above waist height

g. Ifthe shuttle does not cross the net

h. During service if a player touches the marking of the court

i. Ifa player intentionally deceives the opponent during service.

5. Let: If any unforeseen accident takes place during the game the umpire can

declare a let. For example, if the server serves before the receiver is ready or if

both the players commit a mistake simultaneously

6. Five types of competitions in badminton. They are-

a. Male single

b. Male doubles

c. Female single

d. Female doubles

e. Mixed doubles

7. There should be one referee, one umpire, one scorer and two or four line

judges ina badminton game.

Skills of badminton: Badminton skills are divided into four types.

They are-

(i) Grip, (ii) Footwork, (iii) Service, (IV) Stroke and smashing

1. Grip: A player should learn how to grip the racket, which is essential for

every player. In griping the wrist plays an important role. There is a difference

in griping while taking a forehand and back hand short. So, grips are divided

into two types. They are (a) forehand grips and (b) backhand grips. SY
g

Team Game 113

a. Forehand grip: A right-handed player, plays all the shots from his right
side with a forehand grip. A player holds the racket with the thumb and the
index fingers in such a way that it looks like an English letter ‘v’.

b. Backhand grip: A right-handed player plays all the shots from his left side
with back hand grips. In this grip, the thumb will be placed on the handle
diagonally. Last part of the handle of the racket will be held with palm.

2. Foot work: Good foot work is necessary to take a quick stroke. A player’s

foot work has to be good to take a stroke forward, backward, sidewise, with

jump and run. A right handed player has to stand with the flex left foot ahead

and right foot a bit back and knees a little flex to receive a service or to do a

service. At this time the body weight of the player rests on toes. Feet are kept at

a distance of 14"-18" This position of a badminton player is called stance.

Apart from this a player can pivot his one leg and move around the other to

perform foot work.

3. Service: A good player should know three types of service. They are (a)

High deep service, (b) Low service, (c) Drive service.

a) High deep service: When a service falls near the long service line of the
opponent court travelling very high, it is called high deep service.

b) Low service: When the shuttle travels very low to the near short service
line of the opponent court it is known as the low service. At that time the
racket is held with forehand grip.

c) Drive service: If the shuttle travels low and fast right back to the receiver,
it usually hits hard, so it is known drive service.

4. Stroke or smashing: The skills of stroking or hitting skills are divided into
six types. They are-

a) Forehand stroke: The right-handed player keeping left leg and left
shoulder towards the net, hits the shuttle from right side. His body weight
will be on the right leg while taking the racket back. After hitting the
shuttle his body weight will be shifted from the right leg to the left leg.

b) Back-hand shot: The right-handed player will hit the shuttle from left side.
He will keep his right shoulder and leg towards the net.

c) Overhead shot: Firstly, keeping the left foot a bit forward and the body
weight on the right leg, the player usually hits the shuttle bending his upper
part a little backward. He will keep an eye on the shuttle and pull the racket
from back to play an overhead shot.

114 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

d) Drop shot: The technique of a drop shot is that the shuttle will drop in the
other court, crossing the net very narrowly.

e) Underhand drop shot: Swing the racket during service after it touches the
shuttle and control the speed of racket.

f) Smashing: Smashing is basically an overhead shot. In an overhead shot
position, swinging the hand with the racket from back to upward, a player
hits the shuttle hard downward. It is called smashing.

Activity-1: Draw a badminton court and display in the class room.

Activity-2: Practice techniques of different grips as per instructions of the
teacher.

Activity-3: The class will be divided into two groups. One group will tell the
faults of service and the other group will correct them where
necessary.

Lesson-4: Volleyball /<—_____9 =

Volleyball is a team game which people []<—— Lines of service zone ——>|]

of all ages can play in an open space or 44 4 end line

in a gymnasium. This enjoyable game «

originated in the United States of E £ Back zone

America. William G. Morgan, director of |, E

physical Education department at YMCA ° attack line

college Hollywook, USA, first invented a

the volleyball game in 1895. The |

teachers of physical education £/ ¥ ¥o.. |___imiddletine|)

department at Spring Field college, USA, . "he

considering its similarity with “volley” . Hentaone -

named it volleyball in 1896. In 1897 “5 =—_

YMCA first formulated and published {6 w

volleyball rules. On 20th April 1947, elle Backzone

Paul Lebort took the initiative to form an bi

International Volleyball Federation. After endline

independence a volleyballfederationwas ~~ ~~ [aa 5m

: . (san service zone 20
formed in 1972 in Bangladesh. S
Vollyball court >

Team Game 115
a) Rules and regulations of volleyball
1. Playing court: The volleyball court is rectangular, whose length and width
are18 meters x 9 meters respectively. There will no obstacles up to 7 meters in
height from the floor.
2. Boundary line: The boundary of the court has to be marked around it by a 5
cm wide boundary line. 2 meters away from the boundary line have to be free
from any obstacles.
3. Centre line: A line joining the two side lines of the court making the court to
equal halves is called the centre line. The centre line lies under the net.
4. Attack area: There are two parallel lines 3 meters away from the centre line,
whose two ends will meet the two sidelines of the court. The two courts created
by the centre line will have two attack areas, each having an area of 9X3
meters.
5. Service area: The whole area behind the back line is known as service area.
A line will be drawn 15 cm. at the distance at 20 cm. from the back line.
6. Temperature: If it is an indoor court the temperature will not be less than
10°C or 50° F,
b) Net
1. Measurement and structure: The length of the net will be 9.5m and the
width one meter. Each square of the net will be 10 cm. There will be a
white canvas tape of 5 cm on top of the net. A wire or string will go into the
tape, which will fix both sides of the net with the poles.
2. Height of net: The height of the net from the floor, in the middle will be
2.43 m for male and 2.24 m for female.
3. Side marker and antenna: From the point where the side line and the
centre line meet together, a tape of 5 cm width will be hanging, which may be
moved when necessary. There are two antennas of 1.80 m in length and 10 mm
in diameters made from fiber glass or similar metal will be hanging. That tape
will be tied from both sides with the net.
c) Ball, players, and equipments of players
1. The ball: The ball will be made of soft leather. It will be round shaped. There is
~ ? soft bladder inside. The radius of the ball will be 67 cm.
S
x)

116 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
2. The players: A volleyball team consists of 12 players. One member of the
team will be appointed captain. There is an 8x2 cm badge on the left side of the
chest of the captain.
3. Dress and equipment of players: The jersey, shorts and light and flexible
shoes without heel are the dress of a player. The colour of the dress for all
players of a team will be the same. There will be jersey numbers on chest and
back of different colour. The colour of the numbers will be different from that
of the jersey.
4. Position of players: Six players will take position in the court. Of them 3
players will be in the attacking area and the other 3 are back court players,
Before the beginning of the game, the information regarding players positions
and rotation should be given to the umpire so that they can maintain the same
totation until the game is over, but the order of the rotation may be changed at
the beginning of each set.
d. Play
1. Preparation of game and toss: The referee will toss a coin in the presence
of both captains before entering the court, and the winning captain will choose
service or court. There is 3 minutes for warm-up for both teams. Substitute
players and coach will sit on specified place opposite to the referee.
2. Rotation: In volley ball players will maintain rotation clock wise. Rotation
will take place after the opponent loses service. The referee will take necessary
measures to punish the team in regard to faulty rotation.
3. Time out: At the request of the captain or the coach, referee can grant
time-out when the ball is out of play or dead. Every team will get time-out
twice in each game and can take temporary interval for substituting 6 players.
During the time out a player can come closer, to the side line but cannot go
outside the court.
4. Substitution: Six players play in court, and the 6 additional players and the
coach will sit in specified place. At the request of the coach or the captain,
these additional players may be substituted for court players.
5. Officiating: One referee, one umpire, one scorer and two line judges
conduct the game. The referee's decision is final from the beginning to the end
of the game. The referee sits at any site of the net on a high place at least 50 cm
above the net height, so he can see all the places of the court. 3
N

Team Game 117
6. Court change: After the end of each set, players will change the court except
the final set. In final set, if any team scores 13 points both teams change court.
7. Results of game: At the end of the rally if the serving team wins, the team
will get one point and if the serving team loses, the opponent team will get a
point and service. In this way the team that will first score 25 points will win
the set but with a point difference of at least 2. If the points of both teams are
equal than the game will continue until there is a difference in 2 points. But the
team that first reaches the point 30 will get the set. The competition is of 5 set.
In the final set the game will be completed in 15 points. If a team wins 3 sets
out of 5 sets, that team will be declared winner in the competition.
8. Service: The player of extreme right will serve according to rotation. The
player will stand in the serving area and toss the ball above and hit it to send it
to the opponent court. However, service will be done only after the referee's
signal. If ball crosses the court under the net, or touches the net or the antenna
of the net or goes outside the opponent's court it will be a faulty service and
the opponent will get service.
9. Playing the ball: After service, each team will get three chances to play the
ball within this three touches a team has to pass the ball to the opponent's court.
If the ball touches any part of the player’s body, it will be considered as one
touch.In the time of playing passes the ball with pressure pushing and pulling
by hand is called holding.
10. Block: To protect the smash of the opponent player or more players in the
front line can raise their hands to block the smash. Players in the back line
cannot participate in block.
11. Ball on net: Except the service ball, other balls can touch the net while
crossing the net.
12. Crossing the centre line: During play, any part of player's body can not
cross the centre line and cannot touch the opponent’s court or cannot block
anybody.
Technique of playing volley ball

a a Service: Tossing the ball up with hand and hitting it by the other hand, to

S send the ball to the opponent's court is known as service. If the serviced ball

118 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
does not pass under the net, does not touch the net, does not go out of the
opponent's court the service is considered correct.
Generally service is of two types. They are (1) Under hand service (ii) Tennis service
1. Under hand service: The player will have to stand facing the opponent court
inside the service area, placing one foot forward and the other food backward.
The two feet will be placed a little apart. The body weight will be on back leg,
with knees bending a little forward. Keep the ball on the palm of the left hand
and keep the right hand backward. Then toss the ball upward in the air and hit it
forcefully with the right hand. While hitting the ball the right hand may be
closed or open.
YO
GA
FESO yy
os, (J ((
Under hand service
2. Tennis service: The player stands in :
service area. If he is a right-handed Lh es () ?
player, his left foot will be one step NS ae, GN
forward. Keeping his body weight on Cane
both leg. Tossing the ball high above
head height a little bit forward he will A) \
hit the ball with right hand to send it to LA
the opponent court. After hitting ball
his right leg will come forward asa L
follow throw. axe if k ~
mg
Tennis service »

Team Game 119
b. Position of rotation: There are six players and if
the number of the players is 1 to 6 then three players
will stand in the front court and other three will be in 4 3 2
the back court. The positions of the players are shown
in the picture. In the front court, 3 players will stand.
Player no-2 will be on the right side of the front court, 5 1
player no-3 will stand in the middle position and 4
will be on the left position. In the backcourt, player Rotation
no-5 will be on the left, player no-6 in the middle and
player no-1 will be on the right.
If the opponent loses service then rotation will take place. Player no-1 will be in
the position of player no-6 and so on. Every player will change his position. The
rotation will be clock wise and the arrngement will be anticlock wise
c. Passing: Generally passing is of two types.
(1) Upper hand pass. (ii) Under hand pass.
Overhead volley pass: The hand should be directly over
the head with the arms flexed, elbows to the front. It is «é
not possible to use the normal wrist rotation to play the
ball, so most of the power for the volley must come from
the arms and legs. The arm will be smoothly extended =|
over the head as the ball is played.
: d. Set-up: The
ae volley pass (upper vi
Wy, sy, Ry hand pass) for a
: As “a ni & \<? front line player to >
IN page 4} smash across the net a
“\ is called the set-up :
Bo \ LAG pass. It is said that
At Ves ; i
— a ae attacking strength Ball passing
\ fl 6 will depend on his
“SM ability to place these set-up accurately.
Ay /| e. Smashing: The ball for smashing must
; Che fe be above the net height. Smash will take
fe fal place 3-4 steps behind the ball from where
% % . Ses the ball will be hit. From that position the
x Sraesnliy ~~ smasher will run 3-4 steps and jumps up

126 Physical Education, Health Sclence and Sports
and will take the body behind the ball. One will bend both hands so that onc
can jump high. Smashing hand will swing from back and hit forcefully. He will
land on both legs straight downward. Sometimes to
misguide the opponent he will push the ball other W
side in spite of smashing. Wy ayy
f, Blocking: To form a block, the front line players Cd)
of defending team jump vertically opposite the Ze
smasher and place a wall of hand in the path of the = A
ball, hoping to deflect the ball into his court. At the or A
time of block, players jomp on both legs, keeping {+
in mind that during block the net cannot be ~y Ay
touched . i ( y
Activity-1: Draw a diagram of the system of / &
Activity-2: Show the techniques of tennis service. 4 »
Activity-3: Show the techni of

ity-3: § hniques of black. wade
Lesson 5: Kabaddi
Kabaddi is an ancient and popular game of indo-pak subcontinent, In this
subcontinent, it is played in different areas in different names. There are no set
rules for this game as it is a regional game. In villages, the kabaddi or hadudu
game is the only source of enjoyment, The traditional game of Bangladesh
hadudu is known as Kabaddi, After independence to gain momentum in games
in Bangladesh, different federations are reformed, So in 1973 Kabaddi
Federation was formed. With the assistance of kabaddi federation, kabaddi was
included in the SAF games in 1984 in Dhaka, From that time kabaddi games
have started in the international sports arena. In 1990 kabaddi games were
inchided as regular games in the Beijing Asian games. We shall hope that this
game will be included in the Commonwealth and Olympic games very soon.
Kabaddi: The field will be rectangular and soft. It will be prepared by mat or _
mud. There are three kinds of kabsddi fields, such as- $

Team Game 121
1. Men and Junior boys 6
3. Sub-Junior boys and girls. i

N 6
1. Men means those males | [lk u
whose body weight is 80kg or
below. Junior boys body weight aT
will be 65 kg or below and their ance
age not above 20. For them field a _
measurement is-length-13 meters e =
and width-10 meters. (with - -
idbig) a Middle line
2. Women means those females = ”
whose body weight is 70 kg or Balk line
below not be above 20 years
and girls whose body weight
will not exceed 60 kg. The field ~ 8 endline
for them is-length 12 meters and — i 7
with 8 meters, (vith Lobby)
3. Sub-junior boys and girls Kabaddi field (Sub-junior boys and girls)
whose age will not be more than
16 and their weight is 50 kg or below. The field for them is-length 11 meters
and width 8 meters (with lobby).
Playing area (Court): Before struggle, the court for men and junior boys,
without lobby on both sides, will be length-13 meters x width 8 meters.
Women and junior girls' field will be length-12 meters x width 6 meters and
sub junior boys and girls’ field is-length 11 meters x width 6 meters.
Sitting blocks: Dead players sit on the restricted area known as sitting blocks.
For male and female players this blocking area at a distance of 2 meters from
the end line 1.8 and 1.1 meters away from end line there will be two more
blocking areas 1.8 meters and 1.6 meters from the end line for women and
junior girls respectively.
Lobby: The space on either side of the court with one meter width is known as
lobby. Lobby will be inside the field if it is struggle.

122 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Mid line: The line which divides the court into two courts is known as mid
line.

Court: Each half of the field which is divided by the mid line is called the
court.

Balk line: A line parallel to the mid line inside the field is known as balk line.
Distance from the mid line is 3.75 meters for men and junior boys, women and
junior girls the distance is 3 meters and for sub-junior boys and girls the
distance is 3 meters.

Bonus line: A line parallel to the end line and 1 meter towards balk line is
called the bonus line.

Holding the breath: A player holds his breath and starts saying rapidly,
clearly, and loudly “kabaddi-kabaddi” is known as holding breath.

Raider: A player hold his breath and send into the opponents court is known as
raider. Raider has to hold his breath before entering the opponents court.

Anti raider: The entire players opponent to the raider are called anti raider.
Breath lost: If a raider does not utter “kabaddi kabaddi” rapidly, clearly and
loudly or he is not holding breath then it will be considered he lost his breath.
Touch or kill anti raider: If a raider without breaking any rules or without
violation of rules, touches ant raider’s any part of the body and comes back to
his own court the anti raider will be considered out (kill).

Catch raider: If a raider is caught without violation of any rules, until his
breath of until the referees whistle then the raider is considered out (kill).
Touch: If the raider touches the dress of any anti raider it will be considered he
touched the anti.

Struggle: When the anti or antis come into contact with the raider it is called
struggle. During struggle lobby also considered as court.

Playing rules

1. Wining captain will chose raid/court, other captain will take the rest one.
The players will change court in the second half. If a team takes raid at the
beginning of the game, in the second half the next or the other team will get =
chance to start the game with raid. S

Team Game 123
2. If any body part of a player touches the ground outside the boundary line,
he will be considered as dead.
3. a) During the game if any player is out of the boundary line, he will be out.
TheUmpire/referee will call his name, that player will be out of the court. The
referee will not blow the whistle and the raid will be continuing, that means the
game will not stop.
b) During the raid if an anti or antis go outside the boundary line and catch the
raider, then the raider will not be out.
4. At the time of struggle the lobby will be part of the field. During struggle or
after struggle, the players who are involved in struggle can return to their court
using the lobby.
5. The raider will hold his breath with saying kabaddi, but if he does not utter
kabaddi correctly, then the referee will call him back and the opponent will get
one technical point.
6. The raider will hold the breath before touching the opponent court. If he
holds his breath late or after/the umpire will call him back and the opponent
will get one technical point. The raider also gets a chance to raid again.
7. If the raider starts raiding and enters into the opponent court without having his
tum. The referee will call him back and the opponent will get one technical point.
Rules for competition
1. Team. There are at least 10 players and at best 12 players in a kabaddi team.
Seven will play in the field and the others will be the substitute players.
2. Duration of play: For men and junior boys, each half will be 20 minutes
with 5 minutes interval. For female or junior girls and sub junior boys and
girls, each half will be 15 minutes with 5 minutes interval. The players will
change the court after interval. In the second half, the number of players will
be unchanged- the same number and the same players will be on the court.
3. Point counting: For each dead player the opponent team will get one point
and if all players of a team are dead the other team will get lona and additional
two points.
«4 Time out: a) Each team will get time out twice in each half. The duration of
S time out will be 30 seconds. The captain, coach, trainer, or any player of a team

124 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
can take time-out with permission of the referee. The time-out time will be
added to the duration of game time.
b) The player cannot leave the court during time out. For violation of this rules
the opponent team will get one technical point.
c) Reasons for official time out are as follows- i) if'a player is injured
ii) Field marking is needed again
iii) If the game is interrupted by outsiders or by similar other things the
referee/umpire will declare the final time out. This time is also added to the
duration of game time.
5. Substitutes
a) With permission of the referee additional five players can be changed during
time out or in the interval.
b) A substitute can play again.
Techniques of kabaddi game: There are two types of skills in Kabaddi game.
They are (i) Defensive skills and (ii) Offensive skills.
1. Defensive skills: Anti raider or the players of a court who are holding the
breath are said to have adopted defensive skills. For example-
a) Catch the heel -
b) Catch the knee airs |
Che SJ
¢) Hold the waist EN ' .
d) Catch the wrist — >:
e) Catch with chain etc A " A
a. Catch the heel: Generally KDY L =
technique when a raider F S )
tries to touch the .
anti-raider with a foot. G |
The player of left side
use this technique
standing left leg ahead, :
catching leg the raider wt
leg with the right hand. Catch the heel 3s

Team Game 125
They put their left leg ahead and catch the feet simultaneously. After the catching
heel, the leg is pulled up to the chest and pull his body.

b. Catching the knee: The players apply this technique when a raider tries to
touch with legs or his legs become stable after movement or when both
legs are together. The left side player, keep the left leg ahead and the
right-side players keep their right hand ahead also keeping their left hand
down and right hand above the knee and hold the raider with both hand and
shoulder together.

c. Catching (Holding) the waist: Anti raiders use this technique when a
raider stands showing back to the opponent. After holding his waist they
lift him a bit high, that means above the floor.

d) To catch wrist: When a raider touches with hand or when his hands are stable,
then the opponent catches his wrist.

Right zone Centre zone Left zone
? ( fp ;
OG: 4 By. @ ' RS
Siesea ' Ay
: ! au — i S ‘ \ H
t
RC + RI t  R/cov+CM+L/cov ' LI=LC
i '
| Catch with chain

e) Catch with chain: Catch with chain is very effective. Most of the trainers give
a very high emphasis to catching with chain. Time of raiding the raider
leaning his body to the opponent then this techniques will be applied.

2. Attacking skills: A raider applies some skills to touch the opponent when he

co raids in the opponent court. All these skills are known as attacking skills. For
& example, touch with leg, touch with hand, touch with fake.

126 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

a. Touch with leg: When a raider tries to touch the opponent with his leg, it is
called the touch with leg. There are different techniques used to touch with
leg.

b. Touch with hand: When a raider try to touch the opponent with a hand,
there are different techniques to do that. They are from top to downwards,
bottom to up from front to side and from side to front etc. Generally the
raider use a hand to touch the opponent’s nose, ear, and head or any of the
upper part of the body.

c. Fake and touch: When a raider fakes to touch the opponent and tries to
touch, it is known as fake and touch. This technique is very effective. Most
of the raiders try to touch the opponent, applying, this technique.

Officials: There are 6 officials to control the kabaddi game.

1. One referee. 2. Two umpires, 3. One scorer 4. Two assistant scorers

Referee: The referee is all in all in the field. He will start and finish the game.

If there is any difference of opinions he will take the decision.

Umpire: An umpire maneuvers the game.

Scorer: The scorer writes scores declared by the umpire.

Assistant scorer: An assistant scorer assists the dead players to sit in the

proper place and helps them to enter into the court according to rules.

Serious violation of rules and fouls: If a player commits the following fouls,

the referee or the umpire can give a caution and give a point to the opponent.

He can also expel a player or declare him unfit.

1. To persuade them to take decision

2. To criticise a decision

3. To raise finger to take a decision in favor.

4. To hold or press mouth of a raider to stop his breath

5. To play dangerously so that the opponent be may be injured

6. To take more than 5 seconds to start a raid.

7. To catch a player with both legs like scissors.

8. To train a player from outside the field

9. To obstruct a raider to breathe S

Team Game 127
Bonus point: If a raider crosses the bonus line the raider team will get one
bonus point. But at least 6 players have to be in the court.
Lesson-6 : Basketball
Basketball first started at Massachusetts in America in 1881. Dr. James A.
Naismith Director, department of physical education of Spring Field YMCA
college of America first introduced this game. At the initial stage 10/15 players
used to take part in the game. In 1994, basketball was first played by five
players. Basketball first started in Bangladesh by the Christian missionary
schools, such as St. Gregory’s school, St. Joseph school of Dhaka and st. Placid
school of Chittagong. Endurance is required to play this game.
Rules of Basketball \ } / [
1. Court: The basketball court is \ j s
rectangular. It's floor will be wooden 4 wo, } a :
or hard without any obstacles. The voy F i
measurement of basketball court for wy
national and regional levels: length
will be 26 meters and width 14 meters. Tae
For international competition: length
will be 28 meters and width 15 meters. ] “y sm
2. Circle of court: There are three ( f |
circles in the court, each with a radius wy,
of 1.80 meters. k
3. Restricted area: A circle (with | ee
1.80 meter radius towards playing
area 5.80 meter away) from the ea
midpoint of end line and two marks fi i E
on both side of end line from the i" ‘ : E
midpoint of end line add with the ie \ 625m an
diameter of the circle which is known | pee ft i
x a8 restricted area. i -
S Basketball court

128 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
4. Ring: The height of the ring is 3.05 meters and 15 cm away from the board.
5. Ball: Ball will be rounding (spherical) shaped. There will be 8 panel on ball
and orange in colour. Ball will
rough so that will be easy to grip. Je — a -1.20m ~~~
6. Playing time: The total time is -
40 minutes, which is divided into
four quarters of 10 minutes each.
There is an interval of two L-059- eo!
minutes in between the first and ner '
the second quarters, the third and ¥
the fourth quarters. There is a 0.45m
15-minute interval in the game. ; level on the ring
7. Point: If a team scores from t- =
WVIV
outside the 6.25-meter marked NOON
line, they will get 3 points and if ~ YY VY
from inside 6.25-meter line, they BOG)
will get 2 points. Basket
8. Start of game: Through toss court will be selected. Two players will stand
inside the centre circle. The game will start by throwing the ball in the air.
9. 3 seconds rules: If a team in an attacking position any player of that team
cannot stay inside the restricted area.
10. 5 Seconds rules
a) A team has to take the throw within 5 seconds after the referee’s whistle.
b) A player cannot hold the ball more than 5 seconds.
c) A player has to dribble or pass the ball within in 5 seconds after catching it.
11. 8 Seconds rule: A team can control a ball 8 seconds in their own court. The
team has to take the ball to the opponent court within 8 seconds.
12. 24 Seconds rule: All the players of a team can keep control on a ball up to
24 seconds.
13. Violation: Violation of any rules such as not to raise the hand at the time of
personal fouls to break 3, 5, 8 seconds rules.
14. Technical fouls: A player is not respectful to officials and intentionally
disobeys rules and show unsportsman like conduct.
15. Personal fouls: If a player does an illegal physical contact with opponent
during the play or when a player is dead, it is called a personal foul. 0
S
QQ

Team Game 129

16. Intentional fouls: A foul committed by a player intentionally with the

opponent is known as an intentional foul.

17. Double foul: The foul committed by two players of two teams against each

other at the same time is known as double foul.

18. Five foul: If a player commits five fouls technical of pesonals within

40-minutes game, he will have to leave the court.

19. Seven foul: Team foul of a team in each half is seven or more, that foul

may be personal or technical. For each foul opponent will get 2 (two) free

throw. If duration game is 4x10 minutes then four personal or technical foul in

each quarter, after that for every foul opponent will get 2 (two) free throw.

Technique: A good basketball player requires endurance, agility, speed, and

jumping ability. Simultaneously they require expertise on the following basic

skills.

1. Stance: Stand with both feet apart from each other keeping a comfortable

distance between them. Knee little flex, upper limb little incline forward, both

hands near to chest a bit above the chest height, palm facing opponent, and

elbow also down ward.

2. Catch the ball: A player has to catch the ball in such a way that the ball

should be under his control. Fingers are spread, flex and a bit round shaped,

during catching the ball. Thumbs usually control the ball. Catching the ball

with palm is not the correct technique.

3. Pass: In basketball, during passing the ball, the wrist and the elbow are more

active than other parts of the body. While giving a pass, one foot is ahead and

the other leg a bit back. There are many types of pass in basketball. Some of

them are given below.

a. Chest pass: Pass fast at chest height.

b. Pass below the head height: This type of pass is used when players are
close and is given very fast.

c. Hook pass: Away from the opponent, this type of pass is given over the

opponent's head. Generally this pass is given using one hand.

d. Bounce pass: A pass is given to a team-mate giving a drop or bounce on ground.

130 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
4. Dribbling: Dribbling is used to change the place and to go forward.
Generally, dribbling is done by one hand or by turns by the left or the right
hand.

5. Pivot: When a player fixes his one leg and moves the other leg in any
direction as many times as he wishes it is known as pivot.

6. Shooting: Throwing a ball to score a basket is known as shooting. Shootings
are of two types (1) directly into ring. (ii) With help of board.

a. Set shoot: Shooting while standing without movement is known as set
shoot. A set shoot can be taken by one hand or both hands. While shooting by
one hand, the shoot taking hand will be behind the ball and the other hand will
be used to support the ball so the ball can travel to the basket accurately. Again
when shooting with two hands, both hands are behind the ball.
b. Layup shot: Normally a lay up shot is taken to score from a short distance.
A player moves forword by dribbling and he jumps up on his foot from the
ground and tries to take a lay up shot direct to the basket or with the help of
back board.

Activity-1: Show the technique to grip a ball.

Activity-2: Show or demonstrate a chest pass with a partner.

Activity-3: Practice the technique of a lay-up shot.

Lesson-7: Hockey

Though there is no concrete evidence about its origin, it is believed that it
descended from the earliest civilization and it is one of the ancient games. As
per knowledge goes, in 2000B.C there was a game like hockey in Persia.
Afterwards it was introduced in Greece and from Greece it went to Rome.
About 2500 years back historians observed a similar game like todays hockey
in East Greece. Afterwards the people of France started the game named
hocket. Hocket is a French word which means a shepherd's stick. After many
years the English people started the game named as Hoque after learning it
from the French. According to the English pronunciation this game spread all
over the world as Hockey. s

g

Team Game 131
1. Team: A Hockey team consists of 16 players, 11 players play the game
while other 5 players are additional or substitute players.
2. Attack: During the play the team that tries to score a goal is called the
attacking team.
3. Defensive team: During the play a team engaged in not to concede a goal
is known as defensive team.
4. Centre pass: Putting the ball at
the centre of the field, pushing or Alnternational Hockey Ground
hitting in any direction is called
centre pass. Game begins with this 5 Man ee 5
5. Playing the ball: Playing the an af ns fi
ball means to stop, go forward, | au at sean
change the direction or speed up | go“ Si ox
the ball. ile 4 “Byung 5
6. Playing distance: A distance |
from where a player can reach and .
can play the ball. 1 e
t iy

7. Tackle: To take control of the = 5 | , |.--2varis centre ine
ball from the opponent. The i °
techniques by which a player takes; A
control of the ball from opponents {| |®
are known as tackle. '
8. To hit a ball into goal: An: Ls 25 yar lie 5
attacking player tries to hit the ball veeeee
towards goal post from inside the | oo “hy
circle. ffs om ‘ i
9. Fouls: A player does not ',| / Te “dy
follow the rules or disobeys the 4.\- 7 a “Vina
rules for which an umpire can we ae r
punish the player. Hockey Ground
10. Stroke: The method of playing
the ball with the stick to go

S forward and hiting the ball is

‘called stroke.

132 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

11. Penalty stroke: Try to score a goal from the penalty spot by the push or

scoop is called the penalty stroke.

12. Dangerous play: A technique to play the ball which is dangerous for the

opponent.

13. Misconduct: Misconduct is as follows-waste time, intentionally commits a

foul, during play misbehave with others, disobey the captain.

Playing area: Hockey field is rectangular, length-100 yards, width 60 yards.

The length line is called sideline, width line is called end line and in between

two goal posts is known as goal line. The width of the line is 3inches.

Shooting circle: A halt circle of radius of 16 yards on both sides of the post.

Middle 4 yards parallel to the goal post is known as shooting circle. 5 meters

away from the shooting circle another circle will be drawn, with dotted line. A

line is use to stand the player.

Midline and 25-yards line: A line joining the two midpoints of length line is

called midline. A line behind the midline is known as 25-yards line.

Goal Post: The distance between the inner side of two posts will be 4 yards,

and the height of the lower side of the cross bar from the floor will be 7 feet.

The colour of the goal post and the crossbar will be white.

Ball: The ball will be made of hard material. The colour of the ball will be

white. A different colour of ball may be used with the agreement of both teams.

Hockey stick: The stick will be straight and the head will be curved. The left

side of the stick will be flat and the right side will smooth and round shaped.

This curve of the stick will not be more than 4 inches. A 2 inches diameter ring

passing through the head of the stick is considered to be a correct stick.

Goal keeper: The colour of the dress of the goal keeper will be different from

that of the other players. To protect the upper part of the goal keeper, he will

use a protector. He can use the leg guard, kicker and hand protector.

Duration of play: 35 minutes for each half with 5 to 10 minutes interval.

Penalty corner: If any defensive players-

(a) Intentionally foul is committed within the circle

(b) To safe definite goal, an unintentionally foul is occurred us their the circle

(c) Goal keeper is broken rules again and again. If occurred above this foul
opponent- team use be awarded penalty corner. Penalty corner is taken 7
yards spot from the goal line. ES

Team Game 133
Skills
Hold a stick: A right hand player hold the top of the stick with left hand, and
will hold the middle of the stick with the right hand. The right leg will be ahead
and left leg will be a bit back. A player will move the stick left and right with
left hand, while the right hand will support the stick.
Stop the ball: To stop the ball the head of the stick will be along the line of the
ball and the ball will be stopped by the flat part of stick. One leg will be ahead
and the other back.
Dribbling the ball: The ball will be in front of a player who will move the ball
forward with the help of the stick by moving left and right. A player can
dribble the ball by pushing the ball in between the ball will be played with the
flat part of the stick.
Hit: A player stands keeping both the legs parallel and 1% to 2 feet away from
the ball, Lifting the stick up to the shoulder level he will hit the middle part of
the ball. Hitting hard the ball is called hit.
Push: Pushing the ball with the flat part of the stick without making any
sound means the ball will be in contact with the stick.
Flick: When a ball is pushed it is stable or in motion and if the ball rises up to
the knee height it is called flick.
Scoop: When a player pushes the lower part of a stable ball to travel in the air
above head height it is called scoop.
oo SSF
DW " \ 7 Sg
EJ Scoop
R

134 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Activity-1: Show the technique of taking penalty stroke.
Activity-2: Demonstrate the technique of scoop and show to the classmate.
Activity-3: Explain the technique to hold a hockey stick.
Lesson- 8: Handball
Handball game has its origin in Germany. In the German lyrics dating back to
12th_13th centuries, mention had been found of something like CATCH BALL.
In 1917 Max Husser of Berlin a sports teacher for women invented the hand
ball game for women. The Hand Ball Association of Bangladesh came into
being in the year 1983 and later on in 1985 it turned into a federation.
1. The playing area of Hand ball: The field of Hand ball game is 40 m long
and 20 m wide. The marks/signposts are 5 cm thick. The line inside the goal
post is 8 cm. The sign post on length is called sideline while the sign post on
the width is called end line.
2. Goal post: The height of the goal post from the floor to lower part of the
crossbar is 2 meters and the length is 3 meters.
3. Goal area: A line is to be drawn with a radius of 6 m which would be
equi-distant from both the goal posts. A 3-meter straight line will be drawn
parallel to goal the post whose dots will be 15 cm in length.
4. Free throw line: Similar to the goal area line two quarter circles of 9-meters
radius of both goal posts, and from goal line to the front of goal post and the
rest 3-meters will be parallel to the goal line a doted half circle known as free
throw line.
5. Penalty line: A 15 cm line 7 meter away from goal line and parallel to the
goal line is know a penalty throw line.
6. 4 meter line: A 15 cm line at 4 meter away from goal line and parallel to the
goal line is called 4 meter line.
7. Duration of play: Duration of play for boys and girls of 16 years and above
is 30+10(break)+30=70 minutes and for 12-16 years boys and girls duration of 2x
play is 25+10(break)+25=60 minutes. 8

Team Game 135
8. Officials: There are four officials, Two referees, one time keeper and one
score taker.
9. Ball: The ball must be produced by leather or some synthetic material. It
must be spherical. The surface must not be shiny or slippery.
10. The players: A team consists of 12 players (10 court players + 2
goalkeepers). No more than 7 players (6 court players + 1 goal keeper) on the
court. The remaining players are substitutes.
11. Restrictions for goal keeper
a) Play dangerously
b) Leave the goal area with ball
c) Taking the ball in to the goal is when it is outside the goal area.
d) Touch or cross the goal keeper's border line (4-meter line) before the ball
has left the thrower's hand when a penalty throw is being taken.
e) Intentionally play the ball over his own outer goal line once he has got the
ball under control.
12. A player is not permitted
a. Cannot hold the ball more than 3 seconds
b. Cannot move more than 3 steps without dribbling.
c. Cannot pull, push or hit the opponent while catching the ball
d. Cannot touch the ball by below the knee
13. Throw-off: The game begins with throw off and after scoring a goal, the
play also starts with throw-off.
14. A free throw is awarded in the case of
a. Incorrect substitution
b. Illegal entry inside the field
c. Infringements by the goal keepers
20
Sd. Infringements by court players in the goal area

136 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
e. Deliberately playing the ball across the outer goal line or side line
f. Fouls concerning the approach to the opponent
g. Infringements in connection with throw-off and throw in
h. Assault in and of the field
15. Penalty throws
A penalty throw shall be awarded
a. When a clear chance of scoring is spoiled by an infringement in any part of
the court .
b The goal keeper holds the ball in the field and enters into the goal area.
c. When a court player intentionally plays the ball to his own goal-keep in the
goal area.
d. If spoiled a clear chance of scoring by an illegal whistle.
Skills: The basic skills of handball are as follows.
1. Catch the ball. 2. Passing the ball. 3. Shooting or goal. 4. Obstruct an
opponent.
a Fa
| | ss side line We
pas lt | , i |
woe — rriLek z aier ig . &
cee at |s bel F rH al FI - 7" &
: Boog \F a]
— fal\SNe fF ‘
RASZ ot ‘
“ - - a4 ° 5445 445 ‘ ;
| Pon 15_. __substitnte line te |
bench for substitute player —>—————} oad !
table for time keeper and scorer 2
Handball field 5

Team Game 137
1. Catching the ball: At the time of catching a ball, a player spread out his
fingers, keep his eyes on the ball and bending his elbow, pull the ball towards
himself. The ball may be hold to consider speed and position of the ball as- line
with the shoulder, below the waist, standing and jumping above the head.
Rolling ball catches front of sideways.
2. Pass: Passing the ball is an important technique in handball. There are
many types of passing techniques in hand ball.
i , am
/ \
¥,
(y 4
Passing Ree
a. Shoulder level pass. b. Wrist pass. c. Below the waist pass d. Above the head
ete.
3. Shots on goal: Scoring a goal in hand ball is very important so that the
skills of throwing the ball on goal for a score have to be learned. To score a
goal outside 6 meters of 9 meters is difficult. So the player should know the
technique of how to throw a ball on goal. There are different types of
technique such as throw directly on goal, jump and throw, bounce on goal area
to score a goal etc.
4. Obstruction: When the opponent player is forwarding with the ball to score
a goal, he should be prevented in such a way that he is unable to pass the ball to
his mate or throw the ball to the goal. To do that a player alone or two or three
players will build a wall by raising their hand or with body to obstruct opponent.

138 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
SS
<5 = =,
=a es
Obstruction
Activity-1: Write on a poster paper the causes of awarding a free throw and
present it in the class.
Activity-2: Demonstrate the technique of catching the ball.
Activity-3: Explain the position of body while throw on goal.
Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. Which one is the technique of playing handball?
a. hold the ball b. hold the stick
c. shooting d, hold the waist
2. From which one of the following is not declared goal by the referee in spite
of the ball being entered straight into the net?
a. comer kick b. goal kick %
c. direct free kick d. indirect free kick §

Team Game 139
3. In the game of basketball the things we notice, are -
(i) can stay till 3 seconds in the restricted area
(ii) if there is a score from the free throw of the ball it will get 1 point
(ili)the player will have breath, rapidity, speed and the power of jumping
Which one in the following is correct?
a. i&ii b. iGiii
c. ii & iii d. i, ii & iii
Observe the stem and answer questions. 4 & 5.
A B C
4. Which playground is indicated by A marked picture?
a. football b. handball
c. hockey d. basketball
5. There is similarity of the playing in the B and C playgrounds as mentioned in
the stem.
i. offside ii. dribbling
iii. passing
Which one in the following is correct?
a. iii b. i & iii
c. i & iii d. i, ii & iii
Read the stem and answer questions 6 & 7.
Arif is a goal keeper. He occasionally plays as a field player but due to his
committing foul the referee gives free throw against him.
6. Of which game is Arif the player?
a. football b. handball
c. basketball d. hockey
7. The referee can give free throw against Arif -
(i) if he enters the goal boundary by taking the ball from the ground
- (ii) if he runs more than three steps by holding the ball
s (iii) if he moves by taking the ball from the ground

140 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Which one in the following is correct?

a. i&ii b. iG iii

c. ii & iti d. i, ii & iii
Creative Question:
1.While playing cricket in the field, the bowler bowls against the batsman Monir.
As the ball hits the leg of the batsman, several players including the bowler
prayed for out with one voice. But the umpire shaking his head instructs to
continue the play. In the 10th over when the new batsman Shakil faces his first
ball, the ball hits the stamp and the bell falls down but the umpire expanding
his right hand shows the sign. It frustrates the fielders.

a. What is called by-run?

b. To which technique does delivery belong? Explain.

c. Explain the reason of praying for out with one voice as mentioned in the

stem.

d. Analyse the logic of the umpire's 2nd decision.
2..In the inter-class T-20 cricket tournament the students of class nine winning the
toss were elected to bat first. As the students of class ten missed some catches
and did not save boundaries, the opening pair built a 100-runs partnership and
scored a big total of 180 run for 2 wickets. Chasing the target of 181 runs, the
umpire declared the opening batsman out in the lst over as the ball hit his leg
directly. The students of class nine were spontaneous and lively. They saved
several certain boundaries of the opponent and did not miss any catch. As a
result the students of class ten did not exceed the target.

a. How many panels will there be over the basketball?

b. What is meant by lonaball? Explain.

c. What is the nature of out of the opening batsman? Explain.

d. What reason do you think works for the success of the students of class

nine? Give logic in favour of your answer.
ES
ES

Chapter Nine
Athletics and Swimming
Athletics and swimming are the best way for the exhibition or display of
personal sportive feats and skills, Athletics includes but is not limited to events
such as running or racing, jumping and throwing etc. In the primitive age,
people utilized these feat and skill for survival. At the advent of human
evolution and with the advancement of human adaptation to natural calamities,
these two techniques were later on considered to be the best personal feat and
skill for sports and games. In ancient times, there was hardly any technique or
rule for swimming. But at a later stage, swimming was taken as a unique
medium or technique for building sound physique and it also later on turned
out to be a wonderful instrument for amusement. Athletics and swimming
positively impact on building a sound physique, achieving personal sportive
feats and skills and being obedient to some given norms and laws and these
consequently lead the students towards becoming ideal citizens of the country.
: — j ir
SJ fy _..—_¥ SQ-—
_—— aa
>, &
4
. Swimming
Running
In this chapter, we will be able to
@ Explain the various rules of athletics,
@ Interpret the various techniques of the tracks and field events of athletics,
e@ Describe the qualities and qualifications of the athletes relating to
various events,
e Describe the qualifications and features of swimmers relating to different
2 events,
g

142 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
e Explain the rules and regulations of various events of swimming,
e Brief the strategies of various events of swimming,
e Exercise and practice various events according to the governing laws
of athletics,
e@ Practice swimming through abiding the laws, rules and regulations of
swimming.
Lesson-1: The Guiding Rules for the Events of Athletics
(Track & Field)
Out of the numerous games throughout the world, running or racing, jumping and
throwing are the most primary.A human child after its birth undergoes
various stages such as running, jumping and throwing during its growing-up
phases. In ancient time, people had to run and jump for survival such as for
hunting or safe guarding from the attack of animals or saving life from other
hazards and dangers. People at that time used throwing or pelting technique to
defeat enemies or for hunting animals. These three techniques were thus utilized
essentially for their livelihood and survival. With the passage of time, running,
jumping and throwing changed from the survival technique to personal skill
development and amusement instruments along with the advancement of
civilization.
The events of Athletics are divided into two parts as shown below in the figure:
/ 500m s nae
‘Running/Racing if aq IL ‘\\ 1 ada
isco! |B Welkiag CT Thon. gi 8 }
2.200 Metre Sprint 1. Marathon (26 Mile, 385 Yards) “sap _— gS ig 4
es en 2.20 Km Walking. 1 Long Jump. 1. Sphere throw. PY
5.1500 Metre Sprint 3.50km Waking 2. High Jump. eee 4
. sooo non went 3. Triple Jump. 3. Spear throw. ne zy
8.4* 100 Metre Relay 4, Pole-vault 4. Hammer throw. ig | ?
Sener | Liana
cate ic TEE
X ee LLL stom
SS
Sa
Athletic track

Athletics and Swimming 143

N.B.- 5,000-meter run, 10,000 meter Run, 4x400 meters relay race, Hurdle

Run, 3000 meter Stipple Chase, Walking events and Hammer throw are not

usually held at Inter School and Madrasah Sports Competitions.

General Principles of Running/Racing Competition

1. A 400-meter Track is the allowable track for the running or racing
competition.

2. During running or racing competition, the athletes would run keeping the
1St Lane in the left.

3. Lane cannot be changed during sprint i.e. 100 meter, 200 meter, 400 meter,
hurdle run, 100x4 meter run and every individual/performer would have to
run in the specified lane.

4. During relay run of 800 meters, 1500 meters and ae
4x400,meters lane can be changed. After going to a
certain distance, how lane can be changed
needs to be well understood before the kicking
off the running or racing competition.

5. For sprint, starting block needs to be used but in
other running or racing, starting block is not Torso
mandatory.

6. During the run or race, one should put on the
finishing stand. , f

7. Finishing ribbon must be in touch with the Torso f
first. : |

8. The starting and ending point of the run or race _ \,
must be marked with white color. F om RS

9. All the runs do not have the same starting point Va g TE d
but always end at the same place or point. un ot naming

10. Runners must start all runs at the sound of the fire.

11. During sprint run, the starter must use three instructions

a. On Your Mark.

b. Set.

Lo}
S co. Fire or firing of pistol.

144 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

12. If once false start takes place, the incumbent or the performer will be
disallowed or discarded.

13. During Marathon, Set need not be used. Only one needs to run or race after
the utterance of the word “On Your Mark” and hearing the sound of the fire.

The Technique of Sprint Run or Race: The run or race with the highest

velocity and speed is called Sprint. Any run or race from 100 to 400 meter falls

within the purview of Sprint. Start plays a vital role in case of Sprint Run.

There is a proverb, “A good beginning is half the battle”. This purely fits in the

case of Sprint Run. A good start gives actually additional advantage for Sprint

Runners.

The start of the Sprint Run can be made in the following three ways:

1) Bunch Start

2) Medium Start

3) Elongated Start

1. Bunch Start: The front leg is kept two steps behind from the starting point

and the tip of the hinder leg will be aligned with the hill of the front leg.

2. Medium Start: The front leg will be two steps behind the starting point and

the toe of the hinder leg and the strength of the front leg will be aligned.

3. Elongated Start: The front leg will be three steps behind the starting point

and the toe of the hinder leg and heel of the front leg will be aligned.

Sprint Run has four phases. These are:

1. On Your Mark. 2. Set.

3. Drive. 4. Acceleration.

1. On Your Mark: As soon as the “On your Mark” is pronounced, the athlete

would set their legs 20-25 centimeters behind from the starting point and the

fingers of two hands on the starting point upon the ground. If legs are

positioned on starting block, that need to be placed earlier or immediately on

the specific spot. The vision will be straight forward. The runner would have to

sit folding the knees and pressing on the palm of hands.

2. Position before the moment the Run starts: As soon as the starter utters

SET, the hinder leg needs to be straightened and bent forward. The hip will rise

upward. The whole mass of the body will hinge upon the hands. One needs to «

be stable and silent while one can hear the sound of the fire within 2-3 seconds. &

Athletics and Swimming 145
3. Drive: As soon as one hears the sound of the fire, one need not stand rather
needs to bend forward.
4. Acceleration: Soon after this, one has to mun accelerating the velocity and
speed. These four positions are displayed through the following pictures:
es
.
O f bh) < 9. 4 ; Se
Various phases of Starting.
Start Standing: In case of medium and long distance mun, it is needed to start
from the standing position. As soon as the starter utters “On Your Mark”, one
needs to come to the starting point. Then one needs to start running after
hearing the sound of the fire.
Ending of the Running: All runs will end at the same point. The run will be
accounted to have been finished when the head and leg will merge on the
ending point.
Relay Race: When four competitors or performers run smoothly parallel from
a certain distance, this is called Relay Run.
The following rules need to be followed in Relay Run
1, One needs to run with Baton.
2. Baton needs to be changed at the point marked for Baton exchange.
3. The space for Baton exchange is 20 meter.
4. The length of Baton is 28-30 centimeter, radius 38 mm and weight 50 gms.
5. The Baton is made of wood, metal or similar object.
6. After exchange of Baton, the players would have to be in their respective
places until other competitors cross him or her.
Technique of Baton Exchange: The most important thing to remember during
Baton exchange is that the velocity or speed does not decrease at any cost. So
the technique needs to be revised time and again. The technique of Baton
exchange is of two types- 1. To exchange by seeing the Baton, 2. To exchange
without seeing the Baton.

146 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
1. Exchange by seeing: When one exchanges Baton looking behind, this
exchange is called Exchange by seeing.
2. Exchange without seeing: When Baton is exchanged through speedy run
from behind and without looking back, this is called Exchange without seeing.
L, | He
) J
Wy ae
Fig. (1) Exchange by seeing Baton Exchange Fig. (2) Exchange without seeing
The Rules of Baton Passing: This technique is of two types. These are-1.
Upward Pass, 2. Downward Pass.
Upward Pass: When the passing of Baton/stick/staff takes place with the head
of Baton/Stick/Staff upward, this is called Upward Pass.
Downward Pass: When the passing of Baton/stick/staff takes place with the
head of Baton/Stick/Staff downward, this pass is called to be Downward Pass.
Whether the baton is passed upward or downward, the efficiency and efficacy
depends on a sound practice and exercise of the players or performers or the
competitors.
Activity-1: Ask the player to show how the start for Sprint takes place by
going physically to the field.
|Activity-2: Show the techniques of touching the ending point of run/race/sprint in
group.
Activity-3: Explain the techniques of exchange of Baton by seeing or without
seeing.
io)
5

Athletics and Swimming 147

Lesson-2: Division of Jump

Under this division are included a. Long Jump, b. High Jump, c. Hop Step and

Jump, d. Pole Vault.

The general Principles of Long Jump

1. Approoch run: One has to run through the runway.

2. The length of runway needs to be at least 40 meters, Width 1.22-1.25
meters, and both sides should be marked with white color.

3. The length of Takeoff border should be 1.21-1.22 meter, width 19.8
cm-20.2 mm and height 100 cm.

4. The takeoff board will be at a distance of 1-3 meter from the jump pit.

5. The measurement of the Jump pit would be 10 meters, width 2.75-3 meters.

6. The color of Takeoff board would be white.

7. The jump pit will be filled in with sand but will not rise above takeoff
board level.

8. The measurement needs to be taken from and on where the maximum part
of the body would touch the sand.

9. A competitor/player would be considered to have been disqualified if he or
she -

a. Fails to jump within 60 seconds from the name call.

b. Jumps out of the Takeoff board.

c. Touches the ground out of the landing area before landing.

d. Walks back after completing the jump.

e. Performs takeoff with two legs.

f. Touches the ground in front of the takeoff board.

The Technique of Long Jump: Those who are sprinters usually fare well in

long jumps. To be an expert long jumper, he or she needs to acquire strength,

velocity and speed which usually a sprinter possesses. The techniques of long

jump falls under four categories: 1. Approach Run, 2. Takeoff (To rise up

giving pressure on ground), 3. Flight (to float on air), 4. Landing (To descend

on the ground).

= 1. Approach Run: For the purpose of jumping, when one comes running with
‘heavy speed from a distance of 50 to 80 feet, this run is called Approach Run.

148 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

The last approaches need to be very drastic and speedy. A sign is posted at a

distance of 15-25 feet from the takeoff board so that legs are stamped

accurately. This sign is called check mark. If the legs touch properly this check

mark, it can then be reasonably presumed that legs will also touch the takeoff

board. An athlete has to practise again and again to make sure that legs touch

the takeoff board properly.

2. Takeoff: In a long jump, there is an arrangement of a takeoff board to enable

the jumpers to rise high leaving the ground. This board is 4 feet long, 8 inches

wide. The surface is colored white. When legs float in the air from this board, it

is called takeoff. One who excels in takeoff, will jump longer distance.

3. Flight: The time duration between the rise of legs from the takeoff board till

they ground is called Flight or floating in the air. To walk, fold knees, heavy

jerking of legs and Hitch Kick are the methods for floating in the air. One

whose movement in the air is excellent would cover longer distance.

4. Landing: While landing or descending on the ground, one needs to keep the

legs straight and keep himself or herself at full length forward before touching

the ground so that one can cover longer distance. The heels would first touch

the sand of the landing pit and soon after that, folding two knees, the whole

mass of the body would be passed to the tip of legs and the performer or

competitor would fall sliding forward.

Activity -1: Ask the learners to show if he or she can perform the takeoff of
the long jump properly.
Activity-2: Ask them to demonstrate if the right position of legs during
landing is ensured.

Lesson-3 : High Jump

Rules of High Jump

1. The competitors need to be informed about the height of jump before
starting the high jump and announced how much the round height to
be increased.

2. After the rounds being over, the height needs to be raised at least 2 cm.

3. Length of the Runway should be at least 15 meters.

4. Acompetitor for his or her convenience can use more than one mark or S
signpost to adjust or fix his or her Run up and Takeoff. N

Athletics and Swimming 149

5. The distance between two poles should be 3.64 meters to 4 meters.

6. The crossbar may be made up of wood or metal or similar objects.

7. The measurement for landing area for high jump is 5 x 4 meters.

8. A competitor loses his or her chance when he or she -

a) Fails to jump within 60 seconds from the roll call.

b) Crosses the line of the crossbar while jumping.

c) Performs takeoff with two legs.

d) Falls on the crossbar while jumping.

Techniques of High Jump: A competitor has to undergo four stages in high

jump, whatsoever be the technique of high jump. These techniques are- 1.

Approach Run, 2. Takeoff, 3. Crossing the crossbar 4. Landing.

1. Approach by running is called Approach Run.

2. To get up or fly, keeping the weight on leg after running is called Takeoff.

3. The crossbar has to be crossed by any method for high jump.

4. Falling on the ground after crossing the crossbar is called Landing.

There are three methods of High Jump-

1. Western Roll, 2. Belly Roll, 3. Fosbury Flop.

1. Western Roll: The special feature of this method is that the landing will

take place with the same leg which has been used for the takeoff. If the takeoff

is performed by the left leg, then after crossing the crossbar, landing will also

be performed with and on the left leg.

a. Jump is usually initiated after seven steps forward but if the height is less,
then five steps are adequate.

b. For the purpose of jumping, one has to stand at 45° to 60° angles with the
crossbar at the time of running.

c. At the time of mounting or taking off from the ground, one has to notice
that the last three steps would be speedy and comparatively long.

d. The hinder leg needs to be thrown very forcibly upward while the leg upon
which the competitor will leave the ground needs to bear the whole weight

%9 of the body and the same leg would roll or slide from the hill to the tip of
& that leg.

150 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

e. The leg used for leaving the ground would later be folded at the knee for
rising upward.

f. On the crossbar, the whole body needs to be whirled or bent and the
shoulder needs to be kept vertically aligned with the obstacle ahead to
cross the crossbar.

g. The leg upon which landing will be performed should be used along with
two hands at the time of landing.

ae _
= 7
. © ca ie a.
4
Western Roll

2. Belly Roll: The feature of this method is that the competitor will use one

leg for the takeoff while the opposite leg and two hands will be used for

landing. If foam is used for landing, according to convenience, landing can be
done on the back as well. In this method, one should remember-

a) The running angle should be 25° to 40° angles with the crossbar.

b) During takeoff, the last steps would be faster and longer. But after leaving
the ground, the opposite leg and hand of the concemed side need to be first
raised above the crossbar.

¢) While nearing the crossbar, the upper part of the body needs to be bent or
inclined downward. It helps keep the belly part come closer to the crossbar.

d) The upper part of the body (from shoulder to hip) of the corresponding leg and
hand which is lowering down needs to be lowered further while pushing the
hand forward and inside the body. Then simultaneously the competitor would .,
let the body slide during landing. s

Athletics and Swimming 151
las
Zi "Wa,
a gat
eo if
Belly Roll ad

3. Fosbury Flop: In 1968, Mr. Dick Fosbury from America won gold medal in

the Mexico Olympic using a new method in High Jump. According to his

name, this high jump is named Fosbury Flop. This is treated now as a universal
method. But one should keep in mind that jumping in this method is not
possible without foamed mat.

a. In this method, the competitor has to stand at 90° angles with the crossbar
and he or she has to come closer to the crossbar in a half circular motion.

b. The middle of the body is jolted and bent while the takeoff of the leg is
placed at the epicenter of the body. After that, one has to rise upward with
haste and force. At the same time, the other leg is hung and raised towards
the right shoulder-line. As a result, the back will be inclined towards the
crossbar.

c. When the body will leave the ground and fling upward, the hands need to
be immediately placed parallel with the body and the head; the middle part
of the body and the lower part of the hip would have to be crossed upon the
crossbar. The hands and legs would be facing upward while the performer
would land on the back.

2 sepean —t mse | “Bar clearance ‘Landing
& Fosbury Flop

152 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

The Tie of Athletics: Tie means equality. When the two competing players

have the same result, it is called Tie. Tie is of two types. 1. Tie of height, 2. Tie

of distance.

1. Tie of Height: When tie occurs in Pole vault and high jump, it is called the

Tie of the height, because tie happens in terms of height.

2. Tie of Distance: when tie occurs among the competitors of Long jump,

Hop Step jump, Disc throw, sphere throw, spear throw, Hammer throw events,

these are called to be the Tie of distance. Only Tie has to be postponed for the

18t position but for the 224 and 3f4 position, the result is announced

simultaneously.

1. If Tie occurs in Height, the rules for breaking the Tie are

a) The height for which the Tie has occurred, the person who has achieved
this score with less effort will be the first winner.

b) If Tie can’t be broken according to the rule mentioned above, the
competitor whose cross is less from the first to last will be the first winner.

c) If the Tie still does not break, the jump needs to restart either increasing or
decreasing the height. One who can cross successfully would be the
winner. Here the competitors would have only one chance for jumping.

Rule for tie Breaking in case of Distance:

(a) Out of total throw of jump, the 2nd highest distance needs to be noticed.

(b) If tie still does not break according to this rule, then the 3rd highest one is
to be examined. (In this way, it would gradually advance).

Activity-1: Show/train the jumping method to the students whichever you like.
Activity-2: Ask the students to describe the method of Belly Roll.

Lesson-4 : Triple Jump or Hop Step Jump and Pole

Vault

1. Triple Jump or Hop Step: The jump that combines Hop Step and Jump is

called Triple Jump. The leg used for takeoff is also used for first hop and the

opposite leg is used for hop and then jump in this method. In this event, all the

three kinds of jump carry equal importance. If ratio is properly calculated in 2x

these three types of jump, one can cover longer distance through practice and &

Athletics and Swimming 153
exercise. Usually, 6:5:6 ratio is very advantageous for the new athletes. If first
hop is 6’, then step will be 5’ and last jump will be 6’. If the left leg is used for
takeoff, then the same leg needs to be used for hop and then the right leg
should be used for step and then jump should be performed.

Approach Run: In this case, one has to rush like that of the long jump. The

speed of running or racing is controlled in such a way that the speed reaches

the highest at the time of leaving the ground.

Takeoff: The takeoff of long jump and triple is not the same. In case of triple

jump, efforts are made to ensure how to keep the speed forward intact or

uniform. The first hop should not be taken at too high a level. If the natural hop
gradually rises, the jump attains perfection. The height of step should be higher
than that of hop, which should be higher than the previous both feats.

To Float in the Air and above the Ground: In this case, legs are moved and

oscillated the same way that of the long jump, so that longer distance can be

covered.

Landing: The technique for landing is similar to that of the long jump.

Guiding Rules:

1. If more than 8 competitors take part, in that case, after three jumps, 8
competitors need to be selected and those 8 people will again jump for three
times. In these 6 jumps, whoever secures the highest distance will be the
winner.

2. While jumping, if someone breaks the sand bar or sand wall in front of the
takeoff bar, that jump will be cancelled.

3. During approach run, no sign can be placed on the run way.

4. Jumping is not allowed with weight either in hands or legs.

5. While jumping, if the leg other than the required one touches the ground,
then that jump will be cancelled.

2. Pole Vault: The jump that is performed exerting pressure or mass of the

body on the pole is called the Pole Vault jump.

Roles for competition

a. Inform the competitors about the height before starting the competition and

how much height will be increased after the end of every round.

b. After the end of every round, the crossbar would rise at least Scm.

154 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

c. For the convenience of jumping, the competitors can shift the posts up to
0.4 m from the edge of the inner portion of the box towards runway and 0.8
m towards the pit.

d. When the competition starts, the jumping ground cannot be used for
practice.

e. The jump of a competitor will be considered unsuccessful if-

1. Both legs float in the air.

2. Crossbar falls or clutters after jump.

3. The front ground of the crossbar is touched.

4. Someone without jumping breaks or clutters the crossbar.

5. Someone takes the lower hand upon the upper hand during jump while
holding the pole or changes two hands and tries to mount by climbing.

f. Acompetitor will have three chances for one height.

g. Any substance can be used in hand for the efficient holding of the pole.

h. While jumping, if the pole breaks, he or she will have the chance to jump
again.

i. IfTie occurs, the rule for Tie Breaking for Height will be applied.

j. The length of runway would be 40 m and width 1.22 m.

k. The measurement of Landing will be 5 m long and 5 m wide.

1. Every competitor will use his or her own pole.

Technique: Pole can be handled in three way- 1. To carry the pole holding

high, 2. To carry the the pole holding it in the medium height, 3. To carry the

pole holding it low. It depends on the height and practice of the individual

competitor how and in which manner he or she will hold the pole. Whatever be

the manner of holding the pole, one has to jump entering the edge of the pole

in the box. |

Six Phases of Jumping ft ri.

1. To rush towards the runway. LF | A

2. To place the pole properly in the box. atl

3. To take takeoff properly. . x

4. To mount high pane ‘weight on the pole.

5. To swing the body on the crossbar. x <i ai yo

6. To land without pole and swing the body. Pole Vault 8

Athletics and Swimming 155
Acivity-1 : Show how Pole is held/gripped and carried.
Activity-2: Describe the various phases of jumping.
Activity-3: Ask the students to demonstrate the techniques of Triple jump.
Lesson-5: Throw Division/Department
During the Inter School and Madrasah Sports Competition, in this division or
department, competitions on Sphere, Spear and Disc throw are usually held. The
tules and techniques of these three events are described below:
1. Sphere Throw: The sphere will be made up of iron, brass or of similar
substance. Its shape will be circular and smooth. The weight of the sphere for
the male will be 7.260 kg and for the female 4.000 kg. The diameter of the shot
put circle will be 2.135 m and the stroke of the sector will be 34.92°. This need
to be placed in front of the circle of the stop board made of curved wood. The
stop board will be of white color and would be firmly fixed with the ground so
that it does detract at the blow of legs.
The Technique of Sphere Throw: The sphere = =
would not be placed in the palm of the hand a. fo fr
rather would be fixed with fingers fully clung to x aa
the base of fingers. The thumb and pinkie finger A) —
would be a little bit scattered two sides so that it
does not fall. Then the sphere needs to be Hat aaron ee
placed between neck and shoulder and the
elbow of the hand will be a little bit elevated. —
The way or direction the sphere will be thrown: ‘
one has to stand with face opposite to that
direction. The right leg will be forwarded and Spiele
the foot of the left leg needs to be placed behind ; io le
along with the ankle of the right leg. After that, is
the body needs to be squeezed backward while
7 it would also move sideways.
S

156 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

Rules

1, The sphere needs to be thrown in the sector.

2. If the number of competitors is 8, each of the competitors will have chances
of 6 throws.

3. If the number is more than 8, selection should be made by three chances of
throw. The selected competitors would have additional three chances of
throw each.

4. After throw, the surface of circle cannot be touched.

5. One cannot get out of the circle until the sphere falls on the ground.

6. The sphere needs to be thrown within 60 seconds from the time the name of
the competitor is pronounced.

2. Spear/Javelin Throw: The English

term of spear is Javelin. The length of

Javelin is 2.60-2.70 m for the male

and 2.20-2.30 m for the female, while hia al BS

weight for the male is 800 gm and

female 600 gm respectively. The

length of the runway would be at least

33.5 m. An are needs to be drawn with AD, ag AR

8 m length and 4 m width. The are

would be made of wooden materials The techniques of Sphere Throw

and placed parallel to the ground. Both

sides of the arc would be extended or

raised by 1.5 m.

Technique of Javelin Throw: Firstly, one should know how to hold the Javelin.

If the catch or hold or grip is good then the throw would also be good. The

holding of Javelin is of three types-

a. Fore Finger Grip: In this case, the Javelin is gripped with the fore fingers.

b. Middle Finger Grip: In this case, it is gripped with the middle fingers.

c. In between fore and middle fingers: In this case, it is to be gripped with the

fore and middle fingers right in the middle. s

Athletics and Swimming 157
— or : 4 or
f —— ra gil Po yy rT _—
7 ‘ ' J yi be | , KX. JS
a“ Aad Ps 4 “
Javelin Gripping

Javelin throw has to be performed in four phases. These are- 1. Come running,
2. Rhythm of five steps, 3. Throw, 4. Retreat.
1. Come running: For Javelin throw, one needs to come running through the

runway.
2. Five Step Rhythms: Before throw, one needs to take five steps with rhythm

and then throw.
3. Throw: After five steps, one has to maintain equilibrium after the Javelin

throw.
4. Recovery/Retreat: After equilibrium, one has to retreat/recover.
The Rules of Javelin Throw: oF -
1. The Javelin must fall in the . tg ae
sector and the tip should first eX APOE ‘ex, y
touch the ground oe cS 3 Jd, (7. \
2. It cannot be thrown touching ; 4) Pea ff if
the Javelin marker or the front a gx ae RG 4
qaarker. Javelin Throw
3. After throw, one cannot cross the extended line.
4. One has to throw the Javelin within 90 seconds from his or her name being
pronounced.
5. It cannot be clung with finger with tape or lace.
6. One cannot use gloves during Javelin throw.

s 7. One cannot use powder or similar substance to have tight grip.

158 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

3. Disc Throw: Disc throw is a popular field event. The disc is actually

circular in appearance. The weight of this disc for the male is 2 kg while for

female 1 kg. The diameter of the circle for disc throw is 2.5 m. The circle

should be circumscribed by iron ring and the circle will be rough and

concrete-made.

The Technique of Disc Throw

Gripping of Disc A |

a) First, the disc needs to be kept in the opposite hand.

b) The smooth part of the disc will be upward facing. Gripping of Disc

c) The disc has to be gripped tightly with the upper curve of the middle three
fingers of that hand which would be eventually used for the throw of the
Javelin.

d) Support needs to be gained with the help of the thumb and the pinkie.

The Phases of Disc Throw: It has three

steps such as 1. Swing, 2. Turn, \ ike vn seam

3. Throw. 4 ea

1. Swing : The thrower would a ut >

advantageously swing, gripping the ty a ee

disc tightly and standing in the circle. . r 2s0em

2. Turn: Just before the throwing “a A

moment, the performer would have to ==

swirl 1.5 times and then throw. The circle & sector of disc

3. Throw: Soon after the turn, the performer has to take or gain strength on leg

and throw. During throw, the performer has to maintain the equilibrium of the

body on one leg.

Rules

1. Throw to be performed within 60

seconds from the announcement of the —" ~~" ™ ° -

name.

2. Disc to be thrown from within the RR Ls a x

circle. - _6M Ow 8&8

The Technique of Disc Throw N

Athletics and Swimming 159
3. After throw, the performer has to get out of the circle from the hinder part.
4. The disc must fall in the sector.
5. While the disc is floating in the air, the performer cannot come out.
6. The iron ring round the circle should not be touched.
7. While throwing, the ground outside the circle should not be touched.
Activity-1: Ask the performers to show how to take grip of the disc and how
to throw.
Activity-2: Demonstrate one different techniques of disc throw, sphere throw
and Javeline throw.
Activity-3: Ask the performers/students to present the rules of those three types
of throw.
Lesson-6: Swimming
Swimming is a very old game. In the ancient time, men have learnt swimming
for survival. There was no necessity of any specific rules and regulations, tools
and techniques. Later on, swimming competition event has emerged as a
genuine medium of amusement and building sound physique. The pattern of
swimming that we find common now-a-days was actually initiated by the
English people. They first started swimming through breast stroke and side
stroke. In 1873, the first competition on swimming was held in England. At a
later stage, it spread throughout the world. After the independence of
Bangladesh, the Bangladesh Amateur Swimming Federation was constituted in
1973. Since then, this federation has been carrying out various events of
swimming in Bangladesh.
The Techniques of Swimming: Competitive swimming is of four types such
as 1. Free Style, 2. Back Stroke, 3. Breast Stroke and 4. Butterfly.
A. Free Style Swimming: In this method, a competitor can swim in any style.
But how the swimmer will go faster can be determined through repeated
« practice. For this purpose, the position of the body, the functions of legs and
& hands and the inhalation and exhalation are crucially important.

160 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
1. Position of the Body: The body is to be prostrated and kept parallel with
water. The head will be little bit above water but the position of head
sometimes needs to be accommodated through keeping head high or bending
the shoulder.
2. Functions of Leg: The leg function starts from the hip and for moving
forward while the left and right legs are moved upward and downward one
after another. The leg is slightly folded at the point of knee but the foot of the
leg is kept straight. The ankle of the left leg does not go above water. When
water is pressed with the feet, the feet of the leg may go down up to 12-18
inches. In water, when the two hands would complete one full circle of
movement, the legs would have 6 times upward and downward activities or
circulations. The function of leg can be divided into two parts such as a.
kicking upward, b. kicking downward.
3. Functions of Hands: Two hands need to be thrown towards the head in
water. One hand while moving past water, will slide one side of the body up to
the hip keeping the elbow a little bit folded. As soon as the hand propels
upward, hand would reach in front of the head. As soon as the hand falls on
water, the body needs to be pushed forward moving past the water. The
fine-tuning and coordination of hands and legs increase the speed of the
swimmer.
4. Inhalation and Exhalation/Breathing: While Sas
swimming, one needs to perpetually move the La °
head and breathe keeping the mouth slightly a
above water. The hand that will be over water, the o
head needs to be turned to the direction of the a
hand that will be over water and the swimmer will
have to breathe with mouth. But exhalation should ___ a ae
occur when the mouth turns into the water. ie eae
B. Back Stroke: This technique is called back e
stroke as one has to keep the back on the water Re
surface keeping face upward and swimming o
backward. a
=
Freestyle Swimming. S

Athletics and Swimming 161
1. Position of the Body: The body is kept with face upward and generally the
head is positioned inside the water. As a result, the body floats on the water
while the surface being parallel to water. The nose will not plunge into water
but will be positioned above the water and eye sight will be towards the ankle
of the legs.
2. Function of Legs: Like freestyle swimming, the function of legs is also
important in this mode of swimming. In case of freestyle swimming, one has to
ptostrate the body and two legs, one after another, propel the body through
water. Similarly, in this case, one has to fall on the back and move the two legs
upward and downward. The feet of the legs will remain straight.
3. Function of Hands: In this case, one hand will go behind just beside the
ear and will move past the water with palm and fingers of the hand and would
ultimately reach beside the body while the other hand will go behind the same
manner, One after another, one hand will go behind and come beside the body
and with this process, the function of the legs will be simultaneously
coordinated.
4. Breathing: Since swimmer falls on the back upon water in this mode of
swimming where the face keeps at upward direction, the breathing will take
place normally.
“
LEE AE LE
Ss SE SS
Swimming by falling on the back/ Supine Swimming

C. Breast Stroke: This is called Breast stroke as one has to swim exerting

pressure on water through the breast.
1. Body Position: The body would be parallel with the surface of the water.
The hinder part of the body will be partially plunged into water. The head will
be over the water. After the functions of hands and legs, when the body will
move forward, the nose and mouth will plunge a little bit into water.

162 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
2. Function of Legs: Two legs are to be kept together. Two hands will be
thrown in front of the head and water will be moved past by the hands
longitudinally beside the two sides of the body. At this time, the two knees will
be folded and plunged into water and two ankles together will come closer to
the hip and give heavy thrust on water.

3. Function of Hands: Two hands are to be extended forward together. Two

hands will move past water together and while coming near the two sides of the

body, the elbow will slightly bend. After the water being moved past, the two
hands together would come in front of the face. At this time, the nose, mouth and
forehead will be slightly plunged into water.

4. Breathing: After extending the hands in front of the face, when the hands

will move past the water on both sides of the body, the mouth will rise from

water for inhalation but exhalation should take place in the water.

D. Butterfly: Out of the four types of swimming, butterfly is the most difficult
one. In this mode of swimming, the swimmer has to work very hard.
He/she has to practice a lot as well to master the art of butterfly swimming
technique.

1. Body Position: Like all other methods, the body will be in parallel position

as much as possible. Since the body is moved forward and the swimmer has to

breathe raising the head, so the hinder part of the body remains inside the
water.

2. Function of Legs: Two hands will be close together. The more smooth the

part from hip to leg is positioned, the more heavily water can be stirred with

the paired legs. The legs are to be folded slightly and thrust in water downward
and backward. The way Dolphins exert pressure on water through their tail, the
paired legs will produce kicks in the sameway. These kicks are called Dolphin

Kick.

3. Function of Hands: Two hands are projected together in front of the head.

Then the two hands together exert pressure and move the body sharply

forward. This process would be finely coordinated with Dolphin Kick of legs.

When two hands are raised from within the water together, the swimmer

appears to have the look of a butterfly. So, this mode of swimming is called 20

Butterfly Stroke. R

Athletics and Swimming 163
4. Breathing: When hands perform once, the legs’ Dolphin Kick takes place
two times. While maneuvering hands and the second time of the kicking of
legs, the swimmer has to breathe through mouth. Then the head remains above
water.
Turning: Turning is a very ae “ _
important part of swimming. If SSS ES
turning takes longer time, it will ~~ --—sy es
take more time. While turning, Gy
the speed of swimming cannot be ~~ SSS: ty: = “hie
reduced. A swimmer accordingly ene (Sp
and chronologically performs the Butterfly Swimming “® ~~
following functions:
1. The swimmer has to prepare for going to the wall.
2. The body needs to be turned according to the techniques of turning.
3. The knees are to be folded and the two legs are to be placed near the wall.
4. If the feet of legs are properly set, the body can be well turned.
5. The swimmer has to come forward by giving thrust with legs.
6. While gliding, the body needs to be kept straight and move forward.
7. The functions of hands and legs need to start simultaneously.
The Turing of Swimming.

The Guiding Principles of Swimming
1. An ideal swimming pool needs to be 50 m long and 21 m wide.
2. An ideal swimming pool has 8 lanes; each lane is 2.5 m wide, and 1.8 m deep.

oo 3. The starting point will be rough and will be 0.5-0.75 m above water.

S 4. The starter, at the time of start would utter “Take Your Mark”, “Set” and “Fire”.

164 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
5. Except supine swimming, all other swimming needs to be started with diving.
6. In the hit, whoever becomes 1st and 2nd will be given lane 4 and 5.

7. In case of Supine swimming and Freestyle swimming, swimming can be
completed by touching the finishing wall with one hand but Breast and
Butterfly swimming requires both hands.

8. Ifa swimmer starts with one style and jumps to another, he or she will be
disqualified.

9. In case of Back Stroke Swimming, the swimmer needs to hold the handle
that remains fitted with the wall and push with legs and start the swimming
from supine mode.

10.A swimmer cannot change lane or obstruct another swimmer in swimming.

Medley Relay: When four swimmers swim for the same distance with four

different styles is called Medley Relay. These are- Supine swimming, Breast

Stroke, Butterfly and Freestyle.

Personal Medley: When a swimmer swims alone with these four styles, it is

called to be Personal Medley. The sequence of this relay is- Butterfly, Supine

swimming, Breast Stroke and Freestyle swimming.
Activity-1: Ask the students/trainees to show freestyle swimming by bringing
a long bench in the field.
Activity-2: Ask everyone to practice the movement of hands by bending the
body forward keeping them arranged in two rows.

Lesson-7: The Qualifications of the Athletes and the

Swimmers

Qualifications vary according to the nature and number of events. The same kind

of qualification is not required for all events. For a specific event, an athlete or

swimmer requires specific qualifications and other qualifications which again
vary with the shift of events. As for example, the qualifications of a marathoner
are not the same with that of the thrower. Since athletics and swimming
competitions are event-related the success of the incumbents or contestants
depends to a great extent on the personal or individual tools and techniques.
Following is the description of the competitors of the athletics and swimming x
competition: 8

Athletics and Swimming 165

1. Physical Fitness: Every game and event requires physical fitness. Some

game requires more strength; some require breathing while other requires

speed and velocity, alacrity and readiness. But it should be kept in mind that
the physical fitness varies with the number and nature of events.

a. Sprinter: Out of all the components of physical fitness, a sprinter requires
the strength of the body the most. Especially the robust structure of the leg
muscle is vital. With this, it also requires speed and velocity.

b. Marathoner: Out of all the components of physical fitness, a marathoner requires
the breathing capacity most. Those who have good breaths fare well in these
events.

c. Short Distance Swimmer: Out of all the traits of physical fitness, these
performers require the strength of hands and elasticity of body though other
fitness is also important.

d. Long Distance Swimmer: The first qualification required for this event is
breathing. Floating on water is another important qualification as well.
Apart from that, these performers also need to excel in the movement of
hands and shoulders.

2. The Efficiency of Mastering over various Tools and Techniques: Since

these two competitions depend on individual performance, Reaction Time

plays a vital role.

a) Reaction Time: Running and Swimming need to be started soon after
firing; hence one requires a very good reaction time. For Sprint and short
swimming, starting is very important.

b) Qualification to touch Ending Point: Qualification for touching the
ending point is also very vital. Be it athletics or swimming, in both the
cases, one need to acquire efficiency in touching the ending point.

c) Those who are throwers, need to acquire skill in turning, throwing and
Follow Throw.

d) Knowing the Rules and Norms of the concerned Events: One needs to
master the rules, regulations, norms and etiquette of the concerned events
to fare well in such competitions.

e) Self-confidence: The competitors must acquire self-confidence. If one does

S not have firm determination and high morale, one cannot fare well in such
» competitions.

166 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
f) Discipline and Obedience: Every competitor has to practice with discipline
and take rest properly. Each competitor needs to abide by the instructions
and do’s and don’ts’ of the teachers and demonstrators.
would discuss the requisite qualifications and efficiency for
event-wise swimming competition while the other group would
discuss in the same way the athletics.
Activity-2: Ask the students/trainees to describe the rules and norms of
starting and ending points for swimming.
Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. Which one is the first stage of high jump?
a. take off b. come running
c. cross the cross bar d. landing
2. In which swimming do the chest and mouth of the swimmer remain upward ?
a. breast b. free
c. back d. butterfly
3. Which colour is given on the take off board?
a. white b. red
c. yellow d. green
4. Which game is related to the word 'take off ?
a. athletics b. football
c. hockey d. cricket
5. Which swimming is started without dive?
a. breast stroke b. butterfly stroke
c. free stroke d. back stroke
6. In high jump when does a competitor get a chance ?
a. jump in 60 seconds b.if take offis taken with two legs,
c. ifrunning starts from 16 meter away d.jump in 90 seconds Ss

Athletics and Swimming 167
7. In personal medley, the serial of relay stroke is

a. breast, back, butterfly, free b. butterfly, back, breast, free

c. back, breast, butterfly, free  d. free, back, butterfly, breast
Read the stem and answer questions 8 & 9.
Samin is always good at playing. In the last annual sports competition he
became the personal champion along with occupying the Ist position in 100
and 200 meter sprint. After his success, his brother advised him to practise
swimming along with athletics and by regular swimming practice, he was
awarded with the glory of becoming Ist in an event of swimming at national
level. He becomes Ist in the swimming that requires hand work for one time.
8. In which swimming did Samin become 1st?

a. free b. relay

c. breast d. butterfly
9. Which capability of athletic Samin works as a background of success of

swimmer Samin?

a. gaining more rapidity b. gaining more strength

c. taking nutritious food d. of gripping the technique
Creative Question
1. Shabbir took part in the inter school swimming competition. By keeping his
body floating on water in parallel line, he advanced forward paddling with the
two hands after throwing them long in front of his head and by lifting his
mouth over water, he tried to take breath. He could not stand first in the
competition. In doing better in swimming the physical instructor advised him
to fulfill two conditions by practicing and instructed him to increase capability.

a. What is torso?

b. What is called the raising up by placing the weight on the ground?

c. In which event of swimming did Shabbir participate? Explain.

d. It is possible to be first by hard practice - analyse according to the stem.

2
8

Chapter Ten
The Accidents during Games
Temporary obstacles are created in our day-to-day life through various tangible
and intangible accidents. These accidents may occur in various ways. Accidents
like sudden pain in legs from any source, bruises or fractures in legs or
elsewhere or wounds, sores may happen any time during exercise or games.
Accidents occur suddenly or with uncertainty. At that moment, doctors are
usually not available, But the patient needs first-hand care or first aid that very
moment, That is why we need to be aware of First Aids. Through building
knowledge on First Aid, we would be able to lead a hazard-free and healthy life.
see <j RST AID a
J >. q — +
oe
The components of First Aid
At the end of this chapter, we will be able to
@ describe the importance and methods of First Aid sequentially.
@ describe the elements/components of First Aid.
@ describe the features and importance of First Aid.
@ describe the causes and Remedy of the bruised and swollen skin.
@ describe the first-aid essentials for wounds, fractures of bones, sores and
traumatic conditions.
e@ explain the causes and remedies of the bruises or disjoins of ligaments
and fracture and displacement of joints.
@ describe the classification of bruises, cuts and sores.
@ explain the first Aid or emergency support in case of bleeding of nose
and tension and cramping in the muscles of legs and elsewhere. %
S
Q

The Accidents during Games 169

e@ describe the emergency Aid in case of someone being drowned.

e@ learn about various traumas like bruises in skin, swells, wounds,

fractures, displacement of joints, disjoining of ligaments etc.

@ be inspired about leading a healthy, hazard-free and happy life.
Lesson-1: The Importance, Method and Elements of
First Aid
First Aid is a primary department or discipline of medical science. A person
with appropriate knowledge of First Aid is capable of providing First Aid
support to someone who falls a victim to an accident or suddenly falls ill. First
Aid does not aim at providing full treatment. Because a volunteer of First Aid
is not a physician. Until the doctor arrives or the patient is borne to a hospital,
such volunteers try to save the life of the person affected, facilitates early
recovery, prevent the patient’s condition from turning worse. Thus the
volunteer aims at saving someone’s life with immediate and necessary medical
assistance. If we describe the acronym of First Aid, the very definition and
function of First Aid would be easier to comprehend.

F- Fast: The volunteer providing First Aid has to take quick action. Otherwise,
the patient’s condition might turn worse.

I-Investigation: Investigating the condition and surrounding of the patient,
immediate decision needs to be taken.

R- Relief: First of all, the volunteer has to ensure to annihilate pain and make
comfort for the patient.

S- Sympathy: The patient needs to be looked after with care and sympathy.
Thus the patient would have courage and feel better.

T-Treatment: The volunteer would try his or her level best to provide treatment
for the patient at the earliest and the fastest way.

A- Arrangement: After First Aid, arrangements to be made for immediate
disposal of the patient to a doctor or nearby hospital.

I- Immediate: Immediate action is required for patient, which means that
patient should be either borne to a doctor or nearby hospital.

D- Disposal: The patient needs to be disposed from the area of accident. If the
condition is not serious, then he or she should be borne home or if emergency and
fatal, then borne to hospital.

170 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
The Method of First Aid
1. Immediately but with care and attention, the first action should be taken
first and the later part to be done accordingly.
2. The patient needs to be borne/taken to a safer place from the point of
accident.
3. The patient needs to be investigated whether the patient has conscience or
not.
4. If respiration is obstructed, artificial method needs to be adopted for
respiration.
5. If bleeding continues, it must first be stopped.
6. If the patient is electrocuted, the first emergency treatment should be done
without delay.
7. The pulse should be keenly observed.
8. If the patient is senseless, the cloths should be detached or severed from the
body.
9. The patient and his or her companion should be given hope and mental
support.
10. Bystanders need to be dispersed as much as possible.
11. Adequate lighting, ventilation and air passage should be ensured.
12.The volunteer should observe very cautiously the following symptoms:
a. The apple of eyes normal or abnormal.
b. The face is gloomy or natural.
c. The head has any severe blow or injury or is bleeding or not.
d. Shivering is either with fear or for cold and to decide whether the patient
requires heat or not.
e. Arrangements to be made for immediate disposal of the patient to the
nearest doctor or hospital.
The Components of First Aid
The following components or elements or items are essential in case of First

The Accidents during Games 171
1. Sterilized cotton or gauge 2. Lint 3. splint 4. Pad 5. Scissors 6. A triangular
and a roller bandage 7. Dettol 8. Pad, Flat Pad and Ring Pad 9. Iodine 10.
Benzin 11. Forceps 12. Safety Pins 13. Blades and needle for stitching 14.
Spirit 15. Leucoplast 16. Eye pad 17. One tube Burnol 18. A tray for medicine
19. A syringe 20. A First Aid Box.
Activity-1: Ask the students to write on poster about the importance of First
Aid.
Activity-2: Ask the students to write the do’s and don’ts of the volunteers of
First Aid.
Activity-3: Spreading the different components of the First Aid materials, ask
the students to identify them and arrange them chronologically.
Lesson-2: The Features/Qualities of the Volunteer of
First Aid
1. Observation Power and Knowledge: Such a volunteer can easily perceive
the cause and signs of injury.
2. Intuition: A volunteer does not do any unnecessary activity but tries to
intuit the symptoms of injury and takes drastic action which makes him or her
credible and creditable to all.
3. Experience: A volunteer with experience can serve the purpose of the
patient with whatever materials he or she finds around him or her without
losing time. He or she also ensures that whatever injury the patient has so far
sustained might not aggravate further.
4. Efficiency: The volunteer has to notice that patient does not suffer
unnecessarily. In the light of experience, he or she performs his or her duty
very easily and dexterously.
5. Right Advice: A volunteer gives advice to the attendant and present close
telatives of the patient about their duties and responsibilities.
« 96. Right Decision: The primary attendant would prioritize his or her service
S towards the patient and perform them chronologically.

172 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
7. Confidence: If difficulty arises, the volunteer does not lose hope or gets
lost; rather he or she performs his or her first medical support with due
sincerity and confidence.
8. Sympathy: An ideal volunteer never turns harsh towards the patient. He
needs to care the patient, share his or her pains and complains and encourage
him or her and his or her attendant and relatives.
Activity-1: Discuss in groups about the qualities of a volunteer primary
attendant.
Activity-2: According to you, what qualities of such volunteer you think are
very crucial.
Lesson-3: Bruises of Skins, Tension in Muscle and
Tendons and swells
During our day-to-day activities and games, we may fall victim to any accident
or succumb to any injury. If one has sufficient knowledge of accidents and
traumas, one can skip such hazards sometimes and if unfortunately it occurs,
one can undergo primary treatment and take necessary measure immediately
before disposing the patient to the concerned physician or the nearest hospital.
It is very likely that we may succumb to grievous injury from simple injury
during games and sports.
To avoid or skip such injuries, the following steps can be adopted:
1. Before exercise or games, the body should be properly warmed up.
2. One should avoid excessive exercise or games.
3. One should select his or her peer according to his or her height and weight.
4. One should not play on rough surface, slippery ground or wet and zigzag
ground.
5. One should not play near trees or pole of electricity.
1. Bruises of Skin: Skin might be bruised by the blow of playing boots, or by a
hammer, stone or any blunt substance. In that case, the skin becomes smashed ~
or trampled, blood-stained and black-spotted. s

The Accidents during Games 173

First Aid/ Primary Remedy:

1. Cold water or ice needs to be applied to the affected area.

2. A neat and clean piece of cloth or towel soaked in cold water needs to be

tightly fixed round the affected area. When it gets dry, more cold water should

be poured on it.

3. Ifthe affected area bleeds, then measures should be taken to stop the bleeding.

4. Sterilized cotton should be used to wash the stained blood and ointment

should be applied.

5. If necessary, the patient should be referred to the doctor.

2. Tension or Cramping of Muscle or Tendon: While playing or lifting some

heavy substance, the muscle or tendon might sustain injury resulting in some

sort of tension or cramping. In this case, the fine fiber of muscles are torn

causing painful sensation and severe difficulty in walking. Sometimes, the

injured place swells or turns blackish. This condition is called muscle pool or

tension of muscle. If so happens, the affected area needs to be at rest and then

ice should be applied to that place. After 24 hours, the compression with hot

water and boric powder needs to be applied. Athletes and Swimmers often

succumb to such injuries of muscle and tendon.

3. Swells: Sometimes, some parts of the body swell by the injuries of playing

boots or by the blow during boxing, or injuries by falling and thus create swelling

in the affected area. The first course of action is to apply dry ice or ice or at

least cold water. After applying ice for a while, the swell will reduce in size. If

pain still persists, the injured should consult the doctor.

Activity-1: Ask the students to show how to remedy if skin bruises.
Activity-2: Describe the remedial action for tension or cramping in the
muscle.

Lesson-4: Disjoining, Wounds, Bruises, Fractures and

tearing of the Ligament

1. Disjoining: Where a bone joins another bone it is called the bone-joint. It is
es» the concurrence of two or more than two bones. If a bone is displaced from the
§ point of joining, it is called disjoining of bone. Sometimes the shoulder, elbow,

174 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports

wrists, thumb, lower jaw-bone, knee or the ankles of legs may be displaced

from the adjoining point. Sometimes, disjoining and fracture happen

simultaneously.

Symptoms: 1. The joints would swell, 2. Feeling of pain in the joint, 3.

Disability to move the joints, 4. Assume abnormal shape by the misplacement

of bone of the joint.

1. First Aid for Disjoining

1. The affected area needs to be at comfort as much as possible.

2. The affected area should not be moved.

3. The misplaced bones need to be joined or attempts should be taken to join
them.

4. Joint should be treated with cold water or ice.

5. Ifnecessary, the bandage for bone fracture should be used.

6. Ifthe patient is electrocuted, proper steps should be taken.

7. If doubt is prominent that bone has sustained fracture, the bandage for bone

fracture should be used.

8. The patient should be immediately transferred to the concerned doctor or

the nearest hospital.

2. Bruise or Fracture

The robust ligament keeps the bones and soft tissues at the joining point

adhered and clung tightly. If this ligament is tensed or torn for some reason, it

causes severe pain at the joining point and the affected area becomes swollen.

This is called bruises of bones. When bruise happens during games or

exercises, the affected area should be kept at a comfortable place. After that,

thick layer of cotton should be laid on the upper and lower side of the affected

area and firmly bandaged.

Fracture: If any bone of the body is broken, this is called Fracture. Fracture

may be of various types such as 1. Ordinary Fracture, 2. Compound Fracture,

3. Complicated Fracture. ~

1. Ordinary Fracture: This Fracture happens in the inner part of the body. Ss

The Accidents during Games 175

Firstly, attempts should be made to join the bones keeping the tip of the bones

straight. Then the affected area should be made immobile by fastening with a

splint.

2. Compound Fracture: It is also called open fracture. Because in such cases,

the broken bone comes out penetrating the skin. In this case, the broken bone

should be bandaged straight as much as possible and that part should be made

immobile.

3. Complicated Fracture: In this case, the sharp corner or the tip of the

broken bone generally affects some important part of the body such as kidney,

liver, lungs or blood vessel. Apart from these, there are some other categories

of Fracture such as-

1. Comminuted: In this case, the bone breaks into several pieces.

2. Impacted: In this case, the edge of broken bone collides and gets inside

with each other.

3. Greenstick: Sometimes especially in case of children, the bone does not

fracture rather has some fissure.

What needs to be done for Fracture?

1. The treatment of the patient should be started immediately. It should be

done as sudden transfer of patient is not possible.

2. The affected area should be made immobile.

3. Splint should be used to make it immobile.

4. Efforts should be made to transfer the patient to hospital as soon as

possible.

The tearing of Ligament: The ligament is related with joint. It is surrounded

with tendon and membrane on the joint. A flat bracket is called ligament.

Ligament helps movement of two bones. Above the ligament is the bracket of

tissues which makes the joint more robust. If the leg falls on unparallel ground

or place, a sudden jerk severs the ligament. Sometimes, while running, if the

joint is injured, the ligament is torn. The affected area becomes swollen and

severe pain is felt. It becomes difficult to move that limb. In this case, ice
co should be immediately applied and patient should be put on rest. Later, he or
& she should be borne to hospital or a doctor.

176 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Activity-1: Why does disjoint happen? What are First Aid prescriptions for
this?
Activity-2: What are various types of Fracture? Describe the remedial
measures for fracture.
Lesson-5: Various types of Wounds and Remedies
If some fiber of the body is lacerated or breaks into two or more parts or if that
fiber is perforated, it is called wound. If the skin severs or bleeds, or is incised
it is also called wound. Wounds are generally of five kinds-
1. Confused Wound.
2. Lacerated Wound.
3. Incised Wound.
4. Punctured Wound.
5. Mixed Wound.
a. Confused Wound: Sometimes, the fine fibers and cells which are ingrained
in the human body when affected by a heavy substance or hard blow or wound,
it sometimes causes no harm to the skin but the internal capillary are affected
causing internal bleeding. Since that blood has no scope to drain, it sediments
inside and creates wound which is generally called confused wound. In this
case, no visible bleeding occurs.
b. Lacerated Wound: The wound that occurs due to attack of wild animals,
or being smashed under a machine or firing is called lacerated wound. This
wound is usually unequal and scattered.
c. Incised Wound: The wound that takes place due to bruises by some sharp
weapon such as blade, knife, broken glass, or fish-knife, is called incised
Wound. In this case, the skin and blood vessel are cut very sharply and
smoothly causing incessant bleeding which becomes difficult to stop.
d. Punctured Wound: This wound is usually deep. The top of the wound is
rather small or narrow. This sort of wound is caused by needle, nails, wires etc.
In this case, bleeding might not be severe. 3
g

The Accidents during Games 177

e. Mixed Wound: When a wound happens in combination with more than one

wound, it is called Mixed Wound. The wound from a bullet is such that the

diameter of the wound at the front is narrow but inside wound is very large and

bigger in diameter which cannot be sensed from outside. Again, the point from

which the bullet comes out has a big and uneven wound. This wound is in one

side a punctured wound and on the other side is a lacerated wound. Both of

such wound create is such mixed wound.

First Aid for Wounds:

1. The patient needs to be laid on ground at ease and kept motionless.

2. The wounded limb should be kept above heart level so that circulation of
blood from the wounded part decreases and finally stops bleeding.

3. Soon after such wounds, ice should be applied.

4. The patient should be made as much immovable as possible.

5. The wounded limb or part should be washed by some antiseptic liquid.

6. To stop bleeding, direct or indirect pressure should be exerted.

7. If something hard gets into the wound, it should be taken out.

8. If there are blood sediments on the wound, that blood should not be washed
or erased.

9. If someone is electrocuted, his or her treatment should be done immediately.

10.Sterilized pad should be used on the wound.

11. Wounded part should be made still and motionless fastening with bandage.

12.The patient cannot be allowed to take any stimulating thing or drink.

13.The patient needs to be bore to a doctor or nearby hospital.

To provide treatment for wound to a patient, one needs to have some

knowledge on First Aid. These are-

a) How the bruise has happened and to which category it does fall, whether it

is a confused, or lacerated, punctured or incised wound are the deciding factors

the volunteer has to be sure about it.

b) The do’s need to be fixed first. If it bleeds, then stopping bleeding is the

first course of action. The volunteer needs to notice that septic does not

happen. The patient might be advised to take Toxoid Injection.

178 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
c) If such wounds happen, actions need to be taken to wash them and if it
bleeds, that must be stopped first. Then the volunteer needs to take care so that
infection does not happen. If someone is electrocuted, then he or she must be
provided with First Aid support.

d) If one is electrocuted, the breathing should be fixed first.
e) Depending on the condition of the patient, he or she needs to be borne to
hospital.

Activity-1: What do you mean by wounds? How many kinds of wounds there
are and what are they? Write them all on a poster and hang that on
the wall.

Activity-2: Be divided into four groups and discuss the First Aid support and
present it, coming in front of the board.

Lesson-6: Bleeding from Nose, Drowning etc, methods to
rescue and provide Artificial Breathing

1. Bleeding from Nose: If someone is slightly hurt, it may so happen that the
nose starts bleeding. This frequently happens in boxing.

a) The patient should be either seated on the chair or laid upon the back on
even floor and the face should be leaned little bit backward.

b) The patient should be asked to breathe with mouth.

c) The nose needs to be held with slight pressure.

d) The sedimented blood need not be drained out; otherwise, it would cause
more bleeding.

e) If ice or cold water is applied, it helps stop bleeding fast and easily.

2. Drowning: We have numerous ponds, rivers and drains around us. So,
everyone should know how to swim. If someone does not know swimming,
one should never bathe in such places. Accident might happen by legs being
slipped in the pond or river. If one does not know how to swim, he or she
should rather fetch water and bathe. If someone falls in such water, 2
immediately, some floating substance should be thrown to that person or rescue &

The Accidents during Games 179
him or her by swimming. But care should be given that the drowning person
might not endanger the life of the rescuer by clinging him or her tightly. If the
affected person drinks too much water, then steps should be taken to let water
drain out otherwise the water entering into the respiratory tunnel might stop
breathing. A drowning patient should be given the following First Aid support:
If the patient is a baby then-

1. The ankle of the legs should be turned upward. Sometimes, the back should
be patted. As a result the water drunk during the incident would drain out.
If some water plant enters into the body, it would also come out.

2. Artificial breathing should be arranged.

3. The soaked dress should be taken off.

4. Until medical support is availed, artificial breathing should be continued.

If the patient is an aged or grown up person, then-

a) The neck and mouth of the patient should be properly washed.

b) The patient should be seated on a chair or tool folding his or her knees in such
a way that the head hangs. If the back is patted, the water entered inside
during drowning would be drained out.

c) The wet dress should be taken off.

d) Artificial breathing should be carried out until the patient is hospitalized.

Artificial Breathing: When a patient stops breathing or is about to stop

breathing, the volunteer has to make arrangement for artificial breathing.

Artificial breathing is administered manually or through machine. By pushing

with hands artificial breathing should be started. It actually means and includes

that the patient’s lung can fluctuate 10-12 times per minute. As soon as the lung
squeezes, the air comes out and it is called inhalation. When the lung enlarges,
air enters and this is called exhalation. There are some specific methods for
artificial breathing. The most popular and widely used methods are-
a. Schafer Method.
b. Silvesters Method.
8 c. Holger Neilson Method.
“ d. Mouth to Mouth Method.

180 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
A. Schafer Method: The patient has to
be laid with face downward in supine Pp.
position. His or her nose will face the SEEN,
ground. The two hands will be scattered —@. a =
on the two sides of head. The head should ss - -
be slid one side so that the nose does not
touch the ground. No time should be ¢ ] = ij .
wasted to unzip or undress the patient. 7 met 4 a, |
The First Aid volunteer should face “~— — a
towards the head of the patient and make
his or her position parallel with the hip and then folding his or her knee, the
volunteer would keel down beside him or her. Then he or she would place both
the hands on both sides of the hip in such a way that the thumbs would face
forward and other fingers would remain scattered longitudinally on both sides
of the hip. The hands and elbow need to be kept straight forward. Then without
bending elbow, the volunteer would hang forward and press. This exertion of
pressure and withdrawal of pressure functions needs to be done one after
another within 5 seconds. Exertion of pressure for 2 seconds and withdrawal of
pressure would take 3 seconds. This would continue until the breathing comes
to normalcy.
B.Silvesters Method: The patient
needs to be laid with face upward in
(3 fs) supine position. A small pillow should
aN \Y \ be placed under the neck of the patient.
h SSS < m»\ TAL, His or her head should be placed on the
( GS ? ff psy pillow in such a way that the head
~ remains in the front. The clothes need
ee fe to be taken off from the body. Notice
Hy NN should be given that the patient does
WZ S NAN not stop breathing reversing the tongue.
\Gae Nes The patient needs to be laid flat and his
WD 4 : {~ or her elbow should be moved upward
Tolan Maa forcibly so that it creates pressure on %
both sides of the chest. In this way, 8

The Accidents during Games 181
pressure has to be exerted and later withdrawn. Total time for this emergency
support is 5 seconds. Placing one piece of paper, the volunteer needs to
examine whether the patient has recovered breathing or not. This process
should continue as long as the breathing comes to normalcy.

C. Holger Neilson Method: The patient needs to be laid upside

down/prostrated.

e@ The volunteer needs to sit kneeling down and leaning against the head of

the patient.

@ The back of the patient needs to be patted. Then the two arms of the patient
need to be moved up and down. It should be kept in mind that if there is a
fracture at the shoulder joint or fracture adjoining to the shoulder, then this
method is not operative.

The rule for exerting pressure-

a) First and second steps are to create pressure on the back.
b) The third step is to stop for a while.

c) The fourth and fifth step are to create tension on the arms.
d) Sixth steps are to stop for a while.

In this method, the patient should breathe 10-12 times a minute. Every time,

the rate of passing the air is | liter.

D. Mouth to Mouth Method: A very easy and handy method is this Mouth to

Mouth method. By this method, air can be blown into the lungs. This method

requires less effort and energy as well. Even the youngsters can easily apply

this method. But from the view point of morality, this method creates some
obstacles. If a baby does not breathe, this method has been in application from
time immemorial for artificial breathing. The main aim of this method is to
save the life of the drowned person. The volunteer first has to wash the inside
of the mouth, then has to hold the head of the patient very tightly and the other
hand is to be placed on the lower jaw. The mouth of the patient is to be opened
wide and after inhaling breath to the full, the volunteer fits in his or her mouth
into the mouth and lips of the patient keeping it airtight and blows the oxygen
x into the lungs of the patient to his her full capacity. This way, the volunteer has
“to blow air into the lungs of the patient for 10-12 times.

182 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
Activity-1: Describe the means and techniques to stop bleeding from the nose
and present the same in the class.
Activity-2: What do you mean by artificial breathing?
the one you think easier for you.
Exercise
Multiple choice questions
1. Which condition is called muscle pull?
a. if the skin is torn
b. if there is pull of muscle
c. when there is swelling of any part of the body
d. if ligament is torn
2. What happens due to detachment of joint?
a. the bone is displaced b. ligament is torn
c. a wound is created d. the bone is broken
3. How is the broken bone kept immobile?
a. lint b. splint
c. bandage d. pad
Read the stem and answer questions 4 & 5.
At the end of school due to the knock of an auto rickshaw Rony fell down
while he was crossing the road. The people on the road took him to the hospital
and the doctor, after examining found that the bone of his legs had been broken
into various pieces. After necessary treatment the doctor sent him home.
4. What was the type of Rony's broken bone?
a. comminuted b. impacted
c. green stick d. complicated =
ES

The Accidents during Games 183
5. In treating Rony’s broken what the doctor said is that.
(i) the injured place will be kept immobile
(i1) the injured part will be kept immobile by using a splint
(iii) more fomentation will be given.
Which one in the following is correct?
a i&ii b. i& iii
c. li & iii d. i, ii & iii
Read the stem and answer questions 6 & 7.
Going on a visit to Cox's Bazar, Shakil was drowned due to the knock of the
wave during his bath in the sea. After saving him, a visitor laid him turning and
sitting by the side of his head. He pressed his back and made his two hands up
and down.
6. What is the name of the method applied to Shakil?
a. Holger Neilson b. Sylvester
c. Schafer d. Mouth to mouth
7. Why was Shakil's back pressed?
a. for talking to the patient b. for soothing the patient
c. for artificial breath d. for getting out water from the abdomen
Creative Question
1. Going to a tour to Cox's Bazar with his friends, Ranjhu was drowned in the
sea. After a while he was floated. Then the friends lifted him up and for
making his breath normal, they took the breath mouth to mouth For getting
out water from his abdomen they cleared the mouth and the throat. At last
he came round.
a. What is impacted?
b. What is meant by artificial breath?
&6 c. Explain the method of mouth to mouth in the case of making Ranjhu's
g breath normal.

184 Physical Education, Health Science and Sports
d. After Ranjhus mouth and throat were cleared, he came round. Do you

agree with this statement? Give a reason in favour of your answer.

2. Marium gets hurt on her toes in a road accident. Her legs become swollen.
As a result she feels a great pain. One of the rescuers observes her wound
and applies cold water on the wounded area and forbids her to move.

a. What is comminuted?

b. What is meant by detachment of joint? Explain.

c. What kind of hurt does Marium experience? Explain.

d. Do you think that the activity of the rescuers is sufficient for Marium's

treatment? Give a reason in favour of your answer.
The End

°9
S
AQ

“PRIS CITE HIfS WTS PATS ACA
ala @ Pre feitecra bat wot foals @ afocaicad Gay ATA CBSA OFEICA
dos TIAA (ole A, 28 VST HSH) CIA aT
& ° aN
Tree’
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh

