Fs ! “Ne . : °
f . , . * 5 $5 . y ee ae
3 r ae 4 . * pane el * wi iets
4 >. 2 Gus ~ .o =: s *\s ess ee eS a ‘ . ee .
stp . . Classes Nine-Ten.§. oa Oe
. - ‘ / yes . “2 $4 _ ies ge . .
ee ghey |S ae a eS : (ROE 8 : ita ae Mee, A OS a ae fate = aE
ee SEER Seyi ey NS ARR eo
“ Sis 7 aba Ree ate Bey ka Saas The
ae . ott. at sts ae ra
: oe ree : wae oes 3 “*« fe ee ee “ seed .
ine 2 + GOR - Fe Tee ee ae Roa ag
ey a4 J F) NATIONAL: CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH. -: .
“ > « oa : is PS be ; : . ey . ; wai bf 5 .
; ee ala stmt %, oe i plc Cee oe - *: i a
. =u . ‘ i. « ee ay ° * ere :

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a textbook for classes nine-ten from the academic year-2013
LJ
Physics
Classes Nine-Ten
Reviewed and Modified
for making the contents easy and accessible by
Dr. Muhammad Jafar Iqbal
Dr. Mohammad Kaikubad
Written by
Dr. Shahjahan Tapan
Dr. Rana Chowdhury
Dr. Ekram Ali Sheikh
Dr. Rama Bijoy Sarker
Editor
Dr. Ali Asgar
Translated by
Dr. Rama Bijoy Sarker
Sudeb Chandra Paul
Md. Khairul Alam
Re-translated by
Dr. Rama Bijoy Sarker
Sudeb Chandra Paul
Swapan Chandra Barman
Md. Akter Hossain
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel commercial Area, Dhaka.
[All rights reserved by the Publisher]
First Publication : September, 2012
Revised Edition : November, 2014
Revised Edition : November, 2017
Cover : Nasreen Sultana Mitu
Illustrations : Mehedi Haque, Nasreen Sultana Mitu
& Romel Barua
Photography : SUST SUPA & Colleted
Design
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh
For free distribution by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Printed by :

Preface
The aim of secondary education is to make the learners fit for entry into higher
education by flourishing their latent talents and prospects with a view to building the
nation with the spirit of the Language Movement and the Liberation War. To make the
learners skilled and competent citizens of the country based on the economic, social,
cultural and environmental settings is also an important issue of secondary education.
The textbooks of secondary level have been written and compiled according to the
revised curriculum 2012 in accordance with the aims and objectives of National
Education Policy-2010.Contents and presentations of the textbooks have been
bselected according to the moral and humanistic values of Bengali tradition and
culture and the spirit of Liberation War 1971 ensuring equal dignity for all
irrespective of caste and creed of different religions and sex.
The present government is committed to ensure the successful implementation of
Vision 2021. Honorable Prime Minister, Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina expressed her firm determination to make the country free
from illiteracy and instructed the concerned authority to give free textbooks to every
student of the country. National Curriculum and Textbook Board started to distribute
textbooks free of cost since 2010 according to her instruction.
Physics is inextricably related to the development of technology from the very
beginning of civilization. Tools and techniques of physics are widely used in the
field of engineering, astronomy, oceanography, biology, psychology etc. The study
of physics is necessary for those who are interested in the above mention subjects.
Four color illustrations have been used to make content attractive and visible to the
learner. So it is expected that the learner will be inspired to study this subject for
future.
Considering the challenges and commitments of 21St century and following the revised
curriculum the textbook has been written. The textbook has been revised and re-edited
by a prominent educationist to make it learner friendly in 2017.
I thank sincerely all for their intellectual labor who were involved in the process of
revision, writing, editing, art and design of the textbook.
Prof. Narayan Chandra Saha
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

CONTENTS
[Ghapier [Sujet —SSS*«*d
[One | Pisin Qualia Meson | 130

Chapter One
Physical Quantities and Their Measurements
i x
Figure: An Atomic clock made for measuring time very accurately

When you think about science the image of different instruments, inventions,
research laboratories etc appear in your mind. But the instrument, research or
laboratory are not the subject matter of science rather the actual subject matter
of science is its scientific view . The greatest contribution of this civilization has
come from science and the scientific view of the human beings of the world. To
explore the mysteries of science sometimes they explained logically, sometimes
examined in laboratories and some other times they are scrutinized intensively
in nature. From ancient times to modern times the scientists are relentlessly
advancing the science. A continuous description of the gradual development of
physics has been described in this chapter.

Fonna-1, Physics, Class 9-10

2 Physics
If we read the history of physics we will see that it is developed by the combined
effort of theoretical and experimental scientists. In order to do research in the
laboratory, we need to measure different quantities accurately. How the units are
built up, how they can be measured and what type of instruments will be used to
measure them will also be discussed in this chapter.
® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-
e Explain the scope and gradual development of physics.
e Describe the objectives of physics.
e Explain the physical quantities [with units and magnitude] as the origin of
physics.
e Explain the measurement and necessity of units.
e Explain the difference between fundamental and derived quantities.
e Explain the international system of units.
e Calculate the dimensions of quantities.
e Calculate the transformation of prefixes of multiple and sub-multiple units.
e Express the concepts of physics and its theories by using scientific names,
symbols and notations.
e Measure the physical quantities by using different apparatuses.
e Explain the mechanism of exactness and accuracy of measurement.
e Determine the area and volume of uniform objects by using simple
instruments.
e Determine the length, mass, area and volume of uniform objects used
in our daily lives.
8
8

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 3
1.1. Physics:
Physics is the most ancient branch of science. It is because scientists started
studying and practicing astronomy, the most important branch of physics, before
the flourishment of other branches of science. Besides being the oldest branch,
physics can be said to be the most fundamental branch. Chemistry flourished
on the basis of physics Biology flourished on the basis of Chemistry, and again
many other subjects flourished on the basis of Biology.
Generally we can say that the branch of science which tries to understand matter
and energy and the interaction between them is called physics. You must have
realized that here physics is not only the visible things around us but also the
things such as molecules-atoms, electrons, protons, neutrons, quarks or string
etc. Again energy may be strong and weak nuclear energy apart from our known
potential energy, kinetic energy, gravitational energy or electromagnetic energy.
1.2 Scope of physics
Since physics is the oldest and the most fundamental branch and other branches
somehow flourished on the basis of physics, it is very natural that the area of
physics is very wide. Not only that different technologies have flourished using
different laws of physics and we are using this in our daily lives (there are
examples of some instruments used in medical science in the last chapter). At
present the greatest contribution behind civilization is of electronics and physics
has the greatest contribution behind this technology also. Besides daily
activities, from destruction of war to space exploration the contribution of
physics is present. Not only that by the combination of other branches of science
and physics newer branches have developed, for example astrophysics consists
of astronomy and physics. In order to explain organic processes, biophysics has
been built up by the combination of biology and physics, chemical physics was
born by the combination of chemistry and physics. Use of physics in Geology
has led to Geophysics. Medical physics has flourished using physics. Therefore
the area of physics is very large and deep as well.

© For the advantage of teaching-learning we divide physics into two principal

S parts. These are:

4 Physics
Classical Physics: This contains mechanics, sound, heat and thermodynamics,
electricity and magnetism and optics.

Modern Physics: Modern Physics that built up using Quantum Mechanics and
Theory of Relativity. These are molecular and atomic physics, nuclear physics,
solid state physics and particle physics.

We have mentioned earlier that many kinds of technologies have been
developed in the world using physics or other branches of science. Using these
technologies we have made our lives simple and meaningful. The invention of
some terrible technology has not only endangered our lives but also the
existence of our earth. Sometimes unjustified and unnecessary technology has
spoiled the resources of our earth along with creating pollution. So remember
that technology is not always good, as there are good technologis in the world,
also there are bad technologis. Using your good sense/rationality, you have to
understand which technology is good or bad.

Physics was not built in a single day, it has taken hundreds of years to develop.
The physicists tried to explain, with the help of laws the mysterious world
around them. Sometimes performing experiments those laws were accepted,
changed and sometimes give up. Thus we are able to explain microscopic
particle of matter to shape of largest universe and we are learning continuously.
Perhaps this learning is not complete still now- scientists are trying to make it
complete, it will be possible to explain everything of apparently different
subject with the help of a few laws one day.

Do Yourself

Technology may be good or bad but knowledge can never be bad, in the light

of invention of physics give logical arguments in favour of this.
2
8

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 5
Group Work
Arrange a debate on good technology and bad technology that have been
developed using the laws of physics.
1.3 Development of physics
Modern civilization is the contribution of science. This advancement of science
has not been done in a day, the modern science reached its present state
gradually due to tireless labour of innumerable scientists and researchers. It has
to be remembered that the exchange of information was not so easy, it was very
difficult to convey the results of research to one another, books were prepared in
hand written form and the number of these books were very few. Courage was
necessary to express views against conventional faiths. There are examples of
imprisonment or even scientists being burnt to death. But the search of
knowledge was not stopped and exploring the mysteries of nature, the scientists
have given us this modern science as a gift.
We can describe the history of physics by dividing it into different stages.
1.3.1 Initial Stage (Greek, Indian subcontinent, China and the
Contribution of Muslim Civilization)
Now-a- days, what we understand by physics was started in the ancient times, by
the combination of astronomy, optics, dynamics geometry, and an important
branch of mathematics. The name of the Greek scientist Thales (624-586 BC)
can be mentioned specially, because he was the first who deny explanation
whice is onle based on religion, myth and extrasensory perception but without
logic. Thales predicted about the solar eclipse and knew the magnetic property
of loadstone. Pythagoras (527 BC) was remarkable among the mathematicians
and scientists at that time. He had fundamental works on vibrating wire along
with geometry. Greek philosopher Democritus (460 BC) presented the first idea
that matter has indivisible unit, called atom (This name is used by modern
physics). It was not acceptable to all since there was no chance to prove his idea
by the scientific process. The theory that everything was made of soil, water, air
~ and fire by the greatest philosopher and scientist Aristotle was much more
S acceptable. Aristarchus (310 BC) first gave the idea of solar centered solar

6 Physics
system. His follower Seleucus proved that with arguments, although these
arguments have been lost with time. Greek science and mathematics had reached
its highest peak at the time of Archimedes (287 BC), the greatest scientist of all
times. The upward thrust of liquids is still in the content of science books. He
assisted, during the war, by setting enemy ships on fire by converging the solar
light using a spherical mirror. There was an another scientist of Greek era named
Eratosthenes (276 BC), he found out the radius of the earth accurately at that
time.
Cone Se op Se
WoL yw YZ Os
La * y a | ii y
Figure 1.01: Archimedes and Al Khorgimi
After that the development of science remained stopped for almost one thousand
and five hundred years. Only the civilizations of the Indians, Muslims and
Chinese survived. In the Indian subcontinent Aryabhatta (476), Brahmagupta
and Vaskar have done a lot of valuable work on mathematics and astronomy.
Zero was effectively used in the Indian subcontinent (Aryabhatta). The name of
Al Khorgimi (783 BC) has to be specially mentioned among the muslim
mathematicians and scientists. The present name algebra has come from the
book Al Zaber written by him. Ibne Al Hayum (965 BC) is considered as the
architect of optics. Al Masudi wrote an encyclopedia of thirty parts regarding
the history of nature. Everyone knows the name of Omar Khayam as a poet. But
he was a highly famous mathematician, astronomer and philosopher. Chinese
mathematicians and scientists have done a lot of work in physics. Among them
the name of Shen Kuor can be mentioned (1031), he has done studies with
magnets and mentioned the issue of fixing direction by using a compass during
travel. x
N

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 7
1.3.2 Developing Stage of Science
In the sixteenth and seventeenth century, a surprising revolution started in the
realm of physics, the time was the era of European renaissance. In 1543
Copernicus gave the explanation of the solar centric solar system in a book. (the
publisher of the book became afraid of the priest and wrote that it is not a real
explanation, only a mathematical solution!) The theory was not made available
to the people for a long time, Galileo (1564- 1642) brought it to the fore front.
He introduced the mathematical formulation. After that he introduced the
scientific process to prove the law doing experiments. Sometimes Galileo is
called the father of modern science. He was in curse of church due to be the
founder of solar centric solar system. He had to pass his last days in captivity. In
1687 Newton published the three laws of mechanics and the law of gravitational
force, which forms the basis of force and dynamics. Scientist Newton along with
Leibniz invented a new branch of mathematics called calculus with optics and
other works.
y, ae f 4 i i A Sg US;
Figure 1.02: Copernicus , Galileo and Newton
Before the eighteenth century heat was considered a mass less liquid. In 1768
Count Rumford showed that heat is a kind of energy and mechanical energy can
be converted into heat energy. Lord Kelvin in 1850 introduced two important
laws of thermodynamics on the basis of the research work of many other
scientists.
An extensive research was started on electricity and magnets at this time. In
1778 Coulomb invented the law of force between the charges. Many kinds of
« research were started after the invention of the electric battery by Volta in 1800.
S In 1820 Oersted showed that magnets can be made by the flow of electricity. In

8 Physics
1831 Faraday invented the exact opposite process give by Oersted. They showed
that electricity can be produced by varying a magnetic field. In 1864 Maxwell
(Figure 1.03) expressed the varying electric and magnetic fields with a single
law, the famous Maxwell equation. Here, he also showed that actually light is an
electromagnetic wave. Electricity and magnets are not different. In fact they are
the two forms of the same energy. This invention was well-timed because in
1801 Young proved the wave nature of light experimentally.
1.3.3. Introduction to Modern Physics
From the very beginning of 19th century scientists discovered that many things
could not be explained with the help of existing physics. Dalton introduced
atomic theory in 1803, Thomson invented an electron within the atom, In 1911
Rutherford showed that at the center of the atom there is the smallest nucleus and
there are positive charges in it. But it was found that the revolving electron
model around the nucleus could not be explained because according to
electromagnetic theory an electron should radiate its energy and fall into the
nucleus, but practically it never happens. In 1900 Max Plank invented the
quantum theory and the explanation of the stability of an atom became possible.
Professor Satyendranath Basu gave an appropriate mathematical explanation of
the Quantum — theory of radiation. In recognition of his contributions to physics
one kind of elementary particle was named the Boson. During the period of
1900-1930 many famous scientists together established the quantum theory.

Ley ley (  )

el Ve Oe Aa og

aed Re S| \ UA

Figure 1.03: Maxwell, Rutherford and Mari Curie

An imaginary medium called ether was considered as the carrier of the
electromagnetic wave. In 1887 Michelson and Morley, while trying to prove the
existence of ether, showed that actually there is no ether and the velocity of »
light is equal in both stationary and moving mediums. We get this explanation S

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 9
from Einstein’s theory of relativity in 1905. (Fig-1.04) The most wonderful
equation E = mc? is derived from the theory of relativity in which it is shown
that the mass of object can be converted into energy.
In 1931 Dirac predicted the existence of an anti particle by the combination of
quantum theory and the theory of relativity and it was discovered the following
year.
MM S eae TS VY), PSs ies)
Vv
\
Figure 1.04: Albert Einstein and Satyendranath Basu
In 1895 Roentgen invented X-rays. In 1896 Becqurel showed that radioactive
radiation is emitted from the centre of an atom. In 1899 Pierre Curie and Marie
Curie (Fig:1.03) invented radium and the scientists understood that actually the
atoms are not imperishable, on disintegrating these atoms may emit radioactive
radiation .
1.3.4 Contemporary Physics
Due to the invention of electronics and modern technology it is possible to make
powerful particle accelerators. Accelerating the particle with high energy, new
particles are being discovered. It is possible to arrange these particles
systematically using the Theoretical Standard Model. It is possible to explain the
structure of all the particles using a few elementary particles (and their
antiparticles) though apparently we think there are an infinite numbers of new
particles. It is not possible to explain the mass of the particles using the Standard
Model, so to explain the mass, the existence of a new particle called the Higgs
Forma-2, Physics, Class 9-10

10 Physics
Boson was predicted. The identification of the Higgs Boson particle in the
laboratory in 2013 is treated as a great success of theoretical physics.

In 1924 Hubble showed that all galaxies of the universe are moving away from
one another, which indicates that the universe is expanding slowly. This means
that once upon a time the whole universe was concentrated at a point. Scientists
showed that fourteen billion years ago through a massive explosion called the
Big Bang the universe was created and it has continued to expand. Very recently
scientists showed that this expansion will never stop and every part of the
universe will keep moving away from one another. Besides, the physicist have
shown that they can explain only 4% of visible planets, stars, and galaxies of the
universe, the concept of the mysterious dark matter and dark energy has to be
accepted to explain the rest of the universe. The scientists are continuing their
research in this field.

Semiconductors are created from the research of solid state physics resulting in
present electronics which is the foundation of modern civilization.

1.4 Objective of Physics

Already you know that physics is that branch of science which explains the
change of position of an object with time in the presence of energy and force.
Like any other science the main objective of physics is to learn, the arena of
knowing in physics is very large. The objectives of physics is to unfold the
mysteries of both small atoms and the vast universe. For understanding easily
we can divide the objective of physics into three parts:

1.4.1 Unfold the Mystery of Nature

In ancient times in China, a piece of lodestone was seen to attract another by an
invisible force. This special property of this special type of matter was called
magnetism. Similarly in ancient Greece when a substance called amber was
tubbed with wool, they attracted each other with an invisible force. This special
type of property is called electricity. Many researches were conducted on it in
the eighteenth century and the scientists discovered that, this is actually two
different forms of the same force and this force is called an electromagnetic
force. After the invention of radioactivity while explaining a special radiation
called beta ray, a new type of force called weak nuclear force was discovered.
Later on the physicists showed that electrometric force and weak nuclear force
are different forms of the same force. Their combination is called the electro S

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 11
weak force. The physicists think that two other forces in nature called
gravitational force and nuclear force will be brought under the same law in the
future.
Physics is unveiling the mystery of nature one after another. Similarly we can
say that an object consists of molecules, later on we see that the molecules
consist of atoms of elements. Despite the atoms being charge neutral, there is a
positive charged nucleus at the center and surrounding it electrons are revolving.
Though an electron is an elementary particle, it is seen that the nucleus consists
of protons and neutrons. It is there seen that neutrons and protons also consist of
elementary particles called quarks. At present the research topic is whether
electrons and quarks are made of strings.
1.4.2 To Know the Laws of Nature
From time immemorial we know that if something is released from above, it
falls down and seeing this we can guess that the earth attracts everything towards
its center. If physics stops after pronouncing only the existence of gravitation,
this is not enough at all. The knowledge will not be appropriate until accurately
we know the force by which an object of a definite mass attracts another object
of another definite mass and how the force varies with the distance between
them. Newton explained this law of nature properly with the help of the law of
gravitation. The laws of nature can be used in many other places. So, the motion
of a falling body is explained with the help of gravitation, similarly the rotation
of the earth about the sun can also be explained. To know the laws of nature
properly the scientists analyzed them with argumentative discussions, while also
conducting experiments in the laboratory. Behind the wonderful success of
physics, both theoretical and experimental researches have been conducted. The
main objectives of physics is to find out the laws of nature by doing research in
these two different fields.
1.4.3 Development of Technology Using the Laws of Nature
From the theory of relativity Einstein deduced the law E = mc? and showed that
mass can be converted into energy. In 1938, by breaking a nucleus Otto Hann
and Fritz Strassmann showed that the amount of mass reduced, is converted into

zo energy.

& Using this formula the nuclear bomb was made and dropped on Hiroshima and

12 Physics
Nagasaki in the Second World War and millions of people were killed within a
second. Not only deadly weapons can be made but also it is possible to use for
the good of mankind. Using this formula, nuclear power plants are made and
also in Rooppur of our country a nuclear power is being made.

Solid state physics is a branch of physics where semiconductors are studied.
Mixing some special elements with semiconductors, transistors are made. With
the help of this technology great development of electronics has occurred and
this has made a major contribution to the present civilization.
In this way we can show that physics has a small or large contribution in every
field of technology. Contributions of physics in medical science are discussed in
the last chapter of this book.
Group Work
Prepare a poster on how the development of physics takes place.
@) Do Youself
Consider a particular distance as a particular time on a straight line, put the
important works that different scientists have done from the ancient period to
the present time on the straight line and show that there is a dark period in the
history of human civilization. Search out anyone reason, why there is a dark
period?
2
8

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 13
1.5 Physical Quantities and Their Measurements
Every one of us knows that water becomes ice when it is cooled; it becomes
vapor when it is heated. Peoples have been observing it from the very ancient
times. This knowledge cannot be science completely, unless we can say at what
condition and at what temperature water becomes ice after freezing or raising the
temperature at what condition and at what temperature does it start to boil and
become vapors. This means to be science, everything has to be measured. The
most important point of science is to be able to explain everything accurately
after measuring them.
Table 1.01: Seven physical quantities in SI unit
Symbol
te [meer fm
ee re
Bleetrie current
In this universe anything we can measure is called a quantity. In this physical
world there are innumerable quantities which can be measured. For example, we
can say, length, breadth, volume, weight, temperature, colour, rigidity, position,
velocity, internal material, electrical conductivity, non-conductivity, elasticity,
heat conductivity, non-conductivity, density, specific heat, pressure, melting
point, etc, we cannot finish this list. In brief, in the physical world the
quantities are endless. You may think that to measure these infinite number of
quantities, we have to prepare the definitions and units of these infinite number
of quantities! Actually that is not true, you will be surprised hearing that (and
definitely be happy) if we can fix seven units of seven quantities, then we will be
able to find everything using these seven units. These seven quantities are called
S fundamental quantities. When we express other an quantity using these

14 Physics
fundamental quantities that is called a derived quantity. The fundamental
quantities are length, mass, time, electric current, temperature, amount of
substance and luminous intensity. Internationally recognized these seven units
of seven fundamental quantities are called SI units, (SI came from the France
language term ‘Systeme International d’Units) and these are shown in Table
1.01.

Table 1.02: Very large to very small distance Table 1.03: Very large to very small mass

| Distance | om | | Mas |e

Height of Everest Elephant
atom

1.5.1 Units of Measurement
The measurement of these units is stated very clearly. For example: the distance
travelled by light in vacuum in 1/299792458 second is called 1m. 1 kilogram
unit is still considered as the definite amount of mass, which is the mass of a
cylinder made of platinum-iridium of height and diameter 3.9 cm kept in a
certain building in France. (The scientists will explain this mass otherwise
within few days so that nobody has to depend on a definite mass of a definite
country.) The time required to complete 9,192,631,770 vibrations by a
Cesium-133 (Cs!*3) atom is called one second. The temperature which we get
when the triple point temperature of water is divided by 273.16 is called one
Kelvin. More or less the definition of ampere is complex- When electric current
flows through two wires in the same direction they attract one another. The
amount of current that flows through two parallel wires separated by 1 m and if «
they attract one another with 2x107N force per meter, that amount of currentis S$

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 15
called one ampere. Here it is considered that the wires are of infinite length,
circular cross section, and the cross section is so small that it is negligible! (You
will be happy to know that plans are being made to explain this more clearly!)
One mole is defined as the amount of substance that is contained in a definite
number of fundamental particles (molecule, atom or ion) which is equal to the
number of atoms contained in 0.012 kilogram of carbon-12 atom.
Table 1.04: Very large to very small time
| Time |
Time of big bang
Destruction of dinosaur
Birth of human
Heart beat of human
Time period: green light
Time period:1 MeV gamma ray
One candela unit is perhaps the most complex to understand: one candela is
defined as the amount of luminous intensity of a source of light which is emitted
in one steredian solid angle of luminous intensity of 1/683 part of 1 watt. But
any source of light cannot be used for this, that source must be a source of light
with vibrations of 540x10"? cycle per second. The quantities distance, mass and
time can be very small to very large. To give an idea about these quantities, some
examples are given for distance, mass and time (table 1.02, 1.03, 1.04). Observe
the tables minutely and try to feel them!
The seven units have been introduced to you formally; nobody can hope to
remember them! You need not memorize them if sometimes you want to know,
you can find it look up in a book or browsing the internet. You should have a
practical idea about what is meant by one meter distance, what amount of mass
is one kg, what time is one second, how hot is one Kelvin temperature, what
« amount of electric current is one ampere, what is meant by one mole substance
S or what amount of light one candela is! Now let us try to give you that realistic

16 Physics
idea. Not only do you have to know it, but also you have to feel it. In general it
can be said that:

e The distance from the feet to the stomach of a person of normal height is
nearly one meter.

e The water contained in one liter bottle or water of four glasses have a mass
of nearly one kg.

© The time required to say three words ‘one thousand one’ is approximately
one second.

e If three mobile phones are charging at the same time, one ampere electric
current is used. (a mobile is charged at nearly 5 V. So, current consumption
will be Swatt. If lights, fans, refrigerators of a residence run at 220 V and
one ampere current is used then power consumption will be 220 watt!)

e If we can feel the fever of anyone by touching with hand, then it can be said
that his temperature has increased by one Kelvin.

e It is difficult to realize a mole, we can say a water filled large spoon contains
one mole of water molecules. In one cup water, there are ten moles.

e Light from a single candle can be said one candela.

You see that none of them are perfect measurements, but easy to realize. If you
are habituated with this measurement, when in future you will calculate
anything, then you will have a sense of proportion about it.

1.5.2 Prefix

To study science or physics we have to measure different things. Sometimes we
need to measure the length of a galaxy (6x10 m), or sometimes we have to
measure the radius of the nucleus (11075 m). To measure this huge difference
in the distance it is not wise to use the same type of numbers, so internationally
some SI prefixes have been made. Due to this multiplier we will be able to
express a large or small number by a small prefix. These prefixes are shown in
Table 1.05. In our daily lives we always use these prefixes. To express distance
we say | kilometer instead of 1000 meter. We say 1 megabyte instead of ten lac
bytes to express the size of photographs of a camera.
a
R

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements Wy
Table 1.05: The multiples and sub-multiples used in the SI unit

| deci | d | 107 |

107

10° mili | om | 0° |

pico | p | 10” |

_ peta | P| 10®

| atto | a | 10 |
1.5.3 Dimension
We already know that though there are an infinite number of quantities around
us, we can measure them with the help of seven units only. We have to know, in
which units a quantity can be expressed. Often we need to know also how this
quantity is formed with which fundamental quantities (length Z, time 7, mass M
etc.). The power of different fundamental quantities in a quantity is called its
dimension. For example, we will see next that force is the product of mass and
acceleration. Again, acceleration is the rate of change of velocity with time. And
velocity is the rate of change of position with time.
Therefore,

a r time L - -1
dimensions of velocity: Game oT LT
dimensions of acceleration: = =+=LT-?
time T2

In this book, when we will speak about a new quantity, we will try to tell the
dimension of it at the same time. You will see that, this always will help you to
understand the quantity, in a different way. To indicate the dimensions of a
quantity in this book, it will be shown within third bracket. For example, force F
is, [F]= MLT?.
Forma-3, Physics, Class 9-10

18 Physics

1.5.4 Scientific symbols and notations

The following methods are followed to write the symbol of units:

1. To express the value of a quantity, first we write a number and keep a
space after it and then write the symbol of the unit. For example, 2.21
kg, 7.3 X 10? m? or 22 K. The percentage (%) sign also follows the same rule.
However no space is kept after a number to write degrees (°) minutes (’) and seconds (“’).

2. Derived unit produced by multiplication is written using a space between
two units, e.g. 2.35 Nm

3. Derived unit produced by division is expressed as negative power or ‘/’.
(e.g. ms“! or m/s)

4. No punctuation mark or full stop is used with the symbols, as they are
mathematical expressions but not the abbreviated form of anything.

5. The symbol of unit is written in straight font, for example, m for metre, s
for second etc. But the symbol of quantities are written in italic or curved
font, for example, m for mass, v for velocity etc.

6. The symbols of units are written in small letters, for example, cm, s, mol etc.
But capital letters are used for those which are taken from the name of scientists
(N for Newton). If there are many letters in the unit then the first letter will be
capital only (the unit from the name of Pascal is Pa).

7. The prefix (k, G, M) of unit will be attached with the unit (m, W, Hz) with
no space. For example, km, GW, MHz.

8. Prefixes more than kilo (10%) will be in capital letters (M, G, T).

9. The symbols of unit will never be plural (e.g. not 25 kgs, always 25 kg).

10. We have to try to write any number or compound unit in a single line. A line
break can be given between a number and a unit if it is very necessary. S

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 19
1.6 Measuring Instruments
Once it was very difficult to measure different quantities of physics very
accurately. The work has become much easier due to instruments based on
electronics. For the physics that we will try to learn in this book, knowing how
to measure distance, mass, time, temperature, electric current and voltage will be
enough. Let us discuss what type of instruments we will use to measure these:
1.6.1 Scale
A Meter scale is used to measure small lengths and definitely you may have seen
it. Since this is 100 cm or 1m long, it is called a meter scale. Since in many
places still now inch-foot is familiar (USA is an example!), so inch is marked
very often on the other side of a meter scale. One inch equals 2.54 cm.
We can measure up to the smallest division on a scale. Meter scale is generally
divided up to millimeter, so using a meter scale we can measure the length of
anything up to millimeter. Therefore, if we say the length of anything is 0.364 m,
this means the length of this is 36 centimeter and 4 millimeter. Using a meter
scale it is not possible to measure lengths smaller than this — that is, generally we
can never say the length of a body is 0.3643 m. But from time to time, for
microscopic purposes we have to measure the smallest length of objects of this
type, this can be performed by using an interesting scale called a vernier scale.
Vernier scale
Let us consider that the length of an object comes in between
4 and 5 millimeter marking i.e. the length of the object is greater than 4 mm and
less than 5 mm. We can use the veriner scale to find how much fraction is greater
than 4mm. This scale is attached to the main scale and can be moved forwards
and backwards (Figure 1.05). In the example shown in the figure the length of 9
mm of main scale is divided into 10 divisions on the vernier scale. Therefore every
division of the vernier scale equals = mm, i.e. less than a millimeter by 5
millimeter. If the initial mark of the vernier scale coincides with any mark of the
millimeter scale, then the next mark of the vernier scale will keep a separation of
= mm from the actual millimeter mark, and the next will keep a separation of =
S mm, third one will keep a separation of = mm and so on.

20 Physics
Therefore no mark of the vernier scale will coincide with the millimeter mark of
the main scale, finally the 10 mark again will coincide with the ninth millimeter
mark of the main scale.

Vernier scale Ts
eS Ue aa
Main scale aft
Figure 1.05: Main scale and movable vernier scale
If we keep the vernier scale in such a way that its starting is not from a millimeter
mark rather it starts with a slight (ga mm) displacement (Figure 1.06), then the
number of a mm displacements by which it has moved will be the number mark
of the vernier scale coinciding with the millimeter mark of the main scale! Therefore,
it is very easy to measure a length using a vernier scale. First of all, we have to know
the difference between one division of vernier scale and one division of the main
scale- this is called the vernier constant-- in brief VC. This can be calculated if we
divide the length of the smallest division (1 mm) of the main scale by the total
number of divisions of the vernier scale (in the figure 1.05 and 1.06 it is 10). In
our example, the value of this :
1mm
VC= Ta = 0.1 mm = 0.0001 m

To measure a length, we have to look at the vernier scale after measuring up to the
last millimeter mark. Which mark of the vernier scale coincides exactly with any
millimeter mark of the main scale is then found, and then that number is
multiplied by the vernier constant. We will get the actual length by adding
this amount with the length measured by the main scale. According to our
procedure the length that is shown on the last scale of Figure 1.06 is 1.03 cm or 2
0.013 m. a

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 21
a ee
Ee
a ee

Figure 1.06: Vernier scale displaced by one, two, three divisions
Instead of the vernier scale we can use a special type of scale called a screw
gauge to measure lengths. In a screw gauge when the screw (Figure 1.07) rotates
the scale moves forwards or backwards, the threads of the screw are kept very
fine. After a complete rotation of the screw, the screw with the attached scale
perhaps advances by an amount of 1mm. This displacement of the screw is called
the pitch of the screw. The circular part of the instrument, by the rotation of
which the screw moves forwards or backwards is divided into 100 equal parts.
For the rotation of only one division of the circular scale, the screw advances by
an amount of —L of pitch.
100
Therefore, with this scale up to = mm = 0.01 mm length measurement is
possible. This is called the least count of the screw gauge.
Figure 1.07: A slide calipers with vernier scale and a screw gauge are shown
% Now-a-days instead of the vernier scale, attached dials or digital slide calipers
§ are available by which lengths can be measured accurately.

22 Physics
1.6.2 Balance
Mass cannot be measured directly, so measuring
the weight the mass is generally determined.
When we say the weight of an object is 1 gm or 1
kg, then actually we mean that the mass of the “WA U8 ~ s
object is 1 gm or 1 kg. In earlier times to measure — ee.
the mass of an object, a balance was used, there
the mass of the object was compared with the @2 =
definite mass of a known weight. Now-a-days the
use of electronic balance (figure 1.08) has
increased a lot. If we keep the body on the _ Figure 1.08: Digital weigh
balance then the sensors of the balance can = machine
determine the weight very precisely.
pp feN 1.6.3 Stop Watch
“, % Stop watches are used to measure time interval
(Rin wy 0 (figure 1.09). Once accurate stop watches were
; ‘ iy very precious things, now-a-days very accurate
f stop watches are available in the mobile phone
at low prices due to the advancement of
S electronics. In a stop watch, time measurement
is started at any instant of time, and by stopping
the measurement of time after a definite
igure 1.09: Sinerwateki interval, the elapsed time can be determined. An
interesting matter is that the stop watch can
measure the time very accurately, but we can never start or stop it with our
hands with the same accuracy.
Do Yourself
There is less probability for all of you to possess slide calipers to all of you
but if you want, you can make a slide calipers to carry on your work. Make a
photocopy of figure 1.10. Cut the part of the main scale and the vernier scale
and then put it together after folding as it is shown in the figure following the
steps (1, 2, 3, ...... accordingly). Now you can measure any length accurately.
The slide calipers is also graduated in inch, so to get the length in centimeter
we need to multiply it with 2.54. =
N

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 23
@ _ 2 ©)
ges BEE JES
g 2 a 3 = & of
a Be EF oe ze
~& 88 Em | Kae
Bg ese z 8
By =a “Ss eT @
@ 7 Bo
i os
a 1
2. io
g !
wm | ' 1
fe) ) : 1
= \ _—
2 } I J =)
eTit # °
Q © , &
ees EZ EE |
si e236 ?
= a
Bge 9 ee !
gag eo
SRS & ER
“SE ob ge |
fo} 4 —_ ®
ap og 88 S@ SO
“  8& ES B35
cE os
\ ga Zoe
ee 88
\ 38 ws
ee aS
\___ f ck o&
apg PO
« Figure 1.10 : Making slide calipers with paper
<
S
N

24 Physics
Investigation 1.01
Objective: To find out the volume of a match box or any other object by
measuring the length, breadth and height by a slide calipers. If you have no
slide calipers with you then you can make a slide calipers as shown in
figure 1.10.
1. To measure the length of an object by slide calipers we need to place it
between the jaws of the slide calipers. The jaws need to touch the object
from both the sides.
2. Now observe carefully the zero marking of vernier scale has just crossed
which mark of the main scale. That will be the main scale reading M.
Notice that, the mark which is very closed to the main scale, is not the
reading of main scale, the mark that has just crossed the main scale fully is
the main scale reading.
3. At this position find out which mark of the vernier scale coincides with
any mark of the main scale, this is the vernier coincidence.
Measure the length of object several times and put it in the table.
In the same way measure the breadth and height of the match box.
Observation:
Determination of vernier constant:
Value of one smallest division of main scale, S=.........
Total number divisions of vernier scale, n=.........
Vernier constant , VC = s/n= .........
Table 1.06: Table of finding length, breadth and height of a rectangular object:
Object’s No. of |Mainscale| Vernier | Vernier | Reading =| Average
observations |reading M |coincidence|constant |M + V x VC reading
Vv vc
=} | |_|
1
ew} of of | fT
eight
ik
S

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 25
1.7 Error and Accuracy
Error is a negative word and if the word “error in measurement” is said we think
that the person who is doing the measurement is not performing his duties
properly and an error has occurred! But this is not the case. Sometimes error may
occur due to the person who is doing the measurement for his negligence, but we
have to know that the instrument with which we measure is not error free.
Therefore, there is a limit of how much accurately we can measure, i.e. it is very
natural to have errors in measurement. But how much accurate the measurement
is, also needs a measurement. The reliability of a result will be increased if we
can inform how much accurate the result is when we publish the result of an
experiment after doing it. You can give a measurement of the accuracy of your
experiment if you know some conventional rules for finding the accuracy of an
experiment.
Suppose, you are measuring the length of an object by a scale. How much
accurately you will be able to measure the length of the object depends on how
fine your scale is graduated. If the scale is graduated in 1 cm intervals then you
will express your result for length in some definite number of cm. But the real
length of the object is not exactly equal to this mentioned number of cm but
perhaps very close to it, so there is a possibility of uncertainty in your measured
length. That is why, we add that amount uncertainty with the measured result.
Therefore, if we see the length is near to 4 cm, then we will say the length of the
object is:
4.0+0.5cm

Therefore the length of the object may have any value within 3.5 cm to 4.5 cm.
@) Example
Question: What is the length of the object _———=]
shown in Figure 1.11?
Answer: The length of the object is 740.5
mm. That is, the length of the object willbe | Q cm
of any value from 6.5 mm to 7.5 mm.

Figure 1.11 : the length of the object

beside the scale is nearly 7 mm
Forma-4, Physics, Class 9-10

26 Physics
Now we can discuss how accuracy can be measured. The measurement of
accuracy is the absolute error. Observing the name we understand that this is the
difference of the measured value with respect to the actual value. You can
definitely understand that when we measure anything we don’t know the actual
value. So, instead of absolute error we use the most probable error. Therefore in
our previous example the absolute error is

|+0.5 mm| = 0.5 mm

We can see consider the relative error after the absolute error. Let us consider
that to measure any length an error of 0.5 mm has occurred. If the length of the
object is 1 mm then this error is very serious, but if the length is 1 m then the
measurement is accurate enough. The concept of relative error has been
introduced to give a better understanding.
Therefore, . Absolute error

Relative error = —————_

Measured value

So in our previous example:

Relative error: 0.5 mm/ 7 mm = 0.071

In percentage this is: 0.071 x 100 = 7.1 %
Question: Suppose you have got 10 cm by measuring the length of a square
shaped book. Suppose the relative error in the measurement is 10%. What is the
relative error in its area?
Answer:
Measured area of the object =10 cmx10 cm=100 cm?
Since the relative error of the object is 10%, hence if its length is measured, the
minimum length will be 9 cm and maximum length will be 11 cm.
-. The minimum area = 9cm x 9cm= 81cm?
and the maximum area = 11cm x 11cm = 121 cm’
Therefore the absolute error:

|100 cm? — 81 cm?| = 19 cm’m?
or, |121 cm? —100 cm?| =21c¢
Since the values are not equal, we consider the larger one i.e. the absolute
20

error is 21 cm? s

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements Dy
Therefore, the relative error = 21cm? /100 cm? = 0.21
In percentage, 0.21 x 100 = 21%
If the error in the measurement of the length is 10%, then in the case of area
it will be approximately doubled. Similarly you can show that in the case
of volume measurements the error will be three times!
Question: You have measured a box by a ruler which is graduated only in cm.
You have got the length, breadth and height of the box as 10 cm, 5 cm and 4 cm
respectively. What is the percentage of error in your measurements?
Answer: Since your ruler is graduated only in cm, so your error is + 0.5 cm.
Therefore the error in your measurements:
Length: 10 + 0.5cm
Breadth: 5+ 0.5 cm
Height: 4+ 0.5 cm
Your measured volume: 10 cm x 5 cm x 4cm = 200 cm?
Probable smallest volume:
(10 — 0.5) cm x (5 — 0.5) cm x (4 — 0.5) cm = 149.625 cm?
Probable largest volume:
(10 + 0.5) cm x (5 + 0.5) cm x (4 + 0.5) cm = 259.875 cm?
Therefore the volume,
149.625 cm? < V < 259.875 cm?
Absolute error:
From 149.625 cm? to 200 cm? is 200 cm? — 149.625 cm? = 50.375 cm?
From 200 cm? to 259.875 cm? is 259.875 cm? — 200 cm? = 59.875 cm?
Considering the largest value we have the absolute error 59.875 cm?
Relative error: 59.875 cm?/200 cm? x 100 = 29.9375% = 30%
=
>
N

28 Physics
(?) Exercise
©) General questions
1. Write a report on why we should study physics.
2. Wonderful advancement took place in the twentieth century- put the logic
with examples in favour of this.
3. a) What do you mean by a quantity?
b) Write down the difference between fundamental and derived quantities.
4. a) In SI unit which quantities are considered as fundamental quantities?
b) Write down the names of the units of these quantities.
5. What do you mean by dimension?
6. Arguments, experimentation and observation- among these three methods
which one would you prefer as the most important for science research.
7. Among the seven SI units, one is little bit different from the others. Can you
say which one and why?
8. If you and everything around you suddenly becomes half in size, will you
be able to understand?
9. Will you be able to measure the radius of the earth?
Mathematical questions
1. Express the number given below using the prefixes of Table 1.05
(a) 10” Flops (b)10° bytes (c)10-°gm (d)10 °m
2. In one year how many seconds are there? (for fun express in terms of 7 )
3. How many meters are in a light year?
——————
4. When measuring the length of nnn
as in the figure 1.12. What is the 1 cm
length of the bar? Figure 1.12: Reading of a vernier scale
5. The dimension of energy is ML’T”, in SI units what is its unit? S

Physical Quantities and Their Measurements 29
OS) Multiple choice questions
Put the tick (V ) mark on the correct answer
1. Who has given the quantum theory?
a) Planck b) Einstein
c) Rutherford d) Heisenberg
2. The name ‘boson’ came from whose name?
a) Jagadish Chandra Basu
b) Subhash Chandra Basu
c) Satyendranath Basu
d) Sharat Chandra Basu
3. Which one of below is not a fundamental quantity ?
a) Mass b) Heat
c) Electric current —_d) Quantity of substance
4. When a rod is placed between the jaws of a slide calipers, the main scale
treading is found to be 4 cm, vernier super-imposition is 7 and if the vernier
constant is 0.1 mm, what is the length of the rod?
a) 4.07 cm b) 4.7cm
c) 4.07 mm d) 4.7 mm
From the figure below answer the questions no. 5 and 6.
5. What is the volume of figure (b)
a) : nr3 b) : nr?
c) oars d) ar3 Z|
6cm
6. The ratio of volume of figure |_|
(a) and figure (b): AW.
a) 1:0.673 —_b) 1: 0.0673s —?
c) 1: 0.763 d) 1: 0.637 . ;
Figure (a) Figure (b)
=
Ss

30 Physics

Creative questions

1. Rashed with his newly purchased scale measured the length of his pencil and

the length came to 11.73 cm. His friend Sujon said that this measurement may

not be correct. Rashed said that he obtained the same result measuring by the

scale several times. When they went to the teacher, he instructed them to use a

vernier scale of constant 0.005 cm. Rashed measured the correct length by the

vernier scale.

(a) What is the vernier constant ?

(b) Why units are required to express the amount of a quantity?

(c) Find how many divisions of vernier scale is equal to what number of
divisions of main scale.

(d) First measurement of length measured by Rashed was irrelevant to
accurate measurement, explain with logic.

2. Mr Rashid, a science teacher has given a ruler and a box to the students in the

physics class and told them to determine the volume of the box. The students

observed that the ruler can be used to measure up to cm only. They determined

the length, breadth, and height of the box as 20 cm, 15 cm and 10 cm

respectively.

(a) | What is its dimension?

(b) Why weight and mass are not the same type of quantity?

(c) Determine the percentage of relative error in the measurement of volume
of the box?

(d) This ruler is appropriate for measuring the area of the book but not
suitable for measuring the area of the house- analyze the statement.

=<
8

Chapter Two
Motion

There are many kinds of motion around us. When a person rides a cycle, it’s a
kind of motion. When a car moves, that is another kind of motion. When a plane
flies, it is also motion. When the earth revolves around the sun, it is also a
motion. When a hanging bulb oscillates, it is a kind of motion. When a bullet
ejects from a rifle, it’s a motion also. Apparently it seems that all these several
types of motion are of different types. But you will be surprised and happy to
know that all these motions can be explained by a few number of quantities. In
this chapter those quantities, their units, dimensions and the relationship among
them will be discussed.

J}

S

32 Physics
® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-
e Explain rest and motion.
e Find out the differences among the different types of motion.
e Explain scalar and vector quantities.
e Analyze the relations among the quantities regarding motion.
e Explain the motion of freely falling bodies.
e Analyze the relations among the quantities regarding motion with the
help of graphs.
e Realize the effects of motion in our lives.
2
R

Motion 33
2.1 Rest and Motion

We don’t have any problems in understanding which object is at rest or in
motion around us. We observe by our eyes in such a way that when anything
moves slightly, we can recognize it very quickly. So, we can realize very
amazingly what the terms rest and motion mean. But in physics, it is not
sufficient only to realize rather it has to be well defined. To define it, we can say
briefly, when an object does not change its position with respect to time, then it
is at rest. And when an object changes it position with time, then it is in motion.
Now we need to explain the term ‘position’ properly. In our daily conversation
we use the word ‘position’ in different ways, but in physics the word ‘position’
has a definite meaning. If you are asked, where is the position of your school
and if your answer is ‘Jhiltuli’, your answer is correct but the position of your
school remains unknown. If you reply, your school is 1 kilometer far from the
gate of your residence; the position of your school is still unknown.

Though the position of the gate of your residence is known to us, yet we cannot
tell exactly in which direction the school is situated at a distance of 1 kilometer
from the gate. But if you say the school is situated 1 kilometer east from the gate
of your residence, only then we will know the exact position of your school. That
is to know the position of the school; we have to know both the distance and the
direction definitely. Not only this, this distance and direction has to be specified
from the position of a reference point. In the case of your school, the gate of your
residence was the reference point or origin. Instead of your residence gate, the
reference point might be a bus stop or a shopping mall. Then definitely both the
position and the direction would have different values, but we can specify
certainly the position with respect to the new reference point. That is, to specify
the position of any object, it has to be mentioned with respect to a reference
point. This reference point is not an absolute one; we can conveniently choose
any point as reference point or origin.

Now the question is, to specify the position of an object, is it necessary for the
reference point or origin to be a still point? Let us think, in front of you a person
is sitting still on a chair. If we consider the chair as the reference point or origin,
then we can firmly say, the position of your friend is not changing.

If it happens that actually you are sitting in a moving train, what will it then be?
Forma-5, Physics, Class 9-10

34 Physics
A man outside of the train standing on the station will say, you and your friend
are both in motion, nobody is at rest. Then whose statement is true? Your
statement or of the man standing in the station. In fact, both are correct! The
reason is- if the reference point or the origin moves at a uniform velocity, then
we cannot tell firmly whether the reference point is moving at a uniform velocity
or actually it is at rest and all other things are moving at uniform velocity in the
opposite direction. Therefore we can say, if an object changes its position with
respect to an origin, then the object is in motion with respect to that origin. It is
not our headache whether the origin is at rest or moving at uniform velocity. This
is not important since every motion is relative.

Not only this, if we want to search out an absolute rest reference point, we will
be in trouble. If we consider anything on the surface of the earth as origin one
can object, earth is not stationary rather it is rotating about its own axis, so
everything on its surface is also rotating. Alternatively we can say, the center of
the earth is the origin. Then someone else can come up with the objection that
the centre of the earth is not stationary, it revolves around the sun. Then we can
say more intelligently, the centre of the sun must be the origin! Then another
person can confidently say that the sun is also not stationary it is also revolving
around the centre of our galaxy. Surely you are feeling that no one can dare to
say, the centre of our galaxy is the origin! Who can say that the galaxy and the
universe are stationary? Not only this, if the centre of the galaxy is considered as
the origin to describe any position on the surface, do you realize the extent of
complexities that may arise?

In fact, we don’t need such type of complexities, for our purpose we can
consider any point as the origin, which seems stationary to us. In this case we
have to mention all the measurements are done with respect to this origin. In this
way scientists have done all the measurements starting from the nucleus of an
atom to the satellites launched in space, with no problems what so ever!

2.2 Different Types of Motion

We see various types of motions around us, vibrations, rotations and separations
— all these are the examples of different kinds of motions. Probable motions are
unlimited, but if we wish, we can talk about some important types of motion
separately.

Linear motion

It is an example of the easiest type of motion. If anything moves along a straight
line then its motion is a called linear motion. If an object is pushed off ona &

Motion 35
plane surface then it moves along a straight line. If a ball is allowed to fall from
a height, it will fall straight downwards, so it is also a linear motion.
Circular Motion
When a body rotates about a particular point or a line, keeping the distance of the
particles of the body unchanged, it is called circular motion. Though the motion
of electric fans, hands of clocks etc are the examples of circular motion, a
wonderful example of circular motion is the moon in the sky. Moon is not tied
by to the earth although it is revolving around the earth, neither is it falling on to
the earth’s surface.
Translational motion
If an object moves in such a way that all the particles of the object travel the
same distance, at the same time, in the same direction then its motion is called
translational motion. Sometimes we see many examples of this type in our
surroundings. When something moves in a straight path then its example is very
common. If we do not consider the circular motion of the wheel of a car then
straight advancement of the car is an example of translational motion. At this
time every point of the car will travel the same distance, in equal time, in the
same direction.
Not translational motion } Translational motion
Figure 2.01: Example of translational motion
There is no obligation that the translational motion will be straight. But the
example of translational motion is not easily available in the case of a curved
path. Figure 2.01 shows how a plane has to move for every point of the plane
travelling equal distances in the same direction. The figure also shows why the
example of translational motion on a curved path is so rare.
Periodic Motion
co If the motion of a moving object is such that it passes repeatedly through a
® definite point in the same direction in the same manner in a definite interval of

36 Physics
time, then this motion is called a periodic motion. The vibrational motion of our
heart is periodic, since it vibrates in the same direction in the same manner after
a definite interval of time. The periodic motion may be circular (motion of the
blades of a fan), hyperbolic (orbit of Haley’s Comet around the sun) or linear
(oscillatory motion of an object hanging from a spring). Circular motion is a
special type of periodic motion.

Figure 2.02 : Example of simple harmonic motion
Simple Harmonic Motion
Simple harmonic motion is a special type of periodic motion. In case of
oscillatory motion the object oscillates on both sides of a definite point. Starting
from its complete rest position, the objects starts moving slowly. When the
object comes to the centre it has the maximum velocity, then its velocity starts to
decrease until it comes to rest. Then it changes its path of motion and moves in
the opposite direction. In the opposite direction when maximum velocity is
attained, then its velocity decreases again. It stops its motion completely, and
starts to repeat its motion slowly again in the previous direction. It continues its
motion in this fashion.
There are so many examples of oscillatory motion around us. The motion of an
object hang from a spring is an example of oscillatory motion. The oscillatory
baby on a swing (Figure 2.02) or the pendulum of a clock are the examples of
oscillatory motion. When we speak then the air molecules carry the sound
forward by this type of motion.
So far we have discussed some special types of motion but the causes of these
motions have not been mentioned anywhere. The major success of physics is
that not only can it find the causes of the different types of motion of objects but
it can also explain the motion very clearly. a
Can you guess the cause of the motion? s

Motion 37

2.3 Scalar and Vector quantities

In the world we know anything that can be

measured is called a quantity. Joy and sorrow

are not quantities but temperature is a quantity.

Because joy and sorrow cannot be assigned a

value by measuring them but temperature can A Xe

be given a value by measurement. The c

temperature of your body is 37°C or 98.4°F. To

express temperature a single number is

sufficient, but there are many quantities which 8

cannot be expressed by a single number

completely, with its magnitude its direction has

to be mentioned or more than one magnitude Figure 2.03: Vector A and vector

has to be mentioned so that they altogether can 3 are equal in all respect although

express definitely the magnitude and direction in different position, vector C is

of the quantity. Position is a quantity of this “ifferent from A and B, because

type, to express this only the distance is not int lag ead a. bet

sufficient: its direction has also to be direction is different. Vector D is
iil: . : different from C, because

mentioned. The quantity which can be anecton Gs same ‘bak thee

expressed only by a single number is called a magnitude is not same.

scalar quantity, on the other hand the quantities

for which direction has to be mentioned in addition to its magnitude are called

vector quantities.

Besides temperature examples of scalar are time, length and mass. Because they

can be expressed by a single number only. Besides position you will find the

other examples of vectors are velocity and force. You will be introduced with

velocity and force in the next chapter. Because to express these quantities,

direction is to be mentioned along with its magnitude.

To differentiate vector quantities from scalar quantities they are written in bold

font (e.g. x, y or A, B). In books or in computer printing it is easy to write

anything in bold form. But when anyone writes on a paper then to express

anything as vector, a small arrow is used over it (X,¥ or A,B).

In this book the physics you will be taught will not involve application of

vectors. At best you will be reminded which one is scalar and which one is a

se vector.
8

38 Physics
2.4 Distance and Displacement

We are very familiar with the word ‘distance’ but we do not use the word
‘displacement’ in our daily lives. We want to understand the relation between the
two words, distance and displacement, with the help of an example. A curved
path is shown in figure 2.04. The distance travelled with respect to the point A
is denoted by the number 1, 2, 3 in kilometer.

Let us consider you are at point A (ie.

your position is point A). Now you have A

reached the point B by 4 km way by >?

riding a bicycle along the curved path. |”

We can say the distance between point A 6

and point B is 4 km. Distance is a scalar °
quantity, so to express the distance /)
between the points A and B we need not 2

mention any direction. We determined ie J

the ‘distance’ of the point B along this 0

path with respect to the point A. Now if

we desire we can determine the

‘displacement’ of the point B with __

respect to the point A. By displacement oie ein eae aa
the position of point B with respect to ios ieee amma

the point A is meant.

In the figure the displacement is shown by a straight line from point A to point
B with an arrowhead. In this figure the magnitude of the displacement is 3 km
and the direction of the arrow is in the direction of the displacement. Therefore
displacement is a vector quantity; it has both magnitude and direction.

If going two kilometers more by a cycle you cross a six kilometer path total and
reach the point C, then your displacement will be the straight line AC with an
arrow, whose magnitude is 1.5 kilometer and the direction of the arrow is along
your displacement. Though you covered more distance along the curved path
but your displacement is still small. Therefore the more distance you cover, the
more will be the displacement is not true. The difference between the initial and
final position is the displacement.

Starting from the point A, the distance towards the point B is 4 km along the
curved path, similarly the distance between the point B and pointAis4kmie. .
both are equal. But notice that the displacement from A to B and the $

Motion 39

displacement from B to A are not equal. One is negative of the other. In vector

form we can write,

AB = —BA
Distance or displacement, both have the dimensions of length.
[Displacement] = L (vector)
[Distance]= L (scalar)

2.5 Speed and Velocity

Roughly we know what is meant by velocity. The measurement of how fast a

body is moving is called the velocity. In terms of physics, velocity has a definite

meaning and in addition to velocity we use another quantity named speed. If we

have understood the two terms distance and displacement properly, then we will

be able to understand two terms speed and velocity very easily.

Speed is the rate of change of distance with respect to time. Therefore, if you

have covered 100 m distance in 20 second, your speed will be;

_100m_ oy
°= 20s 7S
The dimension of speed [y] = LT-1

Velocity is the rate of change of displacement with respect to time. Therefore, if

the change of your position along a certain direction is 50 m in 20 second, then

magnitude of your velocity will be;

_ 50m _ 2.5 m/
v= 20s 0s = 4.0 m/s
As velocity is a vector quantity, we will have to fix its direction.
The dimension of velocity [v] = LT~*

~ Here, one thing has to be noticed. If we consider only linear motion, then there
S is no difference between velocity and speed, the magnitude of velocity is the

40 Physics
speed. In this book, we shall consider only the linear motion, so we will not find
any difference between speed and velocity. So to understand the internal
relationship between speed and velocity, some examples beyond linear motion is
discussed:
To explain distance and displacement we considered a curved path in figure 2.04
and showed different positions there. To have an understanding about speed and
velocity, we can consider the same example. But now we have to tell how much
time you have taken for going from one position to another position. Suppose
you have taken 20 minutes for coming from position Ato B by cycle. Then
your average speed will be:
Average speed = distance travelled/time
Therefore, __4km 4% 1000m _ 3 33
°=20minutes 20x60s.
Notice that, we have used the word average speed instead of using the word
speed. Because, while you are riding the cycle, sometimes you rode fast and
sometimes you rode slow. So we cannot talk about the ‘instantaneous’ speed,
rather we can talk about the average speed in the time interval.
Let us try to determine velocity now. Like speed, we cannot calculate
instantaneous velocity. In this time interval, you rode the cycle at different
velocities. The velocity has changed due to the motion being fast or slow. Again
the velocity has changed due to the change of direction. Considering these
changes, the magnitude of the average velocity will be:
Average velocity = displacement/time
3 km 3x 1000 m
Therefore, =-_w7™ 22a
°= minutes 2ox60s ~ > mS
In this example you noticed that the value of the average velocity is less than that
of the average speed. If the path was straight rather than curved, then the
magnitude of the average velocity would be equal to the magnitude of the
average speed.
a
8

Motion 41
In our example, if you rode your cycle always at the same speed then we say
your speed is uniform speed. When anything moves with uniform speed then its
instantaneous speed and average speed will be the same.

Notice that, since the path is curved, if you go through this path your direction is
changing continuously. Therefore you can move with uniform speed through
this path but you cannot go with uniform velocity. If anything moves in a linear
motion along a straight line, only then uniform velocity or constant velocity is
possible.

@) Example

Question: Let us consider another example to understand the relation between
velocity and speed more clearly. Tie a small piece of stone with a string and
rotate it over your head (figure 2.05). Does the stone move with uniform
velocity or with uniform speed? Or with uniform speed and uniform velocity?
Answer: If you think for a while you ee getn SES ge

will be able to understand that the ~~ ae
speed of the stone is not changing but ~.___ as
the velocity is changing at every ies ia ae

instant! Because at every instant the K,

direction of motion of the stone is ¢

changing. If the stone moves along a a

straight line, then the direction of its A

motion will not change. Since it is

revolving, its direction of motion is i

changing bentinuomsly, Go it is an Figure 2.05 : Incase of rotation of a
examp le of uniform sp eed nO of stone tied with string, velocity might be
uniform velocity. If it is uniform changed though speed is same.
velocity, then it must be uniform

speed. Whereas for uniform speed it is not guaranteed that the velocity will be
uniform.

Question: If the stone is suddenly released, will it move with uniform velocity
and with uniform speed?

Answer: If the stone is released suddenly, it will move straight with uniform
velocity and uniform speed. It will continue to move with uniform velocity and
uniform speed if there is no air friction or gravitational force etc.

Forma-6, Physics, Class 9-10

42 Physics
2.6 Acceleration and Deceleration or Retardation
When an object moves with uniform velocity it has no acceleration. If there is a
change of velocity, then there is an acceleration. More clearly, we can say the
rate of change of velocity with time is acceleration.
Since velocity has both magnitude and direction, hence the change of velocity
can occur in two ways. In our previous example, when you rode (your bicycle
along the curved path, the change of velocity occurs at every turn and you are
accelerated. Although you travelled the whole path with uniform speed,
acceleration takes place due to change of direction only. If you tied a stone with
a string, as in the previous example, and rotated it over your head with uniform
speed then the rotating stone will change its direction of motion continuously.
That is, change of velocity will occur and acceleration will takes place.
If your motion is linear, then there is no scope of changing the direction. Then
acceleration may occur only for the change of magnitude of the velocities
(speed). When the magnitude of the velocity increases, then we can say
acceleration is taking place along the direction of the velocity. If the velocity
decreases, then we can say negative acceleration or deceleration is taking place.
Now we can determine the acceleration of an object moving along a straight
line.
@) Example
Question: In figure 2.06 the change of
velocity of an object with time is
shown. Identify where there is 2 B
acceleration and where it is absent. 3 c
Answer: There is acceleration at A; at > B
B there is no acceleration. At C, there is A
acceleration; at D there is negative
acceleration or deceleration. time
Figure 2.06: Change of velocity of an
object with time %
S
aq

Motion 43
In this chapter we will discuss only the linear motion i.e. if the change in
magnitude of the velocity occurs then only acceleration will takes place.
Acceleration is the rate of change of velocity with time. If the acceleration is
uniform i.e. it will not change with time, then we can write;
. (final velocity-initial velocity)
acceleration = ——_—@£__—_—_—_———_-
time
If the initial velocity of an object is u and after time t the velocity becomes v,
then the acceleration a will be;
v-u
a=—
t
The dimension of acceleration: [a] = LT~?
Unit of acceleration: ms~?
When the acceleration a is known and if the initial velocity is u then after time ¢
it is very easy to find the final velocity v (Figure 2.07). The final velocity is,
If the object starts its motion from rest, £
[-} v
then 2
v=at t-
In the meantime all the discussions that i
were done till now are true for uniform éie
acceleration. If the object does not . ; ;
move with uniform acceleration, then it Figure 2.07 : Increasing velocity of an
is not so easy to find the acceleration a ime oa is ae fm ve
from the initial and final velocities. ‘aici iainiiiaimiemiais
The examples of motion we see around us, such as the motion of a car, train or a
bicycle etc. their accelerations are non-uniform, almost all the time. For exam-
ple, if a car starts its motion from rest and increases its velocity gradually, then
starting from zero its acceleration reaches a particular value. When the car
w attains its peak velocity, then its velocity does not increase any further and the
3 acceleration becomes zero again. If the car reduces its velocity and ceases it

44 Physics
motion, then retardation starts. If the car ceases its motion, then both its velocity
and acceleration become zero. You may think that the examples of uniform
acceleration are rare.
There is an amazing example of uniform acceleration which we see in our
surroundings. That is the acceleration due to gravity. Near the earth’s surface, the
value of this acceleration is 9.8 ms. If we release an object from rest above the
earth, then its velocity increases according to the equation v = gz.
2.7 Equations of Motion
Since we will discuss only linear motion, the quantities we have talked about so
far are:

u: the initial velocity

a: acceleration

t: elapsed time

v: velocity after elapsed time

s: distance covered in elapsed timed
The relationship among these quantities, almost all of them are done already,
only one is left, that one is the relationship for the distance s. If an object has no
acceleration, then there is no change in its velocity. Then the initial velocity and
the final velocity will be equal i.e.(u = v). Therefore the distance covered will be,

s=vt
If there is uniform acceleration, the final velocity is:
v=utat

This equation shows that the velocity is changing with time. Therefore to
calculate the travelled distance, velocity at any instant is to be multiplied by the
time of that instant and then the total distance, for the elapsed time, determined.
For this type of calculation we have to know a special type of mathematics
(called calculus), here we will solve it without this mathematics. This will be
possible since we are concerned only with uniform acceleration. If it is not ,
uniform acceleration, it would not be possible. S

Motion 45
Science the velocity is changing every moment hence we cannot write the
equation s = vt but if we consider an average velocity V then we can write
s=Vt
It means that to calculate the distance
travelled we have to find only the VFauuye
average velocity. For uniform | vee
acceleration it is easy to the find > .
average velocity. If anything increases ‘8 v
uniformly then its average value is @ , |
exactly equal to its mean value. In the a
other words if anything increases
uniformly then the arithmetic mean of ° in '
its initial and final values represents its me
average value. i.e. , Figure 2.08: Average velocity is the
utv ut+(utat) mid time velocity of the initial and
V= a final velocity.
1
V=ut 3 at
Therefore the travelled distance is,
s=Vt
=(u+ : Je
sS=(u 3%
= ut + Lat?
S=U 3%

In all, the equations of motion we have already deduced the time ¢ is present. We
can deduce another equation in which f is absent.
Such as:

vr=utat

1
v? =u? + 2uat + a*t? = u? + 2a (ut + sat?)
co
S

46 Physics
Although this equation looks like another general equation but there is some
amazing physics hidden in it, which we will show in fourth chapter.
@) Example
Question: The velocity of a car is increased by 60 km/hour in 1 minute starting
from rest. What is its acceleration?
Answer: From now we will use the unit of time in second (s) instead of minute
or hour and for distance meter (m) will be used instead of mile or kilometer.
The final velocity of the car is

km 60x1000 m

v= 60 For = 660x605 = 16.67 m/s
So the problem is like this, a car attains a velocity of 16.67 m/s in 60 s starting
from rest, what is its acceleration?
v =at
v 16.67 m/s 5
a=7=—s,  — 0.278 m/s

Question: A car is moving with a velocity of 60 mile/hour, suddenly its engine
stops. It takes 5 minutes to come at rest. What is the deceleration of the car?
Answer: If there is acceleration velocity increases, where as decrease of
velocity means negative acceleration or deceleration.
Again we will use s for time and m for distance.

1 mile = 1.6 km = 1600 m
Initial velocity of car,

= 60 Miles _ 60x16 1000m _ 9.4
us hour 60x60s
Final velocity of car, v=0
Ss

Motion 47
Acceleration,
v—-u 0-268m/s 2
Thus the acceleration of the car —0.089 m/s? or deceleration 0.089 m/s?
Question: The velocity of a bullet is 1.5 km/s. It has penetrated 10 cm of a wall.
What is deceleration of the bullet?
Answer: The only way to solve this problem is to use the formula
v? =u? — 2as
Final velocity, v = 0
0 = (1.5 x 1000)? —2 (aa)
mee “\i00
1.5 x 1000
a= ase = 11,250,000 m/s?
Deceleration: 11,250,000 m/s? (or acceleration: — 11,250,000 m/s?)

2.8 Laws of Falling Bodies
We have already mentioned that an amazing example of uniform acceleration is
acceleration due to gravity g. Due to its effect; an object falls downward when it
is released from above the earth surface. Observing these types of falling bodies
Galileo invented three laws. The laws can be used in case of freely falling
bodies. The laws are as follows:

First law: All bodies falling from rest and from the same height without any

resistance traverse equal distance in the same time.

Second law: The velocity (v), acquired by a freely falling body from rest in

a given (¢) is directly proportional to that time. i.e.v « t

Third law: The distance (A) traversed by a freely falling body from rest in a

given time (¢) is directly proportional to the square of the given time. i.e.

x2 | hot?
&

48 Physics
We have said earlier that the acceleration due to gravity is an example of uniform
acceleration. The equations we have deduced about motion, can be used to
deduce the equations of motion of the falling bodies. In case motion s was used
to indicate the travelled distance, for a falling body we will use / to indicate
height. For acceleration we will use g instead of a. These two will be the only
difference!

v=urt gt

1 2

A=ut+ 3 gt

v* =u? +2gh
The three laws of falling bodies of Galileo are nothing but these equations of
motion of falling bodies.
The first law states that all objects dropped from the same height will reach the
ground at the same time i.e. it does not depend on the mass of the objects. This
does not go with the experience of our daily lives. If a piece of paper and a piece
of stone are dropped from the same height, at the same time, then it is seen that
the stone reaches the ground first and the paper reaches the ground later. This
happens due to the resistance of air. If the experiment is done in a vacuum tube
then both the paper and stone will reach the ground at the same time. Galileo’s
first law can be understood from the equation of falling bodies. This is because
there is no mass of object in the equations of velocity and traversed height. That
is the acceleration due to gravity acts equally on both heavy and light objects. So
the freely falling body traverses equal distances in the same time.
Second law of Galileo is the law of increase of velocity due to g. If the initial
velocity u is zero then velocity v is proportional to g. Galileo’s third law is
nothing except the equation of h. In this formula if we consider u = 0 then we see
that traversed distance h is proportional to t?
@) Example
Queston: A good pace bowler of cricket can throw a ball with a velocity of
150km/hour. If he throws the ball vertically upwards, how high will it go?

S

Motion 49
Answer:
150 x 1000 m
Acceleration due to gravity will act as retardation when the ball is thrown
vertically upwards. The ball eventually comes to a stop. If the height is
expressed by / then,
v* =u? —2gh
v=0, u= 41.67 m/s, g = 9.8m/s?
u2 (41.67)?
Thereft =—=+ "+. m=8s.
erefore, h 2g 2x98 m = 88.59 m
[The ball will approximately reach the roof of a 30 storied building]
Question: When a space ship revolves around the earth then its speed is very
high and is nearly 10 km/s. If a cannon ball is fired at this velocity straight up,
how high will it go?
Answer: Let us try like with the cricket ball, only the initial velocity will be
10,000 m/s instead of 41.67 m/s.
10,000)?
Therefore, jh = 20.000)" in = 5,102,000 m = 5,102 km
2x98
Though it is felt that there is no mistake anywhere but actually the answer is not
correct. This is because we have considered the value of acceleration due to
gravity is 9.8 m/s’, this is true for the distances near the surface of earth. But if
we go far from the earth the value of g will decrease. When we deduced the
equation
v?=u?—2gh
then we considered that the value of g is not changing. It is not true for this
problem. So what we have learned till now, that knowledge cannot be used to
solve this problem. If we cannot solve it, there will be no loss; because if
anything is thrown upwards with this high velocity it will be burnt due to air
friction!
Forma-7, Physics, Class 9-10

50 Physics
®) Do yourself
Determination of velocity and acceleration at any time from a time-
distance graph.
(Motion and Graph)
We have deduced equations of motion in the previous sections. We have
analyzed the relations between distance travelled, velocity and
acceleration. In this section we will analyze the same quantities but only by
graph. We can have a kind of real feelings about different quantities of
motion, if we analyze them graphically.
Table 2:01
Tine Distance (a
o | o | | oo | oo
2 | 6
[a | «| 24
3 | 9 | | 6 |
4 | ow | |
—s [| = |
We need to mention something here. Whenever we have discussed distanc-
es travelled, velocity or acceleration always we considered a
standard situation. We considered that when an object moves there is no
friction and the object does not lose its energy by any other means. That
does not happen in real life. That is why it is not so easy to collect real data
for distances travelled, velocity or acceleration. For performing a real
experiment an air track is used in the laboratory, where an object is kept
floating in an air layer so that no friction is present. To measure the change
of position of an object with respect to time, electric sparks or electronic
signals are used. We will not get such type of data in our daily lives easily.
For now we will consider that we have collected some data in this standard
situation, to use in our graph. Two sets of data have been shown in the table =
N

Motion 51
2.01 which represent the change of position of an object with respect to
time. We will solve the set for you and you will solve the second one by
yourself.

HEEB EEEE EEE pe
t PTT Pr ee 4 | +4
Erte PCP Ee Try
gar im SeReseP “sess
ol. | is eT ua | ||
LI PPP ot PrP
CoCr ee + 7
hee OTT oe |_|
EEcaeeneeGuene ne a eee
| Pl | me an TTI Qe 7
eo “Herre e Fr
EeCCe a pe Saeeene
Ce
et COCO ere
OTiri pert terry err Er
Flip ees | | FEEL
REC oe COPE eo
14 xa San a a i rs ras | :
gape er ee
eC Peer errr
aan | [| yy}
E snertaceitene CECE aan
; 4 ‘ao pits 4 t 2 Sn, {tt
Figure 2.09: Finding velocity - time from distance - time and
acceleration - time from velocity-time graphs are drawn.

The distance — time graph of the first data set of the table is shown in figure
co \2.09. We have taken data in integer form. From the graph we will be able to
S
XQ

52 Physics
find the distance of any time from 0 to 5s. For example the distance of the
object in 2.5 second is approximately 6.25m. If we have a velocity versus
time graph, from there we can find the velocity easily. Velocity of an object
is the rate of change of its position. So we can see from the graph the object
has travelled a distance of 0 m to 1 m in 0 to 1 second. Therefore the average
velocity at this time,

_G@-0)m_

v= = 1m/s
We can use this average velocity for the mid-time value of 0 to 1s. Similarly
the average velocity within 1 to 2s is,

_@-1)m_

v= @-Ds =3 m/ s
We can use this velocity as data for the time 1.5 s within 1 to 2s. Similarly
we see the average velocity between 2 s and 3 s is 5 m/s, between 3 and 4s
is 7 m/s and between 4 s and 5s is 9 m/s. We see these data points are on a
straight line on a graph paper and we can connect the points by drawing a
straight line. Although we have put the data for time 0.5, 1.5, 2.5, 3.5 and 4.5
s, but we can find the velocity at any time after drawing a straight line
through these points. For example at time 3 s the velocity is 6 m/s.
We will be able to find the acceleration in the same way after drawing the
velocity -time graph of figure 2.09. Acceleration is the rate of change of
velocity. Since the velocity- time graph is a straight line, so in this case we
will get the same value of the acceleration at any point on the graph. For
example the rate of change of velocity in between the time 2 s to 3 s is,

_ (6-4) m/s _ 5
t= Bays 5 =2m/s
For any other time if we calculate the acceleration, the same value will be
found. It is shown in the acceleration- time graph in figure 2.09.
=
&

Motion 53
Therefore, you have seen that we have found velocity or acceleration
at any time starting from the distance- time graph. As correctly as
possible, we can draw this graph.

Investigation 2.01

Determination of the average speed of an object rolling over a slanting
plank.
Objective: To determine the speed for the same distance travelled on
different slopes and then to find relation with slope with the help of graph.
Apparatus:
1, A plane plank or bench or table.
2. Aruler or meter scale.
3. A marble or a cylindrical pen or a pencil which can roll.
<
ES : sf Ss
a O° ;
—— g i
wo Figure 2.10: A marble is allowed to roll on an inclined plane.
Ss
N

54 Physics
Working Procedure:
1. Taking a plank or a bench or a table, measure its length (L) by a ruler or
meter scale. This distance will be the distance travelled by the object.
2. By placing a book under one end of the plane plank or bench or table let
us make it inclined. Measure the height (h) of the book. Dividing height
by length, find the slope (sin® = h/L ).
3. Put a marble or a pencil or a pen on the inclined plane and make sure
that it can roll.
4. You have to measure the time taken by the marble to travel the length of
the inclined plane. A stop watch is needed to measure the time accurately.
But it is unlikely to have a stop watch available. (Now a days stop watch
option is available in many mobile phones. You use the method given
below). If you have a normal watch instead of a stop watch, you will be at
a disadvantage. Because normal watch cannot measure less than a second.
We need to measure more accurately. If we have no stop watch we can try
to measure the time by other means. How many numbers (one, two,
three,.....) can you count in fifteen seconds at normal speed.
Let us consider if you count up to forty five in fifteen seconds, then we can
assume to utter every number in approximately 1545 = 1/3 second.
Let the marble or pencil or pen move on the inclined plane and start
counting one, two, three and so on. Up to which number could you count
for the the marble, pencil or pen to reach the lower end of the inclined
plane. Calculate the actual time by multiplying with the approximate
multiple.
5. Repeat the experiment several times and calculate the average time.
6. Calculate the speed, dividing the length of inclined plane by the average
time. This is average speed.
7. Increase the slope of the inclined plane by placing another book.
Measure the new height after placing the second book. Calculate the slope
for this height.
3
ES

Motion 55
8. Let the marble, pencil or pen roll on the inclined plane again. Measure
the time by counting the numbers and calculate the speed again. Increase
the slope gradually and calculate the average speed every time.

9. Draw a graph by plotting sin® along the X-axis and average speed along
Y-axis. From the graph calculate the speed for any slope.
cm cm h/L s m/s m/s

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3
Discussion: Describe the relation between slope and speed?
Discuss what necessary measures should be taken to perform the experiment
with more accuracy?

Investigation 2.02
Playing with different kinds of motion.

Objective: To find the differences among different kinds of motion

through playing.

Apparatus: Small open space.

Working Procedure:

1. You have to select definite activities to explain different kinds of
motion.
Linear motion: You have to run straight, if you face any obstructions
you have to turn back and go straight again.

S Rotational motion: Spreading your hands on two sides starts rotating.

56 Physics
Translatory motion: Looking in a particular direction move back and
forth and left and right.

Periodic motion: You have to run along a circular path.
Oscillatory motion: Raise your hands and oscillate them left and right.

2. Those who are interested in playing this game will stand scattered
around the room.

3. An instructor of the game will loudly say the words linear, rotational,
translatory, periodic or oscillatory motion.

4. Everyone has to perform the activities of the game as instructed by the
instructor. Those who will fail to follow the instructions will be
knocked out from the game.

5. The instructor of the game will utter different motions at different

times and the boys and girls have to perform the game.

The person who will be able to demonstrate all kinds of motion perfectly,

he or she will be declared the winner.

Keeping the fundamental characteristics of the motions unchanged, the

activities of different motions can be changed as necessary. For example,

the instructions may be given to demonstrate two different motions at the
same time. In case of linear and oscillatory motion the participant have to
tun straight by oscillating his or her hands left and right.

Discussion: Write down some addtional names of different motions

which can be demonstrated.

Investigation 2.03

To determine the speed of moving vehicles.

Objective: Determination of speed of different kinds of vehicles by
measuring the distances travelled at different times.

Apparatus: Ruler.

Working Procedure:

1. To determine the speed of a vehicle, at first you have to measure the
distance between two stationary objects beside a road (e.g. light post, Tree,

shop etc). Measurement of distance very accurately may be complex that’s

why we will use a simple way to do it. At first you have to measure the
distance of your step by a ruler. (Measure the distance of ten steps and | ,
divide it by ten to make it accurate). s

Motion 57
2. Now go on foot from one stationary object to another object beside the
road. Count the number of steps you need to travel the distance and
multiply it by the distance of your single step to calculate the distance. It
will be better if the distance is approximately hundred meters.

3. Now try to measure the speed of a bicycle, rickshaw, tempo or a
pedestrian staying at a safe distance beside the road. Since the distance is
known, you can measure the required time, then speed can be calculated.
4. To measure the time accurately a stop watch is required, an ordinary
watch will meet up the purpose instead of a stop watch. If you have none,
you can use an easy method to measure the time. It takes almost one
second to utter the words “one thousand one”, “one thousand two”, “one
thousand three” etc. Counting like this we can measure it.
5. When you will see a cycle, rickshaw, tempo or a pedestrian just passing
the first stationary object, you start to count time with a watch, or start to
counting “one thousand one”, “one thousand two” and so on. Again when
you will see this vehicle is just passing the second stationary object, you
see the time on the watch or stop counting the numbers. Find the required
time from the watch or up to which number of words you have counted,
that number of seconds will be the time. This is the time to travel the
distance.
Calculate the speed dividing the distance by the time.
Discussion: Compose your procedure of measuring time with the time of
a watch and see how accurate is it. Guess the percentage of error of your
calculated speed considering the degree of accuracy of your step
measuring procedure.

Distanced ‘ A d=
Vehicles | No. of steps travelled ee si es

L (m) t (s) L/t (m/s)

Forma-8, Physics, Class 9-10

58 Physics
(?) Exercise

@) General questions

1. Velocity is zero but acceleration is not zero—is it possible? If possible,

explain.

2. Velocity is changing but speed is not changing. Is it possible? If possible show
it,

3. The acceleration due to gravity of the moon is 6 times less than that of earth.
Ifa stone is released from a definite height towards earth at which velocity it
will hit the ground, if the same stone is released from the same height.

4.Is there any place from where you go1 km south and then 1 km east,
continuing 1 km north will you reach the same place?

5. Do we travel double the distance at double the time in case of uniform
acceleration?

Mathematical question

1. From your school a car has gone 40 km east, then 40 km north, then 30 km
west, then 30 km south, then 20 km east, then 20 km north, then 10 km west,
then 10 km south. In which direction and how far is the car from your
school?

2. Show when velocity and acceleration become positive, negative or zero on
the portions OA, AB, BC and CD in figure 2.11.

3. If position is plotted along the Y- axis instead of velocity then what would be
the value of velocity and acceleration on the portions OA, AB, BC and CD
in the figure 2.11.

4. The velocity of a car is 30 km/hour, after 1 minute the velocity of the car
becomes 50 km/hour with uniform acceleration. What is the distance
travelled by the car in this time?

5. You have thrown a ball vertically upwards at 10 m/s. How much height will it 2
attain in how much time? 8

Motion 39
OSS) Multiple choice questions
Put the tick (V ) mark on the correct answer
1, What is the unit of acceleration? >
a)ms' b) ms” 3
c)NS~ d)kgs? 2
2. What type of motion do the hands of a
clock have? ©
a) Linear motion _b) Elliptical motion time
c) periodic motion d) Vibratory motion Figure 2.11
3. The distance traveled in a given time by a freely falling body from rest will be
a) Proportional to the time
b) Proportional to the square of that time
c) Inversely proportional to that time
d) Inversely proportional to the square of that time
4, A body moves with a uniform acceleration starting from rest. What will be the
distance travelled by the body at a given time?
@ s=Ss
(ii) s = ut + pat?
(iii) s?=u+2a
5. Which one of the following is the correct?
a)i b) ii C) ii & iii d) i, ii & iii
5. Which one of the velocity-time graph below represents the graph of a freely
falling body?
2 2 2 2
8 3 3 8
8 8 8 8
o time O time o time o time
a b c d
20
s Figure 2.12

60 Physics
Creative question
1. Rajib with his family members started for visiting Jaflong in Sylhet by
microbus.He recorded the magnitude of the velocity i.e. speed of the car from
the speedometer after every Smin throughout the journey. The magnitude of
velocity he got per hour was 18,36,54,54,54,36, and 18 kilometer.
(a) What is instantaneous speed?
(b) Explain the acceleration of an object moving with uniform velocity.
(c) Find the distance traveled by the car in the first Smin.
(d) Draw and explain the velocity-time graph from the collected data.
2. An object of mass m is moving with an acceleration a. Its initial velocity is u,
final velocity v and the distance travelled in time ¢ is s. The state of motion of the
object is given in the table:

Co eC Ge

a Ce CC Ce
(a) Define acceleration.
(b) Why the acceleration due to gravity is the example of uniform acceleration?
(c) Calculate the value of s for event no.1 in the table.
(d) Make comments about the event no. 2 by a mathematical analysis.

2
8

Chapter Three
Force
a ._ \ «yh
ta } \
— > .\
, = i ‘ * ‘ sa i “ ‘ 6 :
6 PA OGOA SUPER  -
6 HHA OGON YF )
' = a cert, 9 BHT
i NATIONAL pent pes By eet a
Weight lifting by South Asian Games gold medal winner
Mabia Akhter Simanta
We have discussed the motion of an object in earlier chapters but the reason
behind motion was not discussed. In this chapter we will see that motion is
created due to force and discuss about three devises laws of Isaac Newton
regarding force. At the time of discussion how force acts on a body, very
naturally topics like different types of force, inertia of body, nature of force,
frictional force etc come into the discussion.
=
8

62 Physics
® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-
e Explain the inertia of an object and the qualitative concept of force by
applying Newton’s first law of motion.
e Explain the nature of fundamental forces.
e Explain the influence of balanced and unbalanced forces.
e Explain the momentum and collision of objects.
e Analyze the influence of force on the motion of an object.
e Measure the force by applying Newton’s second law of motion.
e Explain the action and reaction force by applying Newton’s third law of
motion.
e Analyze the influence of motion and force on safe travelling.
e Explain the conservation laws of momentum and collision.
e Explain different types of friction and frictional forces.
e Analyze the influence of friction on the motion of an object.
e Describe the means to increase or decrease friction.
e Explain the positive impact of friction in our daily lives.
2
8

Force 63
3.1 Inertia and Concept of Force- Newton’s First law
In the previous chapter we have learned about velocity, speed, acceleration (and
deceleration), elapsed distance and their mutual relationships. We have deduced
the equations of motion and applied them to solve problems related to motion as
well. In this chapter we will learn how motion can be created or motion can be
influenced by applying force.

Newton’s First law of motion: Newton’s first law of motion can be

expressed as-

A stationary object will remain stationary and an object in uniform motion

will continue its uniform motion unless a force is applied to it. (Since

velocity is a vector quantity, for uniform motion the object will not change

its direction of motion; it will move along a straight line at uniform speed.)
The first part of Newton’s first law is not difficult to understand because we
always observe that the bodies at rest remain at rest and do not move until
pushed. The problem arises from the second part, because we never observe that
a body in motion keeps its perpetual motion for ever. If motion is produced in a
body by pushing it, we observe that the body comes to rest if no force is applied.
From our daily life experiences it seems that to keep a body in uniform motion
we have to apply force on it continuously. Form Newton’s first law we learnt
that it is not true. If a body in uniform velocity stops then we have to realize that
force has been applied by some means. Friction, air resistance etc. actually stops
a moving body by applying force in the opposite direction. If all these forces
could be withdrawn, then we would find that a body in uniform motion keeps its
perpetual motion for ever.
3.1.1 Inertia
The characteristic that a stationary body wants to be stationary or a body in
motion wants to keep its motion, unless a force is applied, is called inertia. When
a car at rest suddenly starts moving we move backwards, this is an example of
inertia. The lower part of the body is attached to the car. When the car starts
moving, the lower part of the body moves with the car but the upper part of the

S body is still stationary and tends to remain stationary. So the upper part of the

64 Physics
body move backwards. Since this inertia is due to the tendency of rest, this is
called inertia of rest.
When people get down from moving bus, train etc we see they fall downdue to
the inertia of motion. The whole body of the person in a moving train or bus is
in motion. When his or her leg touches the ground, the lower part of his/her
body comes to rest, the upper part of the body keeps moving forward due to the
inertia of motion. So the person falls down.
©) Do Yourself
Keep a card on a glass. Place a metal coin on the card and flip the card and
displace it. The coin will fall into the glass.
If the term ‘inertia’ was merely a definition then it should not be taught with so
much importance. Actually from the viewpoint of physics, it is a very important
topic. Uptill now, we have not uttered the word mass, but to know the motion of
an object we have to know its mass. We do not treat a light cycle and a heavy
truck coming with the same speed on the same scale. The reason is the difference
in mass. But actually what is meant by mass? Often we say ‘mass’ is a measure
of the amount of object. But a more scientific answer is ‘mass’ is the measure of
inertia. (Consider the matter seriously- a very important statement has been
made). If a body has a higher inertia, then you have to understand that surely it
has higher mass. If inertia is less, then the mass is also less. You definitely
observed it that the object with higher mass cannot be displaced by higher
amount by the application of an equal amount of force. But a body with less
mass can be displaced easily. Or otherwise we can say, if the mass is less the
influence of inertia is reduced comparatively.
@) Example
Question: Two graphs show the values of position and velocity with time in
figure 3.01, explain where and for what period force was applied?
Answer: Both graphs are identical to look at, but they contain totally different
information. =
AQ

Force 65
s po B | oy
° =
AY >
() t, ty ) t, b
time time
Figure 3.01 : Position-Time and Velocity- Time graph
(i) In the first graph, from 0 to ¢, or from ¢, to the end, there is no change in
position in these two time intervals, this means there is no velocity, therefore
there is no question of change of velocity. This means definitely no force is
acting in these two time intervals. From time f, to ¢,, there is a change in position,
but the change is at the same rate (since the line is a straight line), that means the
object is moving with a uniform velocity. Therefore, there is no change in
velocity. Therefore, from time ?, to ¢, no force is applied on the body. At the
instant ¢,, a force is applied on the stationary object to make it move with a
uniform velocity. Again just at the instant ¢,, by applying a force the motion is
stopped. No force is applied elsewhere.
Therefore, when 0<t < t,t, <t<t,and t, <¢ there is no force.
Only when, ¢ = ¢, and t= t, force is applied for a moment.
(ii) In the second graph, from 0 to ¢, and from ¢, to the end, the object is in
uniform motion; therefore no force is acting on the body in these time intervals.
From time ¢, to t,, the velocity is changing at a uniform rate, therefore, definitely
a force is applied on it.
Therefore, when 0<t <t, and t, <t, there is no force.
When, t, <t <t, force is applied.
Forma-9, Physics, Class 9-10

66 Physics
3.1.2 Force

The word “force” is used for the first time in Newton’s first law. But the
interesting thing is, what do we mean by the word ‘force’ is still not described.
If it was another book other than physics then instead of using the word
‘application of force’ if we use the word ‘application of energy’ then the
meaning of the sentence will not be changed significantly. Since it is a book of
physics, hence we cannot use the word ‘energy’ here. In physics, the word
‘energy’ is a completely different quantity. Here we have to actually use the term
‘force’. But what is meant by force? Still now we have not given the definition
of force.

Actually Newton’s first law of motion can be the definition of force. Force is
that quantity the application of which a stationary object start move and a body
moving, with a uniform velocity change its velocity. From Newton’s first law we
can understand, what is force but cannot measure it. But from the second law, we
will learn to measure force.

When you use force in your daily life for different purposes, you may realize that
for the application of some forces it is necessary to come in contact with the
object (e.g. to lift heavy objects with the help of a crane, to push anything or
coming to rest of moving objects due to friction). Whereas you may have noticed
that for the application of some other forces, it is not necessary to come into
contact with the object (falling of anything downwards due to gravitational
force, attraction by magnets). So we can divide forces into two types, contact
forces and non contact forces. But you definitely understood that the region we
assumed to touch, but at that region the molecules, atoms and their revolving
electrons of each other do not create force by direct touch rather one is working
with the other by their electromagnetic forces. In other words we can say, if we
go to the atomic scale, then all the forces are non contact in nature. One atom
attracts or repulses another atom at a distance; they need not touch practically.
3.2 Nature of Fundamental Forces

If you are asked how many types of forces are there on the earth? You certainly
will say, many types. If we push anything this is a force, when a truck carries or
pulls a load this is a force, when a tree is uprooted due to a storm this is a force,
when a magnet attracts iron this is a force, when houses are blown away in bomb
blasts, it is a type of force, it is a force, when a crane lifts something this is force.
If you are given some time, you can prepare a big list of such types of forces. S

Force 67
But do you know the amazing matter? There are only four types of forces in
nature, if the forces described above are analyzed, you will find that they are not
outside these four types. Fundamental forces are actually only four in number.
These are; gravitational force, electromagnetic force, weak nuclear force and
strong nuclear force.
3.2.1 Gravitational Force
All objects in the universe attract one another by a force due to their mass. This
force is called the gravitational force. Due to this gravitational force the stars are
revolving within the galaxy or the earth is revolving around the sun and the
moon is revolving around the earth. When the force of gravitation of the earth
works on us, we call it gravity. This gravity pulls us towards the center of the
earth i.e. pulls downwards and due to this pull we feel our weight.
Force of gravitation is an amazing force of physics. An object that has mass
attracts another object by the gravitational force. In this chapter, we shall discuss
the gravitational force a little bit more in detail.
3.2.2 Electromagnetic Force
We have seen, now and then, that when we comb our hair with a comb it attracts
pieces of papers. We have also seen that a magnet attracts or repulses another
magnet. Though we think that electric and magnetic forces are different in
nature, actually the two forces are identical. They only appear in two forms.
Only and this electromagnetic force can attract and repulse but the other forces
can attract only, cannot repulse. It is so much stronger than gravitational force
(10° times, or trillion trillion trillion times stronger). That the statement is true,
you can definitely guess. Because when you comb your hair by a comb and pull
a piece of paper by attraction, then the whole earth tries to pull the piece of paper
by the gravitational force due to its total mass. But the small amount of
electricity in your comb defeats the total gravitational pull of the giant earth.
3.2.3 Weak Nuclear Force or Weak Force
It is called weak because it is weaker than the electromagnetic force
(approximately trillion times weaker) but not at all weak like the gravitational
force. The force of gravitation and the electromagnetic force can act from any
« distance but this force acts for very small distance (107% m). The emission of beta
& (8) rays or electrons from a radioactive nucleus is due to this weak nuclear force.

68 Physics
3.2.4 Strong Nuclear Force

This is the strongest force of the universe; this is hundred times stronger than the
electromagnetic force but it too acts at a very small distance (10° m).

We know the nucleus is situated at the centre of the atom and the strong force
acting between the protons and the neutrons within the nucleus confines them.
Confined due to this strong nuclear force, the nucleus contains an enormous
amount of energy. Therefore by the division of a large nucleus or by the addition
of small nucleuses a huge amount of energy can be produced due to this force.
For this reason a nuclear bomb has so much energy. By this force light and heat
is produced in the sun.

The scientists think, these four types of forces have the same origin and they are
trying to explain all these forces by a single law. Meanwhile, it has become
possible to explain the electromagnetic force and the weak nuclear force by a
single law. This is a tremendous success of theoretical physics. (Therefore, you
can say, forces are of three types: gravitation, electro-weak and nuclear force.
Nobody will say it is wrong). The scientists are trying to unify the other forces
too by a single law.

3.3 Balanced and Unbalanced Forces

Force is a vector quantity; therefore, if a force is applied on an object then it is
possible to cancel that force by the application of another force from opposite
direction. Then we say that the forces are balanced. When two or more forces are
applied on an object and if the combined resultant force of the forces becomes
zero then the body remains stationary.

In figure 3.02 it is shown that an object is suspended with a thread. The force of
attraction (i.e. weight of the object) of the earth on the object is acting vertically
downwards. Again another force i.e. the tension of the thread is acting vertically
upwards. Here two forces are acting in opposite direction thus canceling each
other’s action and producing a balanced condition.

Now if the thread is cut then the tension of the thread T will not work on the
object. Only the force of gravity of the earth or weight will be acting downwards.
Here, the force of gravity or weight of the body is the unbalanced force. Owing
to this unbalanced force, the object will fall down with the acceleration due to 29
gravity. &

Force 69
We can apply an unbalanced
force on the object by not cutting
the thread too. If by pulling the iv)
object we displace it slightly T Li
along one side, then the tension —
of the thread and the weight will | oe *
not work in the opposite w
direction. Then the two forces \
Le. tension of the thread and Figure 3.02: The force is balanced in the first
weight of the body will combine figure. In second figure, just the pendulum is
and produce a resultant force. released; a resultant force will act, so the
When the object is just released, pendulum will start movement.
this resultant force will start working on the object and the body will oscillate.
This is another example of the unbalanced force.
Three forces together can produce the balanced condition too. If a heavy book is
tied by a rope and pulled by the two terminals of the rope from two sides, it is
possible to suspend the book in a stationary state (Figure 3.03). Since the book
is in the stationary state, consequently here the weight of the book W and the two
tensions of the rope 7, and T, combine to produce a zero resultant force.
Ti T2 —~
se 4)
|

Figure 3.03: No matter how strongly you pull the two ends of the rope, you

can never make it completely straight, because then the weight of the book

cannot be neutralized.

=
g

70 Physics
(@)) Do yourself

Tie a heavy book by a rope and try to make it completely straight by

pulling it from the two ends. No matter how much force you apply from

both ends of the rope, you can never make it completely straight. Because

if the rope becomes completely straight then the resultant force cannot be

made zero by neutralizing the weight W of the book.
3.4 Momentum
Let a truck and a bicycle hit a small car with the same velocity. In this collision
the cycle or truck which one will damage the small car more? Definitely the
truck, because the truck is much heavier than the cycle. Though the
velocity of the cycle and the truck are the same, but the momentum of the truck
is much more than that of the cycle since the truck has greater mass. Simply, the
momentum is defined as the product of the mass and the velocity. If the mass of
an object is m and its velocity is v then the momentum p can be expressed as:

p=mv
Here the mass is a scalar quantity, but the velocity is a vector, therefore the
momentum is a vector quantity. You may think that generally the mass of an
object does not change, so a change in momentum may occur only due to the
change in its velocity. But in a special case we may find that the velocity of the
object has not changed but due to the change of mass, change of its momentum
occurs. You may think, instead of defining a new term ‘momentum’, what was
the problem to always treat it as a product of mass and velocity? In general, it
does not create a big problem but in case of a ‘particle of light’ it may create
serious problems. A particle of light or a photon has no mass but it has
momentum! Compared to the mass and velocity momentum is a more
fundamental quantity.
Unit of momentum is kg m/s
Dimension of momentum is, [p] = MLT*
20

If more than one object is in motion and they are moving at different velocities, S

Force 71

then they have a combined momentum. Due to different velocities of the objects,

they may collide with one another in their path of motion and due to the

collisions their velocities may change. If no force is applied from outside, then

after the collision the combined momentum will not change. This process is

defined as the law of conservation of momentum.

@) Example

Question: If you throw a tennis ball on a wall with a velocity 10 m/s, it will

bounce back towards you with the same speed. If the mass of the ball is 100 gm,

what the change of momentum?

Answer: when the ball is thrown, then the momentum is p = mv. After striking

the wall, when the ball bounces back, its momentum becomes p' = -mv.

Therefore the change of momentum:

p-p' = my-(-myv) = 2my

For this change of momentum, the wall exerted a force on the tennis ball for a

very short time. In cricket, the batsman hits the ball by the bat for a very short

interval of time and the change of its momentum occurs. We call these six’s or a

boundary.

3.5 Collision

3.5.1 Conservation of Momentum and Energy

Let us consider that two objects of masses m, and m, are moving along a straight

line in a plane. Due to the difference of their velocities they collide and hence

their velocities are changed. Now, v, and v, are the new velocities of masses m,

and m, respectively (figure 3.04). Can we find the values of v, and v, after the

collision?

The combined momentum of the two objects before collision = m,u,+m,u,
The combined momentum of the two objects after collision = m,v,+m,y,

Since, no force is applied from outside, hence the momentum before collision
« and after collision will be the same. This is the law of conservation of
S$ momentum.

72 Physics
Therefore we can write,
MU, + MzU2 = MV, + M2V2 Pu
Here we have only one equation and two -
unknown quantities v, and v,, therefore we ms < ) ma
cannot calculate the values of v, and v,. We
1 1 VA, ‘ a
need another equation to determine the ae Wan
1
values of v, and v,. Fortunately, we have y) me
another equation too. In the next chapter,
. vu
when we will learn about energy, then from —) v2
the law of conservation of energy we will a OFen
get the second equation. This phenomenon
is the law of conservation of energy. In the Figure 3.04: After collision, v, and
next chapter you will find that the kinetic v, are the new velocities of masses
energy of an object can be expressed as m, and m, respectively
5 mu’, where m is the mass and u is the
velocity of the object.
Therefore using the law of conservation of energy, we can write,
1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2
ym + ymaue = zm" + pme2v2
®) Do Yourself
Using these two equations calculate the values of v, and v,,.
We can write the law of conservation of momentum as:
m, (uz — V2) = m2 (v2 — Uz)
From the law of conservation of energy, we can write:
m, (uj — vf) = m,(vz — uz)
Now using these two equations we can calculate the values of the velocities
v, and v,. These are:
4, = (m, — m2)u, + 2mzuz
1 mM, + M2
(mz — m,)ug + 2muy
Vv =-_ooo
A mM, + M2 se
S
N

Force 73
From the expressions of v, and v, we see that if the masses m, and m, are equal
i.e. m, = m, then the two objects will exchange their velocities.

Then, vu, andv,=u,
@) Do Yourself

Right now you can do this experiment. Knock a stationary marble with anoth-

er marble of the same mass so that it can collide with the stationary marble.

You will observe that the knocking marble will become stationary and the

stationary marble will move with the same velocity as of the knocking

marble.
Finding the velocities of two objects after collision and using that concept we
will be able to explain the incidents of road accidents easily.
3.5.2 Safe Journey: Force and Motion
In the next chapter we will be able to understand kinetic energy in detail when
we will learn about energy. But already we know that the kinetic energy can be
expressed by 4mu? while reading about collisions. The topic is very important
for discussion regarding travelling. The term kinetic energy contains the square
of the velocity, this means if the velocity is doubled then energy will increase by
four times. When two cars in an accident collide, then due to this energy both
cars are damaged and the passengers are injured. Therefore to minimize the loss
in an accident, the easiest way is to keep the speed low. In our country, most of
the accidents occur due to the speeding of cars. Then it becomes difficult to
control the cars and a huge amount of energy is used up when the accident
occurs.
Let us consider that a head-on collision occurred between a heavy truck (m,)
loaded with stone and a small car (m,) coming with the same velocity. Which
one will be damaged more?
Since a head-on collision occurred, so velocity of the small car is opposite to that
of the truck.
Therefore, if u is the velocity of the truck then the velocity of the car is —u. Since,
the mass of the small car m, is far less than the mass m, of the truck, so if m, is
regarded as zero, the error is not too large and our calculations become easier. (If
you desire, you can calculate this by taking the mass of real bus-truck and small
Forma-10, Physics, Class 9-10

74 Physics
car). Taking m, as zero, after collision, the velocity of the truck and the small car
is
(m, —0)u+2x0x (-u)
Vz = a rvw—rSU
And
(0 — m,)(—u) + 2myu
v2. = ——————— = 3u
Mm, bg m2
The result is very terrible. After the collision, the truck will move with the same
velocity, i.e. it will not experience the horrible nature of the collision. The
velocity of the small car will be changed from —u to 3u, that means change of
velocity is 3u- (-u)= 4u, the direction of the velocity of small car will be changed
and it will fly off with four times its velocity in the reverse direction. In this
process the small car will be crumpled and destroyed. The loss of lives of the
passengers will be a very natural consequence.
Therefore, on the roads we have to drive heavy trucks and heavy buses very
carefully, because in an accident even though these are not damaged too much,
but the small cars are damaged much more in a head-on collision with them.
@) Do Yourself
——— a,
Figure 3.05: Experiment of conservation of momentum and energy

Place two adjacent books in parallel and put four or five marbles in the

middle gap so that all the marbles are touching one another (Figure 3.05).

Hit the row of marbles by knocking with a marble. You will see that if you

strike with one marble on one side, one marble will come out from the other

side; two marbles will come out if the strike is done with two marbles. You

will never be able to bring out two marbles striking with one marble or

bring out one marble striking with two marbles. %

S
N

Force dD
3.6 Effect of Force on Motion: Newton’s Second Law
In the football ground we always see that a player kicks a stationary football and
directs it to distant places creating motion. At the time of the kick, when the
player touches the ball, only at that instant, force is applied on the ball. The
stationary ball goes into motion due to this force.
We can apply force also for a long time instead of just for a moment. By pushing
a stationary go-cart for a long time and we can release it after setting it into
motion. It can move for a while until it ceases its motion due to friction.
The direction of velocity can also be changed by the application of force. When
a bowler throws a cricket ball towards the batsman, then the batsman can direct
the ball totally in a different direction by hitting the ball with his bat.
In the three examples described above, we see that velocity is changed by the
application of force on an object for a short or a long time. In the previous
chapter we have seen that the rate of change of velocity is acceleration.
Therefore we can say, when force is applied on an object, acceleration is
produced. The relation between the force applied on a body and the acceleration
is Newton’s second law.

Newton’s second law: The rate of change of momentum of a body is

proportional to the applied force acting on it and the change of

momentum also takes place in the direction in which the force acts.
If a body is moving with an initial velocity u and the velocity is changed (by
increasing or decreasing) from u to v after a time ¢.
Therefore, change of momentum:

my-mu
So, the rate of change of momentum:
mv — mu (v—u)
—_ = m—— = ma
t t
Since, we considered that there is no change of mass, so we can write like this.
Further we know that acceleration is:
a= 2%
* Therefore if the applied force is F, then we can write Newton’s second law of
Ss motion as:

76 Physics
Fe ma
But we don’t want to express the law in proportional form, rather we want to
write it as an equation.
Then using a proportionality constant k, we can write
F = kma
In case of Newton’s second law it is possible to create an amazing result. Since
the term ‘force’ is not explained anywhere, (Newton’s first law gives the concept
only) by using the second law this will be measured for the first time. So, we
have to give a value for the constant. We can say, when Newton’s second law
will be applied, if the proportionality constant is considered as 1, then the
equation we will get is the measure of force. How easily a proportionality
relation is converted into an equation.
Therefore, we can write Newton’s second law of motion as an equation. If the
force is F and the proportionality constant is considered as 1, then
That this small and simple equation can make a revolutionary change in the
world of physics is difficult to believe.
Unit of force is Newton (J).
Dimension of force is [F] = MLT~?
It has to be remembered that Newton’s second law of motion is true not only for
linear motion, but this is true for any type of motion. We have known about grav-
itational force, by using Newton’s second law, we will be able to explain the
motion of the planets revolving around the sun due to the gravitational force. But
in this book, we will limit the use of Newton’s second law only to linear motion.
If force is applied on an object, then by using Newton’s second law, its
acceleration can easily be determined. (If force is divided by mass, acceleration
can be found). If acceleration is known, the velocity or distance travelled
can be determined by using the laws of motion. S

Force 77
Otherwise we can say that if we see an object in motion and can calculate its
acceleration, then if its mass is known, it is possible to calculate the force acting
on it.

Now we look at some examples.
@) Example
Question: A force of 100 N is applied on a stationary body of mass 5 kg for 10
s. (a) what will be the acceleration due to this force? (b) What is the velocity
after 10 s? (c) What is the velocity after 20 s? (d) What is distance travelled in
20 s? (e) show velocity and distance travelled by drawing a graph.
Answer: (a) acceleration,
F 100N
a= en*e 2
a iy 20 m/s
(b) velocity after 10 s,
v=utat = 0+ 20 x10m/s = 200 m/s
(c) force is applied up to 10 s, since force is applied no more, therefore, after
reaching the velocity of 200 m/s, its velocity will be unchanged. That is,
velocity after 20 s is 200 m/s.
(d) distance travelled in 20 s has to be determined in two steps. Distance
travelled in the first 10 s,
Sy = ut + wat? = ; x 20 x 10?m= 1000m
Distance travelled in the second 10 s,
Sz = vt = 200 x 10m= 2000m
Total distance travelled,
S =5s,+ Ss, = 1000m+ 2000m = 3000m=3km
(e) Shown in figure 3.06.
=
8

78 Physics

@& 200 “ee 2.0

Ez &

B 3

*B 100 E 1.0

s a

) 5 10 15 20 ) 5 10 15 20
time time
Figure 3.06 : Velocity-Time and Distance-Time graph
Question: A force of 20 N is applied on a stationary object for 10 s and the
object covered a distance of 100 m. What is the mass of the object?
. 1
Answer: s=ut+ zat
Here, u=0
2s _2x100_ 2
a=a=—Tq «ms =2m/s
Again, F=ma
_F_20, 46
many ke=10ke
3.7 Gravitational Force
We have talked about force (which creates acceleration), how it is measured has
been discussed (product of mass and acceleration). But until now you have not
been introduced to a real force. In physics, an amazing force is the gravitational
force; a body having mass attracts another body by the gravitational force. Let
us consider two masses m, and m, and the distance between them is 7. Then if the 2
nN

Force 79
force ( Figure 3.07) acting between them is F, then
mm,
F=6—.—
7
Here, G is the gravitational constant and its value is:
6.67 X 10-11 Nm?kg?
We have to remember that the mass m, attracts mass m, towards itself by the
force F; also the mass m, attracts mass m, towards itself.
Of the two masses, if one is our earth
and we consider that the mass of the
earth is M and we let another body of
mass m be kept over the earth’s surface. r
Then, the earth will attract the mass m
towards its centre by a force F. ey Me
F=G6 mM Figure 3.07: Gravitational
R2 force between two masses
This force is actually the weight of the object. Here, R is the distance of the
object of mass m from the centre of the earth. This is not the distance of mass m
from the earth’s surface. Since the earth radius is too large (approximately 6400
km), therefore the small distances over the earth surface are not considered. The
distance is measured from the centre of the earth because for a spherical body if
it is considered that all its mass is centered at the centre, then no error occurs.
(Because each point of the earth attracts the mass m towards itself and if all the
attractions are assembled, it seems that the total mass is concentrated at the
centre of the earth!)
The mass m experiences acceleration due to the force of gravitation of the earth.
Already we have said that the acceleration due to gravity is expressed by g instead
of a.
Therefore instead of F = ma we can write,
mM
G Re mg
or, g=G =
S Now, the mass of the earth, M = 5.98x10* kg, radius of the earth, R = 6.37x10° m,

80 Physics
therefore,
_ GM _ 6.67 x 10-11 x 5.98 x 1074 Js? = 9.8 m/s?
9 = R= (6.37 x 10°) m/s’ = 9.8 m/s
In the previous chapter, we have used this value of g in the equations of motion.
Now you know that why this value of g was used.
@) Example
Question: The height of the space >) = 2S, _—
station from the earth’s surface is | pws “AE \ Te c
approximately 100 km. What is the |W) iN rat re
value of g there? . “ Wa eS AS
Answer: In the space station, if the = ys A, ae [9
acceleration due to gravity is g', then of w Fy ip
r GM ea ¥ "4 e
9 RR +r? -@
Here, radius of the earth R=6000 km, . the finald ; .
and height of the space station, Figure a ¢ floating astronaut in
r=100km @ Space snuttie
,. GM _ GM ——_g
9 tr? RA +r/RP (A +r/R)
7 9 — 2
I =To16 9.49 m/s
The value of g' is not zero at all, but why does the astronaut feel weightless (Figure
3.08) there?
If the value of the gravitational acceleration g is known, for any mass m we can
calculate the value of gravitational force very easily. This is,
Bop mM GM
= TR = Mp mg ~
S

Force 81
The gravitational force acting on an m
object is actually the weight of the —*
object! Therefore, by using a mass we
can apply a force on another body. In the | |=
figure, due to hanging of a mass M, a |
force Mg is acting downwards on it. This
force is applied on a mass m located on a
table by a pulley and a string. According / MD
to Newton’s second law, the mass m will Mg |
experience acceleration.
Figure 3.09: Weight of an object is
Therefore, a= F_Mg applying force on another object.
m m

Using this acceleration we can explain the motion of the object located on the
table.
@) Example
Question: As shown in figure 3.10, two weights of masses 10 kg and 5 kg are
suspended from two sides of a mass m using two pulleys. What is the force
acting on the mass m?
Answer: 10 kg and 5 kg m
masses are not a force, these — =
are masses, and therefore by e— |e
malting wi ¢ toe |
masses are transformed into
forces.

10 kg x 9.8 m/s? = 98 N AN ds

5 kg X 9.8 m/s? = 49 N | 10 Kg | 5 kg
Therefore, the mass m is Figure 3.10: Force is acting on a mass by two
pulled by 98 N on the left and _—_—weights from two sides using pulley.
by 49 N on the right.
Combining the two forces, it can be said that 49 N is acting in the left direction.
(On the mass m another force of magnitude mg is acting vertically downwards,
but this is neutralized by the reaction force of the table. Very soon you will know
how this happens.)
Forma-11, Physics, Class 9-10

82 Physics
@) Do Yourself
Rubber Band Spring Balance

A spring balance is used to measure the weight of small objects. It is less

probable that all of you have a spring balance. So, to serve the purpose you

can make a spring balance with the help of a rubber band. You can use the

plastic lid of a container as a pan to keep a weight. Make four equidistant

holes round the pan and tie with a string. Now hang the pan from one end of

a rubber band. Attach the other end of the rubber band to a board with the

help of a paper clip. Now hang the board in a suitable place.

/ \ t & iN ees
h
Figure 3.11: A spring balance made of a rubber band

Put a black dot on the string from which you have hanged the pan with the

rubber band. When there is no weight in the pan, put a black spot on the

board where the black spot of the string remains. This point indicates zero

mass. Now put five coins of five taka in the pan. Since mass of each coin is

8 gm, hence total mass will be 40 gm. Then put another black mark on the

board where the black spot of the string stays. This indicates mass of 40 gm.

Now draw a line from 0 gm to 40 gm marking points and divide the line into

four equal parts. Each division equals 10 gm mass. Now increase the length

of the line and calibrate it to measure more mass. Divide the line

accordingly, as much accurately as you want to measure the mass.

Now your rubber band balance is ready, now with this balance you will be

able to measure the mass of small objects around you. If you have an actual | «
S
N

Force 83
spring balance with you, you can measure the mass more accurately and you
can measure the weight from there.

Serial Name of |Mass of object obtained | Mass of object in kg | Weight of the object
‘umber the object from aaa gram, MM = m/1000 kg W=mgN

3.8 Newton’s Third Law

We have learnt from Newton’s first law what happens when no force is applied.

We have learnt from Newton’s second law what happens when a force is applied.

We will learn from Newton’s third law what type of reaction takes place between

the two objects when an object applies force on another object.

Newton’s Third Law: When an object applies a force on another object,
then that object also applies a force of equal magnitude on the first object
but in the opposite direction.

In physics, generally Newton’s third law is written as, “Every action has an equal

and opposite reaction”, although we have not written it in this form. By this time

since we have a little idea about force, confusion may occur if force is termed as

“action” or “reaction” “suddenly”. Moreover, those who are the new learners of

physics, their first question will be if every reaction (a force) has an opposite

reaction (another force) then why action and reaction are not cancelling each
other, producing zero? For this reason, the third law will have to be written very

precisely. The third law states that if there are two objects A and B, then when A

exerts a force on B, then B also exerts a force on A. It is worth mentioning that

two opposite forces act on different objects, never on a single object. If the two
forces were applied on a single object, only then one could cancel the other. Here
there is no scope of cancellation.

oS

=

84 Physics
The matter will be clarified with the help of some examples. Let us consider that
amass m is allowed to fall from a certain height (figure 3.12). We know that due
to the earth’s gravitational force, the mass m experiences a force F towards the
centre of the earth:
mM
BGR
Already we have seen that this force is written as mg.
From Newton’s third law we know that the
- mass m also attracts the giant earth towards
itself. That force is also F, but in the
opposite direction. We do not bother about
N this force, the reason is that the acceleration
. a of the earth due to this force can be
dh determined:
eS F=Ma
pe zi Here, M is the mass of the earth and a is the
Ar, ood acceleration,
lc ee Therefore, g—-. = 9 _ (—) g
= If the mass of the earth is M= 5.98 x 10” kg,
then if an object of mass 1 kg is released
Figure 3.12: As the earth attracts a from above then the acceleration of the
mass, the mass also attracts the earth will be,
earth in the same manner a= 1.6 x 10-74 m/s?
a9,
S
N

Force 85
This is so small that nobody is bothered about it! Next time when you will jump
anywhere, remember that you attracted the whole earth towards you when you
were falling downwards. (As small as the acceleration of the earth may be, you
pulled the whole earth towards you, you may be little proud of it!)

The easiest way of understanding Newton’s third law is to understand the
mechanism of our walking. We can all walk but nobody knows the physics
hidden behind this. Since you have started to learn physics a simple question can
be put to you. Since you have walked
from a stationary position, so you have -
an acceleration, that means force has ise 2
been applied on you. But all of us know . fp
that nobody is applying a force on us. V4
We walk by ourselves. How is that ea
possible? \.
Unless we know Newton’s third law we e 7 *
never can explain the mechanism of x
walking. When we walk we exert a force ; \ Sp,
on the ground (i.e. apply force). Then wy RD
according to the Newton’s third law the SF Naf
ground also applies an equal and F \
opposite force on our body (Figure
3.13). This equal and opposite force Figure 3.13: During walking when
creates the acceleration and we walk. a person applies force on the
The persons who have a little problem "und then the ground also applies
understanding this, they may be remind- "°° 0 him in contrary
ed that it is easier walking on hard
ground compared to sandy ground. The reason is that it is not possible to apply
force on the sand, sand is displaced. Therefore the reaction force in Newton’s
third law cannot be achieved properly. The matter can be clarified more, if one
is allowed to walk on a very smooth surface lubricated with soap-water or oil!
There friction is hardly present so we cannot apply a backward force at all and
due to this we will not get any force on us as the reaction force. So we cannot
walk at all (You may try if you don’t believe it). If force is applied, equal and
opposite force is found, but if we cannot apply force at all, how can we get a
reaction force? Then how can we walk?

4

&

86 Physics
@) Example
Question: Suppose you are standing on a totally frictionless surface. Your mass
is 50 kg and there is a stone of mass 100 kg in front of you. You decided that you
will push the stone with a force of 50 N and will move it from one end to the
other end. What will be the velocity of the stone after 10 s? (Figure 3.14)
100 kg
60 kg ‘
oa, \
aoa! iA
| \
. )
oy &
e —_> TE
Figure 3.14 : When a person pushes a stone, the stone also
pushes the person in return.
Answer: When you will push the stone with a force of 50 N, then according to
Newton’s third law the stone will push you also with a force of 50 N. The
acceleration of the stone will be towards the right,
F 50_, ,
eT m/s* = 0.5 m/s
Your acceleration will be exactly towards left,
F 50
gee 2— 2
a= = m/s 1 m/s
Therefore the stone and you will move in different directions. By pushing the
stone you cannot move it from one end to the other. Because a distance will be
created between you and the stone. So it is not possible to push the stone nonstop
for 10 s. But after the stone starts its movement, it will reach the other end
moving by itself on the frictionless surface. You will also reach the opposite end ~
but at an earlier time. 8

Force 87

(a) Let us consider you pushed the stone for 2 s, what happens then?

Answer: In 2 s the velocity of the stone will be increased to:

vr=utat=04+05x2m/s =im/s
Then the stone will move with a uniform velocity of 1 m/s.
In 2 s your velocity will be:
ut+at=0+1x2m/s =2m/s

Then you will move in the reverse direction with a uniform velocity of 2 m/s.

3.9 Frictional force

Earlier we have discussed gravitational force or gravity and spring force. Now

we shall discuss about a totally different type of force, this is frictional force.

Let us consider a wooden piece on

a table and we are trying to create F .

an acceleration by applying a

force on it. As shown in figure

3.15, we are applying a force F on ¢f

the mass from left to right. It will i

be seen that due to friction =

between the wooden piece and the SWAY VAM ZR

table, a frictional force f is

developed on the wooden piece

and this is lowering the applied _ Figure 3.15: If a force is applied on a mass

force acting from right to left. then another force may develop in the

reverse direction due to friction.

If you think that due to friction a frictional force is developed from right to left,

so if I apply a force on the wooden piece from the left too, then since the applied
w force and the frictional force are in the same direction, I will get an extra force!
= But it will be seen that the frictional force is still working in the opposite

88 Physics

direction. The frictional force always works in the direction reverse to that the

applied force! If some weight is put on the wooden piece it will be seen that the

frictional force is increased also, though the weight and the force of friction are

normal to each other.

We will see that there is nothing

surprising in it if we can understand dod

how frictional forces develop.

Though apparently wood, table etc. AY

(or the two surfaces where friction is

present) seem very smooth, but if we

view them with a microscope it will

be seen (Figure 3.16) that all

surfaces are rough or irregular.

& gul Figure 3.16: Actually friction creats due to
These rough parts touch one another ;
. two scratched surface.

or the grooves of the two surfaces in

contact catch onto one another. The

motion is obstructed due to this and we say frictional force is developed in the

opposite direction. If the two surfaces are pressed more, then the scratched

surfaces make better contact with one another, the grooves of one surface will

penetrate into the other’s grooves more deeply and as a result the frictional force

will be increased.

Due to friction heat is generated. It is a problem in most cases. When a piston in

a cylinder moves back and forth in a car, due to friction heat is generated there

and to control this heat, the engine of the car needs to be cooled.

3.9.1 Types of Friction

Friction is divided into four types. These are, static friction, sliding friction,

rolling friction and fluid friction.

Static friction: The frictional force that develops when two objects are at rest

relative to each other is called static friction. Due to static friction we can walk,

our legs or shoe soles rub against the ground and we don’t slip.

Sliding friction: The frictional force that is create when an object is in motion

relative to another object is called sliding friction. When anyone grips the brake =
S
vy

Force 89
of a cycle, it presses the wheel and ceases the motion of the rotating wheel due
to sliding friction. The sliding friction depends on the weight of the moving
body, the more the weight, the more the sliding friction. If an object has a mass
M, then its weight W= Mg is a force. Then the sliding friction can be written as,
S=nW, wis the coefficient of sliding friction.

Rolling friction: When an object moves by rolling or revolving on a surface
then the friction that develops is called the rolling friction. Among all the
frictional forces, this is the least, so we attach wheels on all kind of vehicles. It
is very easy to pull suitcases
attached with wheels, if
suitcases have no wheels, it $ 3
would become very difficult a =e
for us to pull it on the floor. By) E Se.
Fluid friction: The frictional }))
force that is experienced by an ed /
object when it moves in a
liquid or gaseous substance is
called fluid friction. When
anyone jumps from a plane
with a parachute then due to
the fluid friction of air he é
comes down slowly (Figure
3.17).
Figure 3.17: Uses of Parachute, Apollo 15
is landing in the sea
®) Do Yourself
Release a paper from a certain height and guess the time required to reach the
ground. Now shape the paper into a small ball and then release it. What is the
time required now to reach the ground? why?
Forma-12, Physics, Class 9-10

90 Physics
(@) Do Yourself
Figure 3.18: Measurement of sliding friction
Static friction and Sliding friction

Take several blank boxes of matches. Fill up the boxes with soil and

make them slightly heavier. Now put a match box on a book and increase

the inclination of the book gradually (Figure 3.18). Due to the static

friction the match will not slide at first. When the book becomes

sufficiently inclined, then along the slope a force works. At the instant

when this force equals the sliding frictional force, then the match box

will start sliding. You will see that only for a particular angle of

inclination the match will start moving. Putting one or more match

boxes over the first one repeat the experiment; you will see that every

time for a particular angle the match box will start moving.
3.9.2 Effects of friction on motion
We already discussed that the frictional force always acts opposite to the applied
force. Therefore, naturally the frictional force slows down the motion and it may
be our assumption that perhaps we always try to reduce the friction. But that is ~
not true. Sometimes you may have seen that a car or a truck is stuck in mud. &

Force 91
Though the wheel of the car rotates but due to less friction, the car or truck
cannot come out from the mud. The wheel slides. Then to rescue the car or truck,
the friction between the wheel and the mud is increased in an alternate way.
Tyre’s Surface: Because of the friction between the car’s tyre and the road the
car can move over the road. If this friction was not present, then the tyre of the
car would slip and the car would not be able to go forward. To increase this
friction many types of grooves are designed on the tyre (Figure 3.19), Those
who drive cars always give attention to whether the grooves of the car are
smooth or flat. If the grooves become flat, then after applying the brakes the car
will slip instead of stopping.
Smoothness off road: The roads are specially designed to increase the friction
between the tyre of the car and the road. —
If the roads are not proper, then the Voo~
wheels of the cars may skid. After the WUE / » \
snowfall, in the winter countries, the yA } ii é Q
toads become very slippery due to ice h\ Ge : »
pery du SNIZ2 Nig
and the number of accidents increase \] VAG é fs
more than ten times. In our country the WN | y g &
friction of the road may decrease due to S\| VW
water logging or due to gravel. All of S\\\4,4 v b
you have seen pitch carpeted roads, due Wy \o /
to this pitch carpeted the friction sy
between the tyre and the road increases.
At the same time, the rain water cannot Figure 3.19: To increase the
infiltrate into the road and the road can _—‘Tiction many types of grooves are
be used for a long time. designed in the tyre.
Controlling Motion and Breaking Force:
The speed of the vehicle has to increase or decrease according to the necessity
when we drive the vehicles. When the speed of the car is low, then it is easier to
control it. You can often see that during taking a turn or overtaking another car,
the speed of the car is lowered by applying the brakes.
When the driver presses on the brake pedal, this is transferred to the shoe or pad
attached to the wheel and the shoe presses down on the disc located inside the
wheel. Due to this pressure friction develops between the pad and disc and this
ce frictional force stops the motion of the wheel of the car.
>
a

92 Physics

3.9.3 Increase and Decrease of Friction

Already we know that for our necessity sometimes friction has to be increased

and sometimes it has to be decreased.

Reducing friction

The measures we take to reduce friction are: ge

1. Make the surfaces as smooth as possible wae (AY Ja 2

where friction is take place. On smooth ls ra ~~

surfaces sliding friction is less. psi id wey

2. Oil, Mobil or grease like materials are called @

greasy materials or lubricants. The friction is Wa Fo fi

reduced to a great extent if lubricants are used we 9 ZA

in between the two surfaces.

Figure 3.20: Using ball bearing, frictioncanbe Figure 3.20: It is possible to

reduced to a great extent reduce friction by using ball
bearings.

3. Using wheel friction can be reduced. If wheel is used we can do work by very

small rolling friction instead of large sliding friction. It is possible to reduce

friction to a great extent by using ball bearings in the rotating wheel, using the

tolling friction of the small steel balls instead of the direct friction.

4. The design of the fast moving vehicles like car, plane is done in such a way

that the wind can flow over the streamline surface without creating any friction.

5. The surfaces where friction occurs touch one another in a very small region,

then friction can be reduced.

6. We have seen that if force is applied on the two frictional surfaces friction is

increased, therefore if vertically applied force is reduced, friction can be

teduced.

Increasing friction

If the procedures that are taken to reduce friction are not done or if the opposite

steps are taken then friction will be increased. Therefore the necessary steps we

take to increase the friction are:

1. Roughening the two surfaces where friction is present. S

AQ

Force 93
2. Pressing the two surfaces more tightly where friction is present.
3. Make the surfaces stationary by stopping the motion which is present on the
two frictional surfaces. Because static friction is more than the sliding friction.
4. Making grooves or waves on the frictional surfaces. Then it can grip the
bottom tightly. If there is water or liquid, it enters the grooves thus increasing
the friction of the surface.
5. To increase the density of air or water.
6. To increase the frictional area in air or water.
7. To remove wheel or ball bearing.
3.9.4 Friction: A necessary evil
All of us have certainly noticed that heat is generated due to friction. In the
winter we create heat by rubbing our hands. The engine of a car becomes hot,
that happens due to friction. Therefore, energy is dissipated by creating
unnecessary heat due to friction. Cars, planes, ships, submarines have to go
forward by overcoming the frictional force, requiring extra fuel. If we treat this
in this way, it may seem that friction is nothing but an evil in our lives.
Meanwhile, we have seen that due to friction we can walk, drive cars on the
toad, write on the paper with pencil or pen, build a building, come down safely
with the help of a parachute. We can give many examples where without friction
we could not do our necessary work.
Consequently though friction is treated as an evil, we have to acknowledge that
friction is a very necessary evil for our lives.
(?) Exercise
) General questions
1. When you try to get down from a moving train why do you fall in the
forward direction?
2% 2. As shown in figure 3.21, if a sudden pull is applied on the string A, it will
R tear. But if it is pulled slowly then the string B will tear. why?

94 Physics
3. The object having more mass has more weight or more force. If it is
released from above it will have more acceleration, is it true?
4. You are standing on a weight measuring machine in a lift. If the cable of
the lift tears, what is the weight that shows up on the machine?
5. If a stone is tied by a rope and is pulled on a completely frictionless
surface towards you, what will happen?
6. What is inertia? How many types of inertia are there?
7. What is force?
8. What is the measure of inertia of a
stationary object? B
9. What do you mean by balanced and _
unbalanced forces?
10. What is momentum of a body?
11. Show that, force = mass < acceleration A
12. What do you mean by law of conservation RY
of momentum? =
13. What is friction? Write down the names of %
the different types of friction
14. Friction isa necessary evil- give argument Figure 3.21: Two string
in favor of this. attached with a mass
Mathematical questions
1. The velocity-time graph of 6
an object of mass 1 kg is shown in rt | tt ft et
figure 3.22. Draw the velocity-time - VN II |
2 20
graph. &
2. A force of 10 N acts on a 3 10 TEN VL
stationary body of mass 5 kg for 2 s. 2
After 5 s another force of 20 N acts PT tT yy yy
on it for 3 s. What is the distance 0 2 4 6 8
travelled by the object? time (Second)
Figure 3.22: Velocity-time graph. =
N

Force 95

3. A force of 10 N acts on a stationary object of mass 10 kg. After 10s a
force of 20 N acts on it for 5 s in the opposite direction. What is the
distance traveled by the object?

4. You have jumped from a boat with a velocity of 10 m/s towards the bank.
Your mass and the mass of the boat are 50 kg and 100 kg respectively. In

which direction and with what velocity will the boat move?

5. The coefficient of friction 1 of a wooden piece on a floor is 0.01. If the
mass of the wooden piece is 10 kg, what is the force required in moving
it? If a stone of mass 100 kg is kept on the wooden block, what is force
required to move it? What happens if the floor is frictionless?

OS) Multiple choice questions

Put the tick (WV ) mark on the correct answer

1. The tendency or property of a body to maintain its present state for ever
is called:

(a) force (b) acceleration
(c) inertia (d)velocity

2 Which one is the dimension of force?

(a) MLT? (b) MLT!
(c) ML?T? (d) M'LT?

3. Which one is the unit of momentum?
(a) kgm (b) kg ms 7
(c) kg m’s* (d) kg ms 7

4. A force of 50 N is applied on a body of mass 5 kg, its acceleration will be-
(a) 12 ms? (b) 8 ms?

(c) 13 ms? (d) 10 ms?

5. If a mass of 10 kg moves with a velocity of 10 ms", its momentum will
be-

(a) 10kgms! (b) 120 kg ms"
2 (c) 100kgms! (d)1kgms'
S
Nn

96 Physics

© Creative questions

1. Faruque pulls a box of mass 4 kg on the floor with a constant force. The
frictional force between the box and the floor is 1.5 N. While pulling, the
box accelerates at 0.8 ms*. Then the box is pulled with the same force on
a frictionless floor.

(a) What is a balanced force?

(b) Why is the frictional force produced?

(c) What is the force applied to the box in the first case?

(d) What is the change in acceleration in frictional and frictionless
floors? Explain mathematically.

2. An object of mass 5 kg moving in linear motion with a velocity of 5 m/s
hits another object and changes the momentum of the second object by an
amount 4 kg m/s. The masses of both objects remain unchanged after the
collision.

(a) Which property of matter is a measure of inertia?
(b) What do you mean by ‘The applied force is proportional to the
change of momentum’?
(c) What is the final velocity of the first object?
(d) When there is no change in momentum, then comment about
the second object by mathematical analysis.
Es]
R

Chapter Four
Work, Power and Energy
——— em I
Proposed Rooppur Nuclear Energy Center
In this chapter we will see how a force works. In terms of physics the word
“work” has a definite meaning. We will see that a force working on something
can move it and create kinetic energy. This kinetic energy can convert into
potential energy and this transformation of energy is a very natural process and
different types of energy can convert into one another.
The most important aspect of science is energy and energy plays a most
important role for the development of mankind. So, how energy can be explored
from nature will also be discussed.
Forma-13, Physics, Class 9-10

98 Physics
® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-
e Explain the relation between work and energy.
e Establish the relation among work, force and displacement.
e Explain kinetic and potential energy.
e Explain the transformation of energy source.
e Analyze the contribution of the source of energy regarding economics,
social and environmental influences.
e Explain the relation between transformation of energy and conservation
of energy.
e Explain transformation of energy and how its use hampers the balance of
environment.
e Explain the effective use of energy in developing activities.
e Beconscious about the effective and safe use of energy.
e Explain the mass-energy relation.
e Establish the relation between transmission of energy and power.
e Measure the efficiency.
pao
Rg

Work, Power, Energy 99
4.1 Work
We use the term ‘work’ in various manners in our daily life. A gatekeeper
guarding a house all day long, sitting on a tool, may claim to have done a lot of
work, but in the words of physics that is not any work. In terms of physics the
word ‘work’ is well defined. If a force F is applied on any object and the object
traverses a distance s during the application of force (that is displacement
occurs) then, the amount of work W done by the force is:
W=Fs
Unit of work: J (Joule)
Dimension of work [W] = ML2T~2

Force is a vector quantity and the distance traversed or displacement is also a
vector quantity but in case of work the product of those two vectors is a scalar
quantity.
As individual vectors there is no such condition that the direction of force and
distance travelled has to be same but in these book, we will only discuss the
force and distance travelled in the same direction.
Have you noticed, while discussing work, we said that the ‘force’ has done the
work. A person or a machine may push any object to some distance by applying
a force. In terms of daily life we say that the person or the machine has done the
work. But in physics, neither the person nor the machine does the work, always
the force applied does the work. This force may be applied by a person or a
machine.
Let us assume that, you have pushed an object to a distance s by applying a force
F and left it after setting it in motion. The object has travelled an additional
distance d and at last it has stopped. How much work is done?
The amount of work done is W=F's, as no force was applied while traversing the
distance d, so no work is done.

re

>

N

100 Physics
@) Example
Question: Your mass is 50 kg. You have climbed up a 10 storied building, how
much work have you done? (Height of each floor is 3 m)
Answer: If your mass is 50 kg, weight is 50 x 9.8= 490 N. This weight is a force,
that is acting downwards. If you want to climb up, you have to exert an equal
force upwards to draw yourself up.
So, upward applied force: 490 N
Distance travelled upwards: 10 x 3 m= 30 m
So the amount of work done, 490 N x30 m =14700 J=14.7 kJ
Suppose, a moving object is coming towards you, you try to stop the object by
applying force F, the object pushes you backwards by a distance s. How much
work was done by the force applied by you? Certainly you have noticed that, this
time the distance traversed is not along the direction of force, rather opposite to
it. So the amount of work done

W=F (-s)=-Fs
That is, the work done is negative. In our daily lives, we talk about work and
useless work, but what is meant by positive and negative work in terms of
physics? If the work is positive, then it can be said that work is done by the force.
If it is negative, then it is said that the work is done ‘on’ the force or against the
force. We must have a clear conception about energy before understanding what
has just been written.
4.2 Energy
In our daily lives we use the term energy for different purposes but in physics it
has a definite meaning. Generally speaking, there is no difference between
applying energy or applying force, but in physics, these two phrases mean
completely different things. In the previous chapter, we have learnt what is
meant by force, what is meant by energy will be discussed in this chapter.
We all have a shallow idea about energy, because we mention the words
electrical energy, thermal energy when we make casual conversation. «
Sometimes we even hear about chemical energy or nuclear energy. Though light &

Work, Power, Energy 101

is not mentioned as energy, we can assume that light is one kind energy too. The

energy which is not mentioned in our daily conversation, but will be discussed a

lot in physics is kinetic energy. We may think that there are many types of energy

in nature, but it is interesting that all kinds of energy are the same and we can

only transform them from one to another! So what is energy?

Ability to do work is energy! Not only that, when a positive work is done by

applying a force on an object, the force creates an energy in that object. The

amount of work done on the object is the amount of energy created in it, and the

person who is applying the force has to give exactly the same amount of energy.

So now you have understood the meaning of negative work. If any force does a

negative work on an object, then it is to be understood that a certain amount of

energy is taken away from the energy contained in the object. The amount of

negative work done is equal to the amount of energy taken away, and he who has

applied the force gets this energy anyway. So, on any object

Doing positive work — giving energy to the object.
Doing negative work —» taking away energy from the object.

You can clearly understand that energy has no direction and it is a scalar

quantity. As we produce energy by doing work or do work spending energy,

these two have the same unit and the same dimension.

Unit of energy: J (Joule)
Dimension of energy [W] = ML?T~2

«> Example

Question: You have moved an object 10 m by applying a force of 100 N on it.

If the frictional force is 10 N in the opposite direction, then what is the amount
co of work done by you? What is the amount of work done by the frictional force?
& (Figure 4.01)

102 Physics

Answer: You have done work, F——>

W=Fs=100 N x10 m=1000 J=1 &J.

Work done by the frictional force, + {

W=Fs= -10 N x10 m= -100 J

The stone has attained the energy i

because of the work done by you. Energy d

has been lost due to frictional force, so : :

heat may be generated. Figure 4.01: when a force is applied
on a body, frictional force acts in the
opposite direction.

4.3 Different forms of energy

We use different kinds of energy for different purposes. For example, heat

energy is needed for water to be heated, we need light energy to see anything, we

hear by using sound energy. We run machines by using electrical energy, and we

create electricity from electric cells by using chemical energy. We generate

electric energy too from the nuclear energy we get by dividing a heavy nucleus

or by addition of light nucleuses. Energy is developed in our body taking

nutrition from food, we perform our activities.

The history of our civilization itself is the history of utilization of energy by

generating energy. We see different forms of that energy around us, for example-

mechanical energy, heat energy, sound energy, light energy, magnetic energy,

electrical energy, chemical energy, nuclear energy and solar energy.

The most general form of energy is the mechanical energy, the energy that is

obtained due to position, shape and motion of the object is called mechanical

energy. There are two forms of mechanical energy; these are kinetic energy and

potential energy.

4.3.1 Kinetic Energy

We have discussed earlier that the ability to do work is energy. Everyone of us

knows that when an object is in motion, it can push another object and set it into

motion resulting in the object moving a certain distance due to the pushing.

Making another object move means, definitely a force has been applied there

and traversing a distance due to this force means work is done there! 3

Work, Power, Energy 103
Therefore we can say firmly that the energy that develops due to motion in a
body is certainly one kind of energy or kinetic energy. In the previous chapter we
said that the terrible road accidents that happen and the losses that occur are
mainly due to kinetic energy. When a bus-truck or a car moves at high speed then
it has a huge amount of kinetic energy.

We can easily calculate how much kinetic energy is acquired by an object when
work is done by a force on that object.
Let an object of mass m be displaced by an amount s due to the application of
force F. Therefore work done W by the force F is:

W=Fs
According to Newton’s second law we know,

F=ma

Again, from the equations of motion we know that if an object starts its motion

from rest,
Then s= sat? and v = at
Then work, W = Fs = mas = ma x =at? = $ma?t? =5mv?
Therefore we can say if a force F makes a displacement s of an object then the
kinetic energy that is generated:

1

f= zmv?
The velocity v is in the square form in kinetic energy, so to double the velocity
we will need to give an object of four times the energy.
When learning the equations of motion, we noticed that
v? =u? + 2as

Multiplying both sides by sm the equation becomes mv? = mu? + mas

If we write F instead of ma and W instead of F's, then the equation becomes,

1 1

amy? = m2

2 mv 3 mu* +W
That is, if an object moves with velocity u, then its kinetic energy is smu?
and if W amount of work is done on it, then its kinetic energy is increased to

Smy?. When we were mentioning this equation (v= u? + 2as) of motion we said

= that later we will see it in an interesting form. This is that form, i.e. the equation
N

104 Physics
of motion is nothing but the equation of kinetic energy.
«> Example
Question: A force of 10 N is applied on a stationary object of mass 10 kg for 10
s. (a) What is the kinetic energy of the object? (b) Calculate the kinetic energy
after 20 s. (c) If the force is applied for 20 s, then what is the kinetic energy?
Answer: Acceleration due to 10 N force is:
_F_10N ig
om 10kg m/s
Therefore velocity after 10 second: r
v=at=—>x 10s=10m/s
(a) Then the kinetic energy,
5mv? =x 10 x 102] = 500]
(b) Acceleration will take place for 10 s, after that no acceleration is present,
so velocity is unchanged, therefore kinetic energy after 20 s will be the same.
(c) If force is applied for 20 s, then the velocity is,
v =at =1m/s? x 20s = 20 m/s
Therefore the kinetic energy,
1 1
=mv? == x 10 x 207J = 2000]
2 2
Question: Motion is created in a body of mass 10 kg by applying a force, if its
kinetic energy becomes 80 J, what is its velocity?
Answer: Kinetic energy is,
1
omy? =
3 mv 80]
2
8

Work, Power and Energy 105
” _2x80J _ 160m?
m 10 s?
v=4m/s
4.3.2 Potential Energy
When we were discussing work, we said that if a force does a positive work on
an object then energy is generated in it. When we were talking about kinetic
energy we have given an example of it too. We have shown that by applying a
force on an object if the object moves by a distance, then its kinetic energy
becomes mv?
Now, we will give such an example L y
where force is applied and displacement 1
occurs even then no kinetic energy is
produced. Suppose, a spring is kept on a
table as shown in figure 4.03. You L- i X i
applied a force at the free end of the no
spring by your finger and compressed it ae
by an amount x. In such a condition, none =
of your hand or spring is in motion, so no F
kinetic energy is present in any of them. Figure 4.02: Stationary state of a
Since the direction of applied force and gpring and compressed by applied
the distance traversed is in the same force
direction, so the work done is positive. According to the definition of work, here
energy is to be created. But where is that energy? Here nothing is in motion, so
definitely there is no kinetic energy.
Those of us who have used springs can guess that energy is definitely hidden in
the compressed spring. Because if an object of mass m is kept before the
compressed spring and then released, the spring would exert a force on it and
make a displacement, which means the spring would perform work. That is it’s
a kind of energy, even it is not kinetic energy, this is another form of energy. This
type of stored energy is called potential energy. This energy is developed due to
the ‘sate or position’ of the object.
Forma-14, Physics, Class 9-10

106 Physics
If the spring constant of a spring is k, and if the spring is compressed by a
distance x from its normal state, then the potential energy stored in it is,
V =1kx2
2
@) Do Yourself
Do yourself: If a spring is compressed or expanded by an amount x, it will
exert a force of F= -kx, using this equation it is possible to find out the
relation, V = 5 kx? . Can you find it? (Since the force depends on the length
of the spring, so calculate the average force and multiply it by the total
distance.)
@) Example
Question: A body of mass 10 kg falls on a spring with a velocity of 10 m/s. If
the spring constant k=100,000 J/m?, what is the compression?
Answer: Kinetic energy of the object,
1 2-1 x 10x 102 = 500
gm =5 J= J
This energy will compress the spring, that is,
1
— peg? =
2 kx* = 500J
therefore, we 2x 500 m= 1 m?
~ 100,000 ~ 100
x=0.1m
When we raise anything, then it acquires potential energy. When a piece of stone
is released freely from above, its speed increases when it comes down. So it
develops a kinetic energy. This becomes possible because a kind of potential
energy was stored in it when it was in the ‘above’ position. How much potential
aq

Work, Power, Energy 107
energy is stored in a stone when the stone is raised above can also be calculated.
You are realizing that the amount of work to be done when an object is raised
above is stored in that object as potential energy. If the work done is W,
W=Fh

Here, F is the applied force and h is the height. We have to apply the force F in
the upward direction and distance traversed is also in the upward direction,
therefore F is positive. The force that has to be applied for raising the object
upwards does not change as the spring force and this force is equal to the weight
of the stone. If the weight of the stone is mg,

F=mg
and W=mgh
We have to remember that the weight of the stone is a force and it acts
downwards. We have to apply an upward force equal to the weight of the stone
if we want to raise it.
Potential energy is stored in a stone of mass m by raising it a distance of h. What
amount of kinetic energy will be generated in the stone if it is released and
comes down by a distance h?
Due to the conservation of energy total of its potential energy will transform into
kinetic energy. We know kinetic energy is= mv’, SO we can write:

; myv’= mgh

v= 2gh
Honestly we can say, when we were deducing the laws of falling bodies,
meanwhile we deduced this identical law once again! Now we deduced the same
law using the conception of energy quite in a different way!
C3) Example
Question: A body of mass 10 kg is thrown in the upward direction with a
velocity of 100 m/s. What will be the height reached by the object?

=<
8

108 Physics
Answer: This has been done before with the help of the laws of motin. Now it
can be done by the transformation of energy.

ineti : 1 1
RAISES = 5 mv? = 5 x10x1007J = 50,000)
When the object reaches a height A, at this height the kinetic energy has been
totally converted into potential energy. So,
mgh = 50,000J
FL)
“ng toxos ™~
For your understanding the mass 10 kg is mentioned here. But it does not depend
on the mass. With any mass we will get this answer. For this we might have used
the formula v’=2gh directly.
Question: A body of mass 5 kg is thrown in the upward direction with a velocity
of 50 m/s. At what height will the potential and kinetic energy be the same?
Answer: Initial kinetic energy of the body is
1 1
Ty = 5mv? = 5x5 x 50*] = 6,250)
When kinetic energy equals potential energy, then for height h, we can say
kinetic energy = potential energy
kinetic energy + potential energy = primary kinetic energy
kinetic energy = potential energy = primary kinetic energy/2
p = 0250)
mgh = —>
5 — 0250) 6250 gan
“2xmg 2x5x98
You may have already guessed that this problem also does not depend on the
mass.
=
&

Work, Power, Energy 109
4.4 Sources of energy
The history of world civilization can be simply named as the history of
utilization of energy. It can be generally said, how much a country is developed,
a simple means to understand it is to calculate the use of electrical energy per
person in that country. Different forms of energy of the world are shown in the
figure 4.03.
Energy
ve =
Energy Energy
Oil Gas )| Coal )( Nuclear pe Biomass oes es Geothermal
Figure 4.03: Different sources of energy
4.4.1 Non-renewable Energy
As the history of civilization on earth is actually the history of energy utilization,
we see there is a hunger for energy in every country and every state in the world.
Everyone is searching for energy and using it in every possible manner.
Fuel Energy (Oil, gas and coal): At this moment, the biggest sources of energy
of the world are oil, gas or coal. Oil, gas or coal, are all fossil fuel, that is, being
buried under the ground from millions of years, are transformed into this form
due to prolonged period of heat and pressure. Coal, oil or gas are to be
extracted from beneath the ground. The oil that is extracted from the ground
(Crude oil) is very dense at the primary stage, they are converted into petrol,
diesel, or kerosene by refining in refineries and some other usable substances are
found as well. The gas that comes out from beneath the ground is mainly
methane CH,, water vapors and other gases can be mixed with it and these are to
be separated. The gas of our country Bangladesh is comparatively much clearer
% and suitable for direct use.
N

110 Physics
Nuclear Energy: Many countries are utilizing nuclear energy, and a fuel is also
required there, that fuel is uranium. There is a similarity in the energies, oil, gas,
coal or uranium; they are spent when they are used. Men have already estimated
the amount of uranium in the world or the amount of oil, gas or coal beneath the
ground. It is seen that if people continue to use energy at the rate they are doing
now, then the sources of energy like oil, gas, coal or uranium will run for two
hundred years at best. After that our known sources of energy will run out.
People are not that much concerned about what will happen then, because they
are almost sure that by them some other sources will be found using science and
technology. For example, nuclear fusion, using which the sun or stars produce
their energy. The fuel for fusion comes from one isotope of hydrogen and each
molecule of water contains two atoms of hydrogen. So, there is no worry for that
to run out.

4.4.2 Renewable Energy

Human being are not only relying upon new forms of energy in the future, but at
this very moment they are also dependent on the sources of energy, which will
not be finished. This energy comes from sunlight, ebb and flow of the waves of
seas, winds in open fields, hot magma from the interior of the earth or currents
of water of rivers. It is not difficult to understand that these sources of energies
are almost inexhaustible. These are called renewable energy- i.e. the energy
which can be renewed, and because of that, there is nothing to be worried about.
At present one fifth of the energy people are using is this renewable energy. As
days are going by, people are getting conscious about the environment. And so
the use of this type of energy is increasing more and more.

Hydroelectricity: One fifth of the total energy of the world is renewable energy.
Most of that part is hydroelectricity, to produce electricity by making a dam ina
tiver. Since the water of a river is inexhaustible, therefore the source of energy
of such a power plant is inexhaustible. This is the conventional concept. But if a
dam is built on a river, it harms the environment to a great extent; due to this the
people of the world have become very conscious. Those who are a little bit
farsighted don’t build such a power plant more.

Biomass: After hydroelectricity, the most renewable energy comes from
biomass, by biomass we mean wood fuel, straw etc. People in many parts of the
world have no oil, gas or electricity; they spend their daily life by burning fuel
wood and straw. The used energy by these poor people is a major part of the total ,,
energy of the world. Even the dried tree, straw etc. are finished due to burning, 3

Work, Power and Energy 111
biomass is called the source of renewable energy because the trees can be grown
again. It is not lost for ever from the world like oil, gas or coal.
The important sources of energy are solar energy, wind energy, bio fuel and
geothermal energy besides the two forms of renewable energy, hydroelectricity
and biomass.
Solar energy: Many of you will be astonished on hearing, only in one square
kilometer area we get one thousand megawatt energy from the sun as light and
heat which is near to the energy of a nuclear power plant. One part of the light
and heat that comes from the sun is absorbed by the atmosphere. It is absent at
night and uncontrolled due to cloud and rain. Beside this, the energy comes as
light and heat energy, it has to pass one step for conversion into electricity. It is
still said to be a most reliable source of energy. Utilizing solar heat electricity
can be generated. Now-a-days a common picture of the earth is the solar panel,
installing this on their roofs; people are generating their own electricity sitting in
their own residence.
Wind energy: After solar energy, wind energy has occupied an important place
very quickly. In our country we are not familiar seeing large turbines for wind
energy, but in many countries of Europe this is a very familiar scene. The place
at which the wind mill is set up, a large tower is erected upwards, so there is no
waste of land at all, for this reason the environmentalists like it very much. From
a wind turbine it is possible to get a few megawatts of electricity! The utility of
the energy that is generated by using air; is increasing by 30% every year. This
number is not a small number at all.
Bio fuel: The people of the world are preparing alcohol for drinking purposes
from a long time- it is one kind of fuel. Preparation of alcohol as fuels from food
like popcorn and sugarcane are almost an acceptable procedure. The oil that we
use for cooking purposes can also be used instead of diesel. There are many
kinds of trees in the world from which we can get fuel oil directly. In many
countries of the world, the research on biofuel is continuing, moreover many
countries like Brazil have started using such types of biofuel on a large scale.
Geothermal energy: Another important source of renewable energy is
geothermal energy. The inner part of our earth is very hot, when a volcano’s
S eruption takes place then we become aware of it. So, if someone can make a

112 Physics
hole a few kilometers deep, then he will get a giant source of heat energy. The
process is still not easy so its large scale use has not yet started. In some places
due to its geographical nature this type of energy is available easily and its use
has started there.

4.4.3 Transformation of energy and impact on environment

People around the world are becoming conscious about the environment. For
prosperity we need energy but the people of the modern world cannot tolerate it
if the environment is destroyed for energy. The people of the world are not ready
to use any type of energy by any means. They want to explore the energy that is
hidden in the world not by making conflicts with nature and not by destroying
the earth.

The largest example of the impact on nature in case of transformation of energy
is the fossil fuel or oil, gas and coal. Among these three, the amount of carbon
is much more and when these are burnt to produce heat energy then carbon
dioxide gas is produced, which is a green house gas. Therefore, this gas can
confine the heat of the world and due to this the temperature of the world is
increasing slowly, which is called global warming. Due to global warming the
ice of the polar region is melting and the height of the sea level is rising.
Bangladesh is one of the countries of the world which will be flooded and the
farmlands destroyed by salt water thus creating a harmful impact on nature. At
present, all the countries of the world are unitedly trying to decrease the amount
of carbon dioxide emission.

There is no emission of carbon dioxide in a nuclear power plant. But nuclear
wastages are very radioactive and these have to be preserved for millions of
years for their radioactivity to reach a safe level which is not hazardous for the
environment. Though nuclear power plant is very safe due to modern
technology, sometimes owing to people’s mistakes or natural calamities major
accident happens to creates a fatal disaster. Two examples of this type are-
accidents of Chernobyl of the then Soviet Union and Fukushima of Japan.
Comparatively the impact of renewable energy on the environment is less. But
when a dam is made on a river for production of hydroelectricity, then on one
hand the environment is damaged due to flooding in a large region, whereas on
the other hand, due to less flow of water draught may be created in the %
subsequent regions. &

Work, Power, Energy 113
4.5 Conservation and Transformation of Energy
4.5.1 Conservation of energy
In our daily lives, the energy we see around us is imperishable. It has no
destruction, it transforms only from one form to another form. When a stone is
raised it develops a potential energy. When the stone is released the potential
energy starts decreasing and the kinetic energy starts increasing. Just before it
touches the ground, its total energy is converted into kinetic energy. But when
the stone stops after touching the ground, then it contains no kinetic energy and
no potential energy, where has the energy gone?
(a)
(h) ] (b)
! v=0 |
(9) v Tvl (©)
ae TW
TV T Kinetic energy
V Potential energy
Vv (f V_ Velocity (¢) Vv
L (e) L
TV “\ TV
Vv
Vv
TV _I
TV

Figure 4.04: A pendulum is oscillating, the total energy is exchanging between kinetic energy
and potential energy.
Forma-15, Physics, Class 9-10

114 Physics
You definitely observe that when a stone hits the ground, it hits by producing
sound and heat i.e. kinetic energy is transformed into sound or heat energy.

The example (Figure 4.04) of changing between potential and kinetic energy is
wonderful. A small stone is tied by a thread and hanged from a support. If we
pull it along one side then the stone rises up by a small amount from its
stationary position and hence a potential energy is developed in it. Now if we
release the stone, due to an unbalanced force on it, it starts going towards its
stationary state, thus creating a motion in it. When it reaches the mid position
exactly, it attains the maximum velocity. So it does not stop there rather moves
away in the opposite direction and rises up until its velocity becomes zero.
Therefore it again develops a potential energy. When it reaches the maximum
height it stops there, owing to its potential energy again it starts moving towards
the stationary state. In this way, the stone oscillates and transformation from
potential energy to kinetic energy and kinetic energy to potential energy
continues. This process would continue for an infinite time if there was no
friction and other causes of energy loss.

Therefore the transformation of energy is a very natural process. Transformation
of energy takes place not only between potential energy and kinetic energy. But
all the known forms of energies around us can transform from one form to anoth-
er. In our daily lives, the energy we see around us cannot be created or even can
be destroyed, it only changes from one form to another. This is the law of conser-
vation of energy.

4.5.2 Transformation of Energy

Around us we see many examples of transformation of energy, e.g.

(a) Electrical energy

If we want to give examples of the transformation of energy, at first we give
examples of electrical energy. Because this energy can be transformed into an
other energy very easily. Not only this, it is easiest to transmit electrical energy
from one place to another place. Though around us there are many types of
energy, we supply electrical energy first to our residence but we don’t supply
other forms of energy. In our daily lives, we see the transformation of electrical
energy into mechanical energy in electric fans or other motors. (Though actually
magnetic energy is not different from electrical energy, even then in motor or
electrical fan we see electrical energy converts first into magnetic energy and
then converts into mechanical energy.) In the electric iron or heater it is S

Work, Power, Energy 115
converted into heat energy. The electrical energy is converted into light energy
in light bulbs, tube light or in an LED. To produce sound energy we need to
vibrate something. It’s a kind of mechanical energy. More over we can tell, in
speakers electrical energy is converted into sound energy. All of us charge the
battery of our mobile using electricity, where the electrical energy is converted
into chemical energy.
(b) Chemical energy
An important energy is definitely the chemical energy among the examples of
transformation of energy. The gas which is used for cooking is an example of
transformation of chemical energy into heat energy. Due to this, when electrical
energy is supplied to our residence, simultaneously gas is also supplied. Due to
the conversion of chemical energy into heat energy, we also get light energy.
Light of a candle is an example. We see the convertion of chemical energy into
mechanical energy using gas, patrol, diesel or such type of fuels in different
kinds of engines. If we observe closely, we will find that at first chemical energy
is converted into heat energy and then heat energy is converted into mechanical
energy. But in the era of modern technology, the greatest example of conversion
of chemical energy is the battery, where chemical energy is converted into
electrical energy. We cannot find any space where chemical energy is not
converted into electrical energy using battery starting from mobile phone to car
or from clock to space shuttle. The amazing example of chemical energy is our
body or body of living beings, where chemical energy from food is converted
into mechanical or electrical energy.
(c) Heat energy
If we consider from the viewpoint of quantity, doubtlessly the conversion of
maximum amount of energy takes place from the heat energy in the world. Heat
energy is transformed into mechanical energy in all engines of all machines. In
thermocouple (applying heat at the junction of two different metals), though
there are examples of conversion of heat into electrical energy directly, actually
almost in all the cases heat energy is converted into mechanical energy and then
mechanical energy is converted into electrical energy. (To save the environment
we don’t like the dissipation of energy now-a-days, so we use energy saving
bulbs more instead of using light bulbs where light is produced due to heating.
We see the transformation of heat energy into light energy from heated gas
iS particles of flame of a candle where heat is generated from chemical energy or
“from the filament of a bulb.

116 Physics
(d) Mechanical Energy
When electrical energy is produced in a generator, then actually electrical energy
is produced by rotating a coil of wire in a magnetic field by utilizing the
mechanical energy. Heat energy is always being produced due to friction, there
mechanical energy is transforming into heat energy.
(e) Light Energy: Light is an electromagnetic wave and we can see a definite
range of the wavelengths of this wave, we call this light. Waves of wavelength
more or less than this range is present in nature and we have generated those in
different ways. For example, in a microwave oven, we convert this
electromagnetic wave into heat energy. Now-a-days using solar cell light is
transformed directly into electricity. Now-a-days the uses of photographic plate
is decreasing day by day, but all of us know that the presence of light in a photo
sensitive photographic film generates chemical energy.
Steam
Generator
Nuclear -
| reactor aA, Generator Coking
. |= 4 ZB L wer
;
Figure 4.05: Structure of a nuclear power center
(f) Mass: You are definitely surprised seeing the word ‘mass’ suddenly in
different types of transformation of energy. When we mean energy, then we
never imagine the mass as energy directly. But Einstein showed using his laws
of relativity, E = mc? and with the help of this equation he informed us about the
possibility of transformation of mass into energy. In the nuclear bomb, the mass
was transformed into energy, where a huge amount of heat, light, and sound
energy destroyed the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. This process of energy
transformation can be used not only in nuclear bombs but also in nuclear power =
N

Work, Power, Energy 117
station. Though heat is produced here directly, using this heat energy steam is
produced and this steam is used to rotate the turbine, then this rotating turbine
generates electricity in a generator(Fig: 4.05).
We have to know an important matter though such types of transformation are
taking place around us. Although there is available energy, but this energy
cannot always be used. In the oceans of the earth, there is a huge amount of
energy, but we cannot use this energy. (Sometimes using this energy cyclones
destroy cities, habitations!) When energy is transformed from one form to
another form, then a part of it is dissipated. Actually this dissipation occurs in the
form of heat energy and this cannot be regained for further use. This dissipation
of energy actually is not the limitation of technology. It is a rule restricted by
physics.
At the very beginning of learning science many don’t know it and they try to
make an everlasting machine for transformation of energy from one form to
another form. (A motor is rotating the generator and producing electricity, again
using this electricity the motor is rotating. This is an example of perpetual
machine. It will never work).
4.6 Relation between mass and energy
You know, in the theory of relativity of scientist Einstein it is said that mass of
an object and energy are identical things. If the mass m is transformed into
energy, then this energy is F, and its amount is E = mc’, here c is the light
velocity. The velocity of light (3x10* m/s) is huge, if it is squared it becomes
huge also, it means if we can transform a little mass into energy, we will get a
huge amount of energy, in a nuclear power plant just this thing is done.
In a nuclear power plant, one of the fuels that are used is uranium 235. Here
there are 92 protons and 143 neutrons. Its amount in nature is very small, only
0.7%, its half life is 703,800,000 (704 million) years. A uranium 235 nucleus can
capture another neutron very easily (if the speed of that neutron is small).Then
the uranium 235 nucleus becomes very unstable, then it is divided into two small
nuclei Kr? and Ba'!. In addition to this, three more neutrons come out
(Figure 4.06), which is depicted in the equation below. If anyone finds out the
mass that remains in the left side of the equation and compares it with the mass
that remains on the right side, will see that on the right side mass is less, the less

~ amount actually emerges out as energy governed by the equation, E= mc’ .

5S in + 738U > $2Kr + 143Ba + 3in

118 Physics
Kr
Figure 4.06: Energy production from nuclear reaction

In this reaction, three neutrons that have come out, actually come out with high
speed, so other uranium (?33U) nuclei cannot capture them very easily. If by
some means their kinetic energy can be lowered, then they will be captured by
other uranium (783U) nuclei and thus will break it creating some more energy
and releasing three new neutrons. In a nuclear power plant, this work is done, so
when the speed of the emerging neutrons becomes low, they again break other
nucleuses and this process continues. This process is called a chain reaction.

In this process, a huge amount of heat energy is produced, using this heat energy
water is vaporized and turbine is rotated with the help of this vapor and
electricity is produced from the generator. This type of power plant is called a
nuclear power plant. It is possible to get thousands of megawatt power from such
a power plant very easily. The wastage material that is produced after the nuclear
reaction is terribly radioactive; so many types of precautionary measures have to
be taken when processing them. If the excess neutrons that emerge after a
nuclear reaction are absorbed somewhere else by any means, then the nuclear
reaction ceases. There is a special type of rod called a control rod to absorb the
neutrons in a nuclear reactor. These are used to control the nuclear reactor.

%
ES

Work, Power, Energy 119
4.7 Power
The term ‘power’ is used a lot of times in our daily lives, not that the term is
always used for good purposes! But it has a definite meaning in physics; power
is the rate of doing work. That is, if work W is done in time t, then power P is:
Ww
pP=—
t
We have seen before that work is nothing but transformation of energy. As
energy can’t be destroyed, so it is only being transformed by doing work. So we
can say, if we desire, power is the rate of transformation of energy. As work or
energy is a scalar quantity, then power is also a scalar quantity.
We have known about different quantities, their units, and tried to know their
dimensions in every case while learning physics. Unit and dimension of power
are:
Unit of power: W (Watt)
Dimension of power: [P] = ML?T-?
Though we have known it here for the first time, it’s unit is very familiar to us.
If 1 Joule work is done per second then we say, work done is 1 watt or
transformation of energy takes place. If we switch on a light bulb of 100 watt
that means, in this bulb 100 W energy is being spent in each second. When we
read in the newspaper that a 1000 MW nuclear power plant will be built in our
country that means in that power plant, 1000 x 10° W electrical energy will be
produced in each second.
4.8 Efficiency
We have said earlier that a certain amount of energy is wasted every time while
transforming energy from one form to another form. So we have to give a little
more energy than the amount of work we want to do. We use various types of
machines and engines in our day to day lives. It is seen always that energy is
wasted due to friction or some other causes. That is why almost always we need
2 to measure how efficiently a machine or engine is using energy. So, we use a
S
N

120 Physics
new quantity called efficiency. Efficiency can be expressed in percentage as:
— __ amount of work __ amount of work —energy wasted
Efficiency ~ energy given 8 100 = energy given x 10G
@) Example
Question: If an object of mass 10 kg is lifted 10 m in 15 s using a motor of 1000
W, then what is the amount of energy wasted? What is its efficiency?
An :
Swer: Amount of work: 10 x 9.8 x 10] = 9,800]
Energy given: 1000 x 15J/= 15,000]
Energy wasted: 15,000 — 9,800 = 5,200/
Effici = 2800) X 100% = 65.3 ¥%
iciency = 15,000] h = 65.3 %
You will be surprised to know that, energy is wasted in every step of production
of electricity in a power plant, and if all these wastages are taken into account,
efficiency of the power plant can drop down to 30%.
Question: If 10% energy is wasted in every step, what is the efficiency in
4 steps?
Answer: 0.9 x0.9 x0.9 x0.9 = 0.6561
Or 65.6%
2
8

Work, Power, Energy 121
Investigation 4.01
Physical ability

Objective: To find out the physical ability of a student

Instruments: A clock and a ruler

Procedure:

1. A building which has stairs to reach the first or second floor.

2. Count the number of steps of the stairs and measure the height of
each step. Multiply these two to find out the height of the first or
second floor from the ground.

3. Measure your mass on a weight measuring machine.

4. Climb the stairs as fast as you can, measure the time needed
using a clock.

5. In a similar way, measure mass of the other students in the class and
collect information about the time needed for them to climb the stairs.
Put the data in the following table.

6. Find out the physical ability of your friends and yourself.

Height of the roof: h=.........

Acceleration due to gravity: g = 9.8 m/s”

Name of the} Mass Time required ingh Average

to reach Power= —— W
student (m)ke the roof (t)s £ Pewer
Find out the mean physical ability of all the students and see whether your
physical ability is more or less than that.
Forma-16, Physics, Class 9-10

122 Physics
4.9 Role of Energy in Development

There is a very close relationship between development of a country with the
uses of energy. To speak the truth, the use of energy may be considered as the
first parameter to see how much developed a country is.

We should pay our first attention to education for the development of our
country. A lot of students in our country are studying in schools, colleges and
universities. We have to ensure an adequate supply of electricity to run these
institutions properly. They need light for studying at night and their studies are
hampered if the electricity supply is not ensured. Laboratories are to be used
and, computers and networks are to be kept active for higher education, and
which has no alternative other than the supply of electricity.

Agriculture plays an important role in the economy of our country. As the
country is small, amount of suitable agricultural land is less, and it is further
decreasing. Our country has achieved self sufficiency in food by growing two or
more crops in this agricultural land. For this reason, arrangements for irrigation
are to be made in the agricultural land without waiting for the natural agriculture
alone. Without energy supply this is not possible at all. Electricity or fuel is
required to run the pumps for irrigation. Fertilizers are needed for agriculture
and the necessary production is not possible without electricity and gas supply
in fertilizer factories. Tractors are used to cultivate lands and for processing of
crops, supply of fuel needed has to be ensured for tractors.

After agriculture, energy supply is needed to ensure health services. A healthy
environment is needed for a sound body. In a densely populated area like
Bangladesh, energy is required for creating a healthy environment and
processing wastage. Energy is needed for pure water supply. Electricity supply
can not stop for a single moment for health services in hospitals.

Other than education, agriculture and health services, energy is must for the
communication system, industries, mills and factories and creating the
infrastructure of a country. That’s why; power plants are to be built through
proper planning in our country to prevent shortage of energy in the future.
Misuse of energy is to be stopped and search for gas continued in new gas fields.
As the requirement of energy supply has increased quite a lot in the
country, establishment of a nuclear power plant may be considered as a possible
solution. S

Work, Power and Energy 123
(?) Exercise

General Questions

1. Why the work done by frictional force is always negative?

2. Ifa spring is cut into two pieces, the spring constant k of the pieces will
increase or decrease?

3. To keep the earth dynamic which one is necessary? Energy or power?

4. Can mass be considered as energy?

5. If velocity is increased by 1%, what will be the percentage increase of kinetic
energy?

6. A match stick is rubbed with its box with a force of 5 N. The stick is dragged
3 cm,
(a) What is the energy used in rubbing?
(b) What is the power needed if it takes 0.5s to drag the stick

7. The reservoir of a hydro-electric project is 800 m high from the sea level and
the power station is 250 m high. The water of a reservoir rotates a turbine
coming through the pipe. There is 20 x 10° liter water in the reservoir. If the
mass of 1 liter water is 1 kg, find the potential energy stored in the water of
the reservoir.

8. Aboy of 40 kg can reach the roof by the stairs in 12 s. The number of steps
of the stairs is 20 and height of each step is 20 cm.
(a) What is the weight of the boy?
(b) What is the height reached by the boy?
(c) What is the work done to reach the roof?
(d) What is the power he uses to reach the roof?

9. It is more advantageous to produce nuclear energy than the power station that
uses fuel because no green house gas is produced.

~ (a) What are the other advantages of using nuclear energy?
s (b) What are the disadvantages of using nuclear energy?

124 Physics
Mathematical questions
1. Change of velocity of an object occurs
due to the application of different forces at @
different times and this is shown in figure £ s
4.07. Among OA, AB, BC and CD, when ° {0 C
has positive, negative or zero work been a D
done?

time (s)
2. A girl of mass 50 kg has gone up the ; —
stairs at a height of 5 m in 10 s. how much eigen 7s oonph aE velo Sane
work has she done? What is her power in
horse power?
3. When a force was applied on a stationary object of mass 5 kg for 10s, its
kinetic energy became 500 J. Find the amount of force applied.
4. Two objects of masses 10 kg and 5 kg
are attached to the two sides of a pulley and é) (.)
is kept stationary 5 m above the ground. If | .
you release the two objects, then the 10kg _<~%
mass starts to come down and the 5 kg yee yg
starts to go up. When the mass 10 kg has pomeranian
come down by 1 m and the mass 5 kg has t im
gone up by | m, what are the velocities of ee ea

i?
the two masses? a
5. Ifa body of 5 kg is released from a al
ee, nergy ‘te hohe ot the poeniil Figure 4.08: Two different masses
aungy attached to a pulley
2
8

Work, Power, Energy 125
OS) Multiple choice questions
Put the tick W ) mark on the correct answer
1. Which is the unit of work?
(a) Joule (b) Newton
(c) Kelvin (d) Watt
2. A body of mass 5 kg is kept at 20 cm, 30 m, 40 cm and 50 cm height
respectively. At which position is its potential energy a maximum?
(a) 20 cm (b) 30 cm
(c) 40 cm (d) 50 cm
Answer the question numbers 3 and 4 according to the following graph.
Y
15
_ 10 B
_ .
55 Cc NE
‘weight of car 1000 Kg
a t sec x
Figure 4.09: Velocily-time graph
3. In which part of the graph, velocity increases in proportion to time?
(a) part OA (b) part AB
(c) part CD (d) part DE
4. What is the maximum kinetic energy?
(a) 1.25 x 10°J (b)5x10J
(c) 1.25 x 10*J (d) 6.2 x 10° J
5. From the law of conservation of energy it is found-
i) Energy cannot be created or destroyed. The total energy of the universe
is a constant and unchangeable.
ii) Non renewable energy will be finished quickly, so renewable energy
S has to be used.
s iii) We have to use energy effectively and reduce system loss in order to

126 Physics
save energy.
Which one is correct?
a)i b) ii C) ii and iii d) i. ii and iti
6. What type of energy is stored when a body is stretched?
(a) Kinetic energy (b) Potential Energy
(c) Heat Energy (d) Chemical Energy

Creative questions

1. A boy of mass 40 kg and a young man of mass 60 kg start running from the
ground floor and reach the roof at the same time. Both of them ran with the
same velocity of 30 m/min.

(a) What is power?

(b) What do you mean by the work 50J?

(c) Find the kinetic energy of the young man.

(d) Explain with mathematical logic whether the power of both are equal or
not.

2. Jeny resides in the 5th floor of a building. The height of each stair is 20 cm.
There are 22 stairs in each floor and Jeny needs 4 minutes time to reach the
5th floor. Susmita requires 4.5 minutes to reach that 5th floor. It is to be men
tioned that mass of Jeny and Susmita are 64 kg and 75 kg respectively.

(a) What is the main source of energy?
(b) Write two similarities between work and energy.
(c) Calculate the amount of work done by Jeny.
(d) Between Jeny and Susmita who has the more power? Make arguments in
favor of your answer.
8
8

Chapter Five
State of Matter and Pressure
Pd a,
y "7 i :
. Wes . ‘ q : eS
Everest winner Nishat Mojumder is breathing using oxygen an cylinder at the peak of Mt. Everest
We are familiar with three states of matter- solids, liquids and gases. Among
them liquids and gases can flow so they are also called fluids. In this chapter we
will analyze and see how matter exerts pressure in its three states. Not only that,
elasticity is a special property of matter. We will also discuss how the property of
elasticity works in the solid, liquid and gaseous state.
Basides solid, liquid and gas, there is another state of matter named plasma, we
will also try to understand why this state is called the fourth state of matter.
=
8

128 Physics
® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-

e Explain the change of pressure with the change of force and area.

e Determine the expression for pressure at a point in a liquid at rest

e Explain the upward pressure on submerged bodies in a liquid

e Explain Pascal’s law.

e Demonstrate practical application of Pascal’s law

e Explain the theory of Archimedes.

e Explain the density.

e Explain the usage of density in our everyday lives.

e Explain why object float on water.

e Analyze the causes of accidents in the waterways of Bangladesh.

e Explain the atmospheric pressure.

e Determine atmospheric pressure by using the height of the liquid column.

e Analyze the change of atmospheric pressure with the increase of height.

e Analyze the effect of change of atmospheric pressure on weather.

e Explain stress and strain.

e Explain Hooke’s law.

e Explain the molecular kinetic theory of matter.

e Explain the plasma state of matter.

=
R

State of Matter and Pressure 129
5.1 Pressure
Though we use the word ‘pressure’ in our everyday conversation in many ways,
the word has a definite meaning in physics. We have talked about applying many
kinds of forces at different times in the previous chapters. But how the force will
be applied was untold. For example you can push a stone with your one hand,
two hands or with your whole body (Fig. 5.01). Every time though you apply the
same amount of force, but the pressure will be different. In the first case you
applied force through the area of your palm. If your applied force is F, area of
your palm is A then the pressure
put
A
Unit of pressure: or Pa (Pascal)
Dimension of pressure [P] = ML~1T~?
Therefore, in the second case because of using two hands, the pressure will be
half as the area through which the force is being applied is doubled. In the third
case, you applied force through your whole body, so the area through which
force is applied will increase more and pressure will be decreased more.
Force is a vector, so you may think that pressure P is a vector! But the interesting
matter is pressure P is a scalar quantity and if we want to write it perfectly then
it should be written like as:
F=PA
: ~~
i a & \— ( LER
{ ~ > N ‘ Z
| ee < Bl ae er > | et _s
ao 2 D>. Se 42 -* Se 3:
Figure 5.01: Pressure depends on the area through which force is applied
Forma-17, Physics, Class 9-10

130 Physics
Therefore, area itself is considered as a vector! A vector must have a magnitude
and the direction. The amount of area is the magnitade of vector, the
perpendicular on the area is the direction of the vector.
Since pressure is a scalar quantity, it has no direction. It is so necessary, because
the concept pressure is more necessary for a liquid and gas than the solid. When
liquids and gases apply pressure then actually it does not depend on the
direction. We will see this matter very soon.
@®) Example
Question: Let us assume your mass is 50 kg, area of one side of your body is 0.5
mand bottom area of your two legs is 0.03 m?. What pressure will you apply on
the floor when lying down and while standing ?
Answer: Mass is 50 kg, therefore weight is: 50 x 9.8N = 490N
Pressure when lying down, p = 20:8 = 980 N
0.5 m2 m?

: 490N N
Pressure when standing, P = 03m2— 16,333 au
You see less pressure is applied when lying down. For this reason when one falls
in quicksand he has to lie down so that the applied pressure becomes lower and
he does not submerge quicksand.
Again the opposite is also true, if the area of force applied is less, then the
pressure increases. The area of the sharp edge of a nail is very small. So when
the sharp point of the nail is placed on a wood or wall and hammered on the flat
back head of the nail, the force exerts pressure through the sharp point on the
wood or wall. As the area of sharp edge of the nail is just a point so pressure is
very high and the nail can easily penetrate the wood or wall. This is alsotruein ,
the case of a knife. Its sharp edge is narrow, so it can apply more pressure and $

State of Matter and Pressure 131
it is possible to cut easily. Another name of the unit of pressure is Pascal (Pa),
when 1 N force is applied on an area of 1 m? we get 1 Pa (1 Pascal) pressure.
5.2. Density
We need to have a clear idea about density before understanding pressure of
liquids and gases. Density is the amount of mass per unit volume, i.e. if mass of
a body is m and volume is V, then density is:
-™
PSV
Unit of density: kg/m? or gm/cc Table 5.01: Density of some na
(gm/cc)
Density of some familiar substances is
piven intable'S.O1. Hereisagood thing | Cok | oz |
to remember, if temperature increases | Wood || 04-05 |
or decreases, volume of a substance can Human body
be increased or decreased. Since there is WwW
! ,
no change in the mass, the density of 'Ghss «| 260 si
substance may change with s
temperature. For this when we talk
about density of a substance, usually we
need to mention the temperature at
which the density is measured.
«> Example
Question: 0.25 kg salt is dissolved in 1 kg water, so that the total volume becomes
1200 cc. What is the density of this water?
Answer: 1 cc is lcm’ therefore
S 1 cc =(10m)3 =10%m?

132 Physics
. . 1 kg + 0.25 kg 3
Density of the salted water: p= 7200 x10-em3 = 1.04 kg/m
Question: Density of Dead Sea water of Jordan is 1.24 kg/liter. What is the
volume of 1 kg water?
Answer: | liter is 1000 cc or 10° m? |
Therefore, density of Dead sea water,
kg 1.24 kg 3 3
p= 1.24 liter 10-2 m? > 1.24 x 10° kgm
Therefore, volume of 1 kg water:
Vous iks = 0.81 x 10-3 m3
“> 124x10?kem> m
or 0.81 liter
Example: What is the density of the nucleus? What is the mass of 1 tea
spoonful of nucleus?
Nucleus consists of neutrons and protons. Mass of one of them is 1.67 x 10-2” kg,
Their approximate radius is 1.25 fm = 1.25 x 107*° m . Therefore, if we can
calculate the density of neutron or proton, it can be considered as the density of
the nucleus!
m 1.67 X 10727 k;
Density of nucleus, p = 77— = ee = 0.204 x 1018 kg/m?
You need to guess how big this number is! One tea spoon contains
approximately 1 cc materials.
Therefore, mass of 1 tea spoon nucleus is:
m = 0.204 x 1018 kg/m3 x 10-§ m3 = 2 x 1011 kg
It is roughly the collective mass of all the people of the world. S

State of Matter and Pressure 133
We can see it in another way. An atom has neutron-proton in its nucleus,
electrons remain outside. Mass of an electron is 1800 times less than the mass of
neutron-proton. Therefore mass of an atom is really the mass of its nucleus. It
does not matter too much loss or gain if electrons are not considered. But the
things we see around us, their shapes are not the volume of the nucleuses.
Volume of the substances come from the volume of their atoms. Electrons
revolve around the very tiny nucleus comparatively in a bigger orbit. Radius of
an atom is nearly 1,00,000 times bigger than that of a nucleus.
Therefore we can say in another way, if we can gather all the people of this world
and can create pressure to extract all nucleuses by breaking the atoms present in
their body and then if we put them together, these will be confined in a tea spoon.
5.2.1 Uses of Density in our Daily lives
Density plays a vital role in our daily lives. Sometimes we do not notice it
separately. For example, when we take water in a pot and let it be heated, after a
while water starts to boil. It occurs because when the water in the lower portion
of the pot becomes heated and expands, then its density decreases. As the density
becomes less, that water goes up and the cold water in the neighborhood comes
down. After some time this water also becomes heated and goes up and so
within a short period of time the water starts to boil. (The process of heating gas
or liquid in this way is called convection.) If density of water was not reduced
after heating, then it would not go up and we could only heat the water in the
lower part of the pot, by fire of the stove, and it would not be possible to heat the
whole water of the pot.
In intense sunshine in summer, those who have jumped into a pond have surely
noticed that though the surface water is hot but the bottom water is cold. Here
the heat comes from above and after heating, the top water density decreases and
remains above, the whole water of the pond can not be heated uniformly.
We have seen the balloons flying at the inauguration of various events. In order
to make balloons fly we need to insert gases lighter than air. Considering safety
they should be filled with inert helium gas, but helium gas is comparatively
expensive, so frequently it is done with hydrogen gas which is very dangerous.
< Not only that, as methane gas is lighter than air, which is used as a fuel is
N

134 Physics
sometimes used also to fill the balloons, which is similarly dangerous!
We have often seen air balloons. Fires are lit under the balloons, which heat the
air inside and make it lighter and this helps lift the balloon up.
We can determine whether the eggs are good or rotten by submerging them in
water. If the eggs have gone bad their density becomes lower than that of water
and they start to float.
§.3 Pressure in liquids
Those who have jumped in water, they all know, after going in deep water a
pressure is felt. (Though atmosphere applies a pressure on us but we don’t feel
it, because our body also applies the same pressure.) Exactly what amount of
pressure will be felt after going in deep water or any other fluid is already been
mentioned. The pressure on you will have to be calculated from the weight of the
column of liquid on you. Let us suppose that you want to determine the pressure
of the liquid at depth 4. Imagine an area A there (Figure 5.02). The weight of the
column of liquid above this area will exert a force on A.
Volume of the liquid over a surface area
A is Ah. If the density of the liquid is p
then weight of this liquid or force is,
Therefore pressure, a
_F _ Ahpg _ ~
Peat a hee ef
Therefore, in a liquid of fixed density,
pressure rises with the increase of depth. =
In case of water, approximately for a ten
meter increase in depth, the pressure Figure 5.02: Pressure is created on
increases by an amount equal to the the lower surface due to the height
pressure of air (atmospheric pressure). of the liquid. S
AQ

State of Matter and Pressure 135
Density can be increased by compressing air or gas by increasing pressure but it
is not true for liquids (neither for solids !). Liquids cannot be compressed in the
same way with pressure, so its density cannot be increased or decreased. How
pressure of water is increases when we go from the surface to the bottom of a sea
is shown in figure 5.03. Since the density of water is nearly uniform, so the
pressure is increasing at the same rate. Starting from zero at the surface of the
sea, it is increased a lot at the bottom of the sea.
“= 400
bot | ~~] | | |
3 100
lil ft iT
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
depth (kan)
Figure 5.03: Pressure increases with the increase of depth
@) Example
Question: The whale can go to a depth of 2,100 m_ from the sea level. How
much pressure can it tolerate?
Answer: The whale can tolerate the pressure,
p= 200m _ 210.am
~ 10 m/atm a
=
S
XQ

136 Physics
Question: Under water, pressure increases by 1 atm for a 33 ft (10 m) increase
of depth. The divers have gone a maximum depth of 1000 ft (330 m) , how much
pressure did they have to tolerate?
Answer: Per 10 m depth, pressure increases by 1 atm or 1 bar. Then, for 330 m
cea 330m a3 at
10 m/atm am
Divers had to tolerate 33 atm pressure.
Question: Calculate the pressure at a depth of 50 cm for kerosene (density 800
kg m*), water (density 1000 kg m*), mercury (density 13600 kg m7’).
Answer: For kerosene,
pressure, p= hpg
P = 0.50 m x 800 kg m® x 9.8 N kg! = 3,920 N m2
For water,
P = 0.50 m x 1000 kg m®? x 9.8 N kg! = 4,900 N m2
For mercury,
P = 0.50 mx 13,600 kg m? x 9.8 N kg! = 666,400 N m2
Question: At how much depth of the liquids kerosene, water and mercury
pressure will be 1 atm ?
Answer: We know, for mercury pressure is latm at a depth of 76 cm. Density
of water is 13.6 times less than mercury, therefore depth of water will be 13.6
times more.
Therefore, depth for water: 76 cm x 13.6 = 1034 cm = 10.34m
Density of kerosene is 0.8 times less than water, therefore depth for kerosene
will be 1/0.8=1.25 times more.
Therefore, depth for kerosene: 10,34m x 1.25 = 12.92m
oS
Ss
N

State of Matter and Pressure 137
5.3.1 Archimedes Law and
Buoyancy
It is sure all of you know >
Archimedes Law and the story
behind this law. The law is easy,
‘If a body is immersed in a liquid, >
the weight of the body is reduced by ny
an amount equal to the displaced
liquid’. Now we will find this Law. mala h
A cylinder is immersed in some h
amount of liquid is shown in figure A
5.04 (This can be any object of any
shape, but for convenience of
calculation we took a cylinder). Let
us suppose that the height of the Figure 5.04: The weight of a body is
cylinder is h, cross-sectional area of reduced by an amount equal to the weight
top and bottom of the cylinder is A. of the displaced water.
We imagine that the cylinder is
immersed in such a way that the depth of upper surface is h, and depth of lower
surface is h,.
We have said many times that, pressure in a liquid (or gaseous) does not work in
a definite direction. It works in all directions. Therefore the downward pressure
acting on the upper surface of the cylinder is:

P, = hipg
and the upward pressure acting on lower surface is:

P, = hypg
Therefore the downward force acting on upper surface and upward force acting
on lower surface are respectively:

F, = AP, = Ahipg
F, = AP, = Ahapg

We do not have to think about how much force is exerted on the surrounding
surface, because the force experienced by the cylinder from one direction is
equal and opposite to the force from another direction and neutralize one anoth-
er.
Forma-18, Physics, Class 9-10

138 Physics
As the value of h, is greater than h,, so we see the value of F, is greater than
F.
Therefore the resultant force will be upwards and its value will be:
F =F, — F, = ACh, — hy) pg
F = Ahpg

As Ah is the volume of the cylinder, p is the density of the liquid and g is
gravitational acceleration, therefore the force exerted upwards is equal to the
weight of the liquid which has the same volume as the cylinder. This is precisely
known as the Archimedes Law. The upwards force is called buoyancy.
®) Do Yourself

Tie a big size potato or a fruit at one end of a rubber band and hang it,

see how it is elongated. Now let the potato or the fruit be immersed into

water, you will see the rubber band is compressed a little. Because in the

immersed condition the weight of the potato or fruit is less!
5.3.2: Floatation and Immersion of a Body
You have surely understood why an object floats and why an other object is
immersed. You know an object experiences an upward force due to buoyancy
which is equal to the weight of the water displaced by the object when it is
immersed in water. The object will float if that force is greater than the weight of
the object.
Just the portion of the object which is immersed so that it will displace water
equal to the weight of the body, only that portion will be immersed exactly, the
remaining part will not be immersed in water.
If the weight of the body is greater than the weight of the displaced water the
body will sink in water. But it seems that the weight of the body when immersed
is less than its real weight.
If the weight of displaced water can be made just equal to the weight of the
object anyway, then the object remains there where it is put in water, it will not
float above or even sink below. In our everyday life though it is not seen by us
but for the movement of the submarine under water this is done. g

N

State of Matter and Pressure 139
@) Example
Question: If a piece of wood floats on water what percent of it will be
immersed? (Density of wood = 0.5x10?kg/m? density of water
Py = 10? kg/m3)
Answer: In order to float, the weight of the wood must be equal to the mass of
water displaced by the immersed part of the wood. That is, if volume of wood is
V then its mass will be Vp, and if the volume of the immersed part of the wood
is V,, the mass of that amount of water is Voy,
Therefore, Vo=Vipy

V,  p _0.5x10* kg/m? _ eno

Va, 710? kg/m? * 100 = 50%
Question: A piece of wood of mass 10 kg went to sea floating from the river. In
the river water it was half immersed, how much of it will immerse in the sea?
(Density of sea water, Ps = 1.03 x 10%kg/m?)
Answer: Density of river water Py = 10° ke/ m
If volume of wood is V and density is P then weight of wood will be Vp

1

In river water the wood is half immersed Vo = 3 Pw

1 3 3
therefore, P= 5 Pw = 0.5 x 107 kg/m
Ifitis immersed by V, amount in the sea water,

Vp = Vip,
V,  p _ 0.5 x10? kg/m _ .
Vp, 103 x 10? kg/m? * 100 = 485%
Lo)
5

140 Physics
Question: Let’s suppose the weight of the gold crown of Archimedes is 10 kg in
air and 9.4 kg when immersed in water. What is the density of the crown?
Answer: If the volume of the crown is V and density is P then

Vp=10kg

Ve—Vpy = 9.4kg
Voy =Vp—9Akg = 10 kg — 9.4kg = 0.6 kg
0.6kg  0.6kg 3.3
V= Py” 10? kg/m = 0.6 x 10-3 m
_ 10kg _ 10 kg _ 3

P= T= Dex T0-F ms — 1666 ke/m
Real density of gold is 19,300 kg/m’, therefore it is understood that the crown is
mixed by impurities.
5.3.3 Causes of Accidents on Waterways in Bangladesh
Bangladesh is a riverine country and the whole country is connected by canals
and rivers. For this reason the waterway is one of the best medium of
communication. Boats, trawlers, launches or ships are involved in accidents as
like as other vehicles and human death occurs. There may be many reasons for
accidents on waterways. Of them the principal reasons are: disastrous weather,
collision with each other, fault of driver, fault of machinery, fault of design,
carrying more passengers than the allowed capacity, irregular storage of
accessories etc.
Following weather signals properly, it is possible to get rid of danger of
disastrous weather greatly. But suddenly the vessel can be affected by
norwesters and fall in danger. In these circumstances the experience and
responsibility of the drivers play a vital role. Another major reason of accident
on waterways are collisions: collision between two boats, collision with the
jetty, collision with the bottom of the river or with a shoal, all of them result in
different types of accidents.
If the accessories of a vessel are not stored properly it becomes the reason for the &

N

State of Matter and Pressure 141
accident. By changing the design of a vessel to carry large number of
passengers, without authorization, may be pushing it towards an accident. For
more profits if excess passengers are carried in a vessel then, due to the change
of the center of mass of the vessel, a big accident may also occur. During
disastrous weather accessories may be displaced due to rolling of the vessel in
big waves and thus the center of mass can change and accidents may occur.
5.3.4 Pascal’s Law
We have shown many times in this chapter that if pressure is applied on a liquid,
it is transmitted in all directions. You will understand that it is normal if you
think a bit. Because if the pressure is not transmitted into the whole liquid then
pressure experienced in one part will be more and it will be less in another part.
Therefore if we imagine a cross sectional area then force applied from one
direction will be more than the force from an other direction and due to this force
the liquid will flow until the pressure becomes equal. Pascal expressed this in the
form of a law, that is stated below:
Pascal’s Law: If pressure is applied on a liquid or a gas enclosed in a
container from outside then this pressure is transmitted equally and acts
perpendicularly on the surface of the container in contact with the liquid or
gas.
Applications of Pascal’s Law:
Using Pascal’s law some interesting machines can be fabricated. In figure 5.05 a
machine like that is shown. Here two cylinders are connected by a pipe. Let’s
suppose cross sectional area of one cylinder is A, and that of another cylinder 4,
, and you have applied force F, on the cylinder of cross sectional area A ,.Then
your applied pressure is F
1
P= A,
Now this pressure is transmitted through the liquid in all directions and it will
also be applied on the cross sectional area of the second cylinder.
Therefore the amount of force applied on the second cylinder will be
A
S F, = PA, = (=)
x 1

142 Physics
Therefore, you see amazingly that if the
magnitude of (4,/A,) is 100 then you T F
will get 100 times more force on the L Fi
second cylinder than the force you
applied on the first cylinder!
This process is very effective and is
used to control very large factories and
aircrafts. But keep in mind; it is the
principle of increasing forces. In this
process energy cannot be increased at
all. You will get back the same amount _ ;
of energy on the second cylinder that Figure 5.05: Force F, is obtained by
you have applied on the first cylinder,  @PPlying force F, which depends on the
cross section on which the force is
applied.

@) Example
Question: Show that you are getting the same amount of energy which is
applied though force is increased.
Answer: Let’s suppose force F, is applied on the smaller piston and the piston
moves by a distance 1,.
Therefore amount of work done wy, = F,1,

‘ ‘ A
Force on the bigger piston fF, = F, (Z)
As the water displaced by the smaller piston moves the larger piston by a
distance 1, by pushing, therefore

LA, = L,A2
F : Ay
Distance travelled by the larger piston: 1, = 1, (3)
2
=<
Rg

State of Matter and Pressure 143
Az Ay

Therefore amount of work done: W, = Fil, = F, (Z) 4 (Z) =F,l,
i.e equal to the work done by the smaller piston.
5.4 Air Pressure
Air has a pressure (Figure: 5.06). We do not feel this pressure separately because
a pressure is also exerted outside from inside of our bodies. So these two
pressures neutralize one another. There is no air in space, so there is no pressure
of air, so there is nothing to neutralize the inner pressure of our body and in such
an environment human bodies may explode instantly due to this inner pressure.
For this reason the astronauts always wear pressure protected space suits. The
pressure on the earth surface is 10°N/m?, which means if you imagine an area of
1m? on the earth surface, then the weight of the column of air on it is 10°N, this
is approximately the weight of an elephant !
Here, you have to understand something very clearly. It is true, weight is a force
and this force acts downwards. Force is a vector, so it has both magnitude and
direction. Pressure is not a vector, it has no
direction, so it is same in all directions at any
place. The place where you are standing or sitting Air column
now, the pressure which air exerts on you is the
same in left , right , up, down or in all directions.
It is true for air or liquid for all times.
If an air-tight casket made of thin tin or
aluminum can be made airless in any way, then it
will be folded or twisted, because in normal
condition, the outer air pressure was balanced by ;
inner air pressure of the casket in turn. After im ng tm
evacuating the inside air by pumping, there is ;
nothing inside to resist the outer air pressure.So Figure 5.06: The pressure
the outer air pressure will twist the casket of air comes from the
(figure 5.07). weight of the air column.

3

Q

144 Physics
You will observe that the casket will not be twisted only from the upper side, it
will be twisted from all directions. If the pressure comes only from the upper
side the casket will be twisted only from the upper side. As the pressure is same
in all directions, so it comes from all directions, and the casket is twisted from
all directions.
See
(a) (b) (Cc)
Figure 5.07: (a) After evacuating the air from the cube shown in (a) by pumping,
if the air exerts pressure only from the upper side, the cube would become flat as
shown in (b). But the pressure comes from all directions so the cube is compressed
as like the picture shown in (c)
@) Do Yourself
Take an empty one liter water
bottle made of plastic. Pour some
T heated boiling water carefully in
ete i the bottle and shake the inside
- & water. When the whole air inside
i > ar the bottle becomes hot, close the
SS eee cap of the bottle tightly. Now
ee —— wait for a while or keep the bottle
ay " in the flow of cold water and
oo make it cold. Some vacancy will
be created inside the bottle and it
Figure 5.08: Due to air pressure willbe fnlded and treisted due ba
the water bottle is folded and the pressure of the outside air.
twisted (Figure. 5.08) 2
S
N

State of Matter and Pressure 145
The pressure on the surface of the earth comes from the weight of the air
column. So if we rise above then the height of the air column above us will
decrease, the weight will also decrease, due to this the air pressure will also
decrease there. The matter is true and how this air pressure decreases with height
is shown in Figure 5.09. What you have to observe separately is that the air
pressure has decreased by half after reaching a height of five kilometer.
Generally, it may be seems that by reduction of pressure why does it not become
zero after the next five kilometer? There is a specific reason behind it. Air or gas
can be compressed by putting a pressure. So on the surface of the earth, air
becomes most compressed where the air pressure is maximum i.e. the density of
air is maximum there. As we go above, the pressure of air will reduce, density of
air will decrease as well.

There are many practical aspects of reducing density of the air with height.
When a plane flies in the

sky, then the friction of air

is a big problem. As high 4 | | | tT tl
upaswe go,thedensityof FM | | | tT
wind will be reduced, an a

friction will also be § 06 Kf | fp tt
reduced. Therefore, really 8 oa | NJ ft ft
big planes try to fly through =

as high as possible in the < 2 Hj~ wi ff
sky. Generally it may seem Pot | pe
that why do the planes not a 5 o TS BBS

fly height at very big as Height (km)

then the friction will be

decreased further. The Figure 5.09: Air pressure reduces with height.
reason is that the planes

need powerful engines to fly and oxygen is required to burn the fuel of those
engines. The amount of oxygen is less where the density of air is less as at great
heights. So at higher altitudes the engine of the plane will not work due to the
shortage of oxygen.

Those who climb to the peak of mountains face the same problem. The higher
they climb the problem of less oxygen due to reducing density of air is more than
the problem of less air pressure. For this reason those who climb mountains have
to practice not only how to survive in less oxygen but also have to learn how to
Forma-19, Physics, Class 9-10

146 Physics
do very hard job like mountain-climbing. So, they have to prepare their bodies.
@) Example

Question: How much oxygen is there at the peak (29,029 ft) of the Everest?
Answer: 29,029 ft = 8,848 m
We see from the graph that the pressure of the air at this height is only 35%
of the pressure of air at the earth’s surface. Therefore the amount of oxygen
there is approximately 1/3 of the oxygen on the earth surface.

5.4.1: Experiment of Torricelli

You have surely sipped cold drinks with straws. Have you ever thought how the
cold drinks reaches your mouth when you sip? Really this occurs due to the
pressure of the air. It would be very easy to understand if you try to drink the
cold drinks with a 10.5 meter long straw. (This thing is not realistic at all. But
acknowledge it for the sake of argument!) Then you would discover that the
drinks rise 10.3 meter and stop suddenly. No matter how much you try the drinks
do not rise any more. (We are assuming that the density of cold drinks is close to
the density of water!)

Mercury is not a liquid to take into mouth but for the sake of argument imagine
you try to sip it to get it in your mouth with a straw. If the straw is longer than 76
cm, then you will discover that the mercury has stopped just after rising 76 cm.
You try to sip the mercury does not rise any more! Density of mercury is 13.6
times more than the density of water, so elevated levels of more but the mercury

is 13.6 times lesser than the water.

Cold drinks will not rise up in a straw normally if we take a straw in the mouth
and put it into the bottle. Because the air pressure within your mouth is the same
as the air pressure of the liquid in which the straw is immersed. The two
pressures are equal so there is no effective force inside it. Now if you sip, which
means you try to create a vacancy in your mouth, then the air pressure becomes
low there. Then the liquid comes above through the straw due to the air pressure»
on the liquid surface. 8

State of Matter and Pressure 147

Scientist Torricelli did this experiment of the pressure of air using mercury in the

year 1643. He did not try to make the mercury rise with a straw by mouth. He

filled a one ended tube with mercury and he put it in a mercury filled container

in an inverted way. After falling

continuously the mercury stopped at a height

of 76 cm. The vacancy which you try to

create while sipping liquid, this vacancy was ;

created in the upper portion of the glass tube.

Air is exerting pressure on the mercury and

that pressure being transmitted everywhere

of the liquid, even down the tube. There is no ;

leakage above the tube, so air cannot exert 76:cm

pressure through that side. Therefore to

equalize the pressure there is only a pressure

under the tube, which is the pressure due to }

the weight of 76 cm mercury column!

The instrument by which air pressure is a

measured is called a barometer (Figure:

5.10) and till now the pressure of the air is

measured by a barometer which uses the Figure 5.10: Mercury

process of Torricelli. The height of the becomes stationary just at 76

mercury column becomes more than 76 cm if cm height due to air pressure.

the air pressure increases and if pressure decreases the height become less than

76 cm.

5.4.2 Air Pressure and Weather

Weather has a close relationship with air pressure. You have certainly heard

many times in weather news about the creation of depression in the sea, which

means air pressure has been decreased there. Then air starts to come from the

nearby areas of high pressure to the low pressure area and sometimes a spin is

created, in special situation that spin creates cyclone. You certainly know the

news of horrible cyclones in our country.

When you will read about heat and temperature in the next chapter, you will
co know that if the temperature of air is increased, then it expands, as a result
S density and pressure decrease. Air pressure decreases more effectively if the

148 Physics
amount of vapor inside it increases. Vapor is water, in a molecule of water there
is an oxygen and two hydrogen atom and molecular mass of water is
(16+1+1=) 18. The main element of air is nitrogen (atomic mass 14), being
created by two atoms it’s molecular mass is (14+14=) 28 and oxygen (molecu-
lar weight 16), is also created by two atoms, so, it’s molecular mass is (16+16=)
32, which is much more than the molecular mass of water. So, when there is
vapor in the air, water of less molecular mass takes the place of nitrogen and
oxygen of higher molecular mass and so the density of air decreases. If the
density of air decreases, the air pressure also decreases. So, it is possible to
predict about the local weather seeing the air pressure on a barometer. If the
barometer shows high pressure then it is understood that the air is dry and the
weather is good. If the pressure starts to decrease then it is understood that the
quantity of vapor is increasing. If pressure low then air from the nearby areas
will come quickly and storm and rain will start.
5.5 Elasticity
All of you must have, one time or another, elongated a spring or a rubber band
by pulling on it and then releasing it. You have certainly noticed that after
releasing the spring or the rubber band it regains its previous length. In physics,
pulling is termed as ‘applying force’ and the change of the length is termed as
‘deformation’. The word deformation is taken negatively in our daily life. But
you should not take it negatively here. It is just a change in condition!
Therefore, you understand that when a force is applied on an object, a
deformation happens inside it (and for this deformation, a counter force is
created). If the force is withdrawn, deformation stops and the object comes back
to its initial condition. This property of a substance is called elasticity. But it
should be remembered that the quantity of the applied force has a limit. If the
limit is crossed, the substance will not be able to come back to its initial
condition. A permanent deformation could take place. This limit is termed as the
elastic limit. After bending a rod a little, if it is released then it becomes straight.
If it is bent too much then it remains curved and does not become straight.
Therefore we can state this like:
Strain: The relative change in length or shape which is made by applying a force
from outside is called strain. Therefore, if force is applied on an object of «
length L, , and the changed length becomes L then it’s strain is: 1 — Lo s
Lo

State of Matter and Pressure 149
It is seen that the deformation has no -
unit, it is only a number. o q
Stress: The force per unit area that /
develops within a substance due to Lo
deformation is called stress. T L
If a force is applied on a body of cross T
sectional area A and as a result
deformation occurs, then if this
deformation develops a resistive force
F, then stress is: tr
F *
A
You see it is similar to pressure and its Figure 5.11: Deformation occurs in
unit is Pa or Pascal. a bar if stress is created by applied
force.

Hooke’s law: If we have understood stress and strain, it is easy to

understand Hooke’s law. According to this law, ‘within elastic limits stress

is directly proportional to strain’.

stress strain
Therefore,
Stress = constant = Strain.
That is, there is a constant relating stress to strain for each material; the name of
this constant is modulus of elasticity.
It will be easy to understand if we discuss two things:
(i) Let us suppose that the length of a wire of cross-sectional area Ais L, ,
a body of weight W is hanged from it and due to this hanged force the wire is
elongated from Z, to L (Figure 5.11). This elongated length creates a counter
force T in the wire (Here the letter T is used to mean the word ‘tension’.
Generally, when a wire is pulled then the force acting in it is named as tension).
o Therefore Stress is 7/A and strainis L— Ly
8 Lo

150 Physics
Table 5.02: Young’s modulus of different substances

| Bon | 9 |
OT y(t)

~Alwmimm |_|
Here, Y is a constant. The name of this constant is Young’s modulus. As strain
has no unit, the unit of Y is Nm? Young’s modulus of some substances are given
in the table 5.02.
@) Example
Question: How the length of a substance changes with the change of the value
of the Young’s modulus?
Answer: Rate of change of length

L-ly_1 ¢)
ly  ¥
Therefore, if 7/A remains the same, the higher the value of Y is, change in length
will be less.
(ii) Let us consider, in normal condition a gas of volume J, is contained in a
cylinder.
Due to the application of pressure P, its volume is reduced to V (Figure 5.12).
Here P is the stress and the Strain is: y _ y
——2
Rg

State of Matter and Pressure 151
Therefore, we can write
Pe C = vo)
Vo
V—Vo
p=a (=)
Here B is a constant and is called the bulk modulus of elasticity. Unit of B is Nat?
or Pascal.
| |
| £ \
Figure 5.12: If pressure is applied in confined air, air is compressed.

5.6 Three States of Matter: Solid, Liquid and Gas

You certainly know that, everything of the universe is created by molecules!

(in fact, molecules are not fundamental particles, molecules consist of atoms,

atom consists of electros and nucleus, nucleus consists of protons and neutrons,

proton and neutron consists of quarks and the scientists are assuming that

electrons or quarks are made of strings!). Since, the properties of a matter exist

in molecules, that is why, molecules are considered as the smallest unit of matter.

For example, all properties of water exist in a water molecule, but when it is split

into atoms it does not exist as water. There will be one oxygen and two hydrogen
~ 2oms, both in the gas form. Whether the substance is solid, liquid or gas depends
= on how molecules are arranged within the matter. (Figure: 5.13) The most

152 Physics
familiar example of it is water; it can exist in three states, e.g. solid, liquid and
gas. Whether it is ice, water or vapor depends on how the molecules are within
it.
When a substance remains in the gaseous state, then its molecules are free, the
distance between one another is very large. When the substance is in a liquid
state, then though the molecule remains comparatively closer but they can move
with respect to one another. In solid state, molecules remain the closest, but can
not move with respect to the other.
le ve ve ve va ve ve ve Ye ve | aa. Sa as >
WOOCOTCOSOGT}, [Pang 0 a ®@ @
SD Baa TO ane? a. @ wo
> 4-4 4 4-4 6 444 Sa a2e .
fa vente veo ver Yale) ta ve ven\ a @- a >< | Dy -
SESS SLES Ss @ @ 7
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 5.13: (a) solid (b) liquid (c) gas.
The distance among the molecules of a gas are very large. Those substances have
no regular volume and shape. Molecules in a liquid remains closer and they have
a particular volume but no regular shape. In a solid, molecules are very close and
they are almost in contact with each other, so they have a definite volume and a
regular shape.
Ina gas, molecule can move freely, in liquids the molecules vibrate, and one can
pass through from one side to the other, in solids though the molecules can
vibrate but they can not change their position.
Normally we cannot see the molecules of solids, liquids or gases, we see it as
solid, liquid or gas. The properties of molecules which have been mentioned
above, are exhibited in their solid, liquid or gaseous state too.
hc)
~
S
“nN

State of Matter and Pressure 153

Gas : Molecular properties Reflection in gases

Molecules move beside one another Spread through the ‘ota ; volume of the
container in which it is kept.
Distance among the molecules is | Gas can be compressed by pressure
more, there exist vacant space
A molecule can move with respect to | Gas can flow easily

another

Liquid: Molecular properties Reflection in liquids

Molecules can move beside one Can flow easily, gain the shape of the

another container in which it is kept.

Molecules are very close together | Liquid cannot be compressed by

so there is no vacant space applying pressure

Solid : Molecular properties Reflection in solids

Molecules are rigid in their own There is a definite shape

position

There is no distance among the Can not be compressed by pressure

molecules

Molecules are confined to their own | Cannot be made to flow

position
5.6.1 Molecular Kinetic Theory of Matter
If a solid substance is kept on a table, the solid exerts a kind of pressure on the table, on
the area of the table which it touches. If we want to put some liquid on the table instead
of solid, it will not work; the liquid will spread over the table. Liquids have to be
contained in a pot and the liquid exerts pressure not only on the bottom of the container
but it exerts pressure on the walls of the container in all directions. (Ifa hole is created in
the wall of the container, the liquid will come out through this hole due to the pressure of
liquid.) If we want to put gas then it is not possible to put it in a open container, then it is
to be stored in a bound region and the gas will exert pressure on the bound surface in all
directions. Gas is contained in a balloon. If we make a hole on a balloon, air will come
out through this hole due to the air pressure.
Forma-20, Physics, Class 9-10

154 Physics
(@) Do Yourself

Put a piece of scotch tap on an air filled balloon. Now make a hole on the

balloon through the scotch tap with a needle. You will see that the balloon

does not burst but air is coming out.
We mentioned about pressure of gas but didn’t explain its reason. We can
explain the reason of pressure by the molecular kinetic theory. If a gas is kept in
a closed space then it puts a pressure on the walls of the container, this can be
explained with the help of the molecular kinetic theory of substance. In a closed
region the molecules of a gas starts moving randomly and every time it hits the
walls of the container it goes back due to reflection. Therefore a gas molecule
hits the wall with a particular momentum, and returns back with a different
momentum. You know to change the momentum of an object; a force has to be
applied on that object. Hitting the wall, the gas molecules apply a force on the
wall. According to Newton’s third law, the wall also applies a counter force on
the molecule thus reflecting the molecule.
An enormous number of molecules thus hit the walls of the container and this
combined force appears as the pressure of the gas.If the temperature of the gas is
increased, then the kinetic energies of the molecules will increase and the
molecules will hit the wall harder. This means the pressure will be increased.
We will see in the next chapter that due to the application of heat, temperature
increases and as a result pressure also increases.
5.6.2 Fourth State of Substance
Despite solids, liquids and gases, the three different sates of matter, substances
may have a fourth state named plasma. We know the number of the positively
charged protons in the nucleus of a molecule or an atom is equal to the number
of negatively charged electrons outside it. That’s why the combined charge of a
molecule or atom is zero. Under special conditions a molecule or an atom can be
ionized, one or more electrons of some atoms can be made free, then separately
the atoms do not remain charge neutral. A kind of a mixture of ions and electrons
is made. Though it stays like a gas but all of the properties of gas are not true for
it. Like we know, a gas has no fixed shape but a fixed shape of plasma can be =
made by a magnetic field. s

State of Matter and Pressure 155
Gases can be turned into plasma by giving excessive heat; plasma also be made
by a powerful electric field. In our house, plasma is created in a tube light. There
is also plasma in the luminous advertisement of neon light. The light which is
seen during thunder is also plasma and the substances which remain in the far
stars is also in the plasma state. At present, we use nuclear energy in fission
process by breaking a heavy nucleus. We try to use plasma for creating energy in
fusion process combining the light nucleuses and now this is a very important
field of research in physics.
®) Do Yourself
Density of a substance

Objective: Determine the density of a substance

Apparatus: Spring balance, a solid which can sink in water, water in a pot.

Theory: Dividing the mass of a body by its volume, density is measured.

Mass of the body can be measured by a spring balance. It is possible to

determine the volume of the body using the Archimedes law. After

immersion, the decrease of the mass in grams is the volume in cc (cm’).

Procedure: 1. Determine the mass of a body using a spring balance.

2. Tie the body with a thread and hang it from a spring balance
and determine the mass keeping the body inside the water.
3. Determine the density of the body.
Table: To determine the density of the matter
Number of | Mass of the Mass of the Volume | Density of
observaions| solid substance | solid substance} of the solid |the substance
M, gm when immersed 4 _M,_ em
: M, gm M,-M, cm M,—M, cm?
=z
8

156 Physics
(?) Exercise

© General questions

1. A piece of ice is floating in water

contained in a glass, after the ice melts the re

height of water in glass will increase or F

decrease? n .

2. Itis possible to float a whole ship in a a

few buckets of water. How? : |

3. Suppose you sit on a boat in a n oF ‘ 2%

swimming pool with a big stone. Youdrop [age La Ran EaaRN

the stone in the water of the swimming ann ees

pool from the boat. The height of the a

water in the swimming pool will increase — ciesiagaed ose

or decrease or remain the same? ———

4. Holy men claim that they can lie down on a bed of nails (Figure 5.14). You

can do the same, if you want, why?

5. Ifthe glass tube of Torricelli’s barometer is twisted instead of straight then

will it work ?

6. What is the relation among force, pressure, area?

7. What is density? What is its unit?

8. What is atmospheric pressure?

9. Is Torricelli’s vacuum a vacuum in reality? Explain

10, Establish a relation between pressure and height of a liquid.

Mathematical questions

1. Density of air is 0.0012 gm/cm’, density of gold is 19.30 pm/cm’, if 1 kg
gold is measured by a balance, what will be its real mass? %9

State of Matter and Pressure 157
2. What will be its height if kerosene is used to make a barometer instead of
mercury?
(Density of kerosene is 0.8 gm/cc)
3. A crown of gold and an equal weight fo
pure gold are hung from the two sides of a bar
and then immersed in water (Figure 5.15). If ake
we find that in water the weight of the crown Wey f
is less then what will you say about the “=
crown? Is it pure or impure? Why?
4. Two water filled cylinders are connected
by a pipe. The cross sectional area of the two |
cylinders are 1cm? and 1m? and two pistons aMdp
are attached with them. A person of weight | \-~/
70 kg is sitting on the bigger piston. How
much force will you have to apply on the &
smaller piston if you want to lift him? Figure: 5.15: Crown of gold and
pure gold is immersed in water
5. A weight of 10 kg is hung from a metal rod of 0.5 m length and 0.01 m? cross
sectional area. The elongated length is 0.501 m. What is the Young’s
modulus of this metal rod?
f S|
(= Goes
«if x SS ee EN ay
=
26 Figure: 5.16 : A man is lifted up by putting pressure on a hydraulic press
S
rox

158 Physics
OSS) Multiple choice questions
Put the tick (V ) mark on the correct answer
1. What is the name of the apparatus used to measure the atmospheric pressure?
(a) Thermometer
(b) Barometer
(c) Manometer
(d) Seismometer.
2. The amount of liquid pressure is —
(a) proportional to its depth
(b) proportional to area.
(c) Inversely proportional to density
(d) equal to acceleration due to gravity.
3. What is the name of the fourth state of matter? i
(a) Gas ,
(b) Plasma a,
(C) Solid eT i
(d) Liquid.
Give the answer of question no. 4 & 5 o2m
from the figure
4. How much pressure will be felt at the Ne
bottom of the container?
(a) 98 Pa (b) 980 Pa .
(c) 196 Pa (d) 1960 Pa Sy
5. If force F is applied on the free surface of the container, then this force-
i. will exert a pressure at the bottom of the container only.
ii. will exert a pressure on the curved surface of the vessel only.
iii. will exert a pressure in all directions of the vessel.
Which one of the below is correct?
(a)i (b) ii
(c) iii (d) i, ii, & iti
=
8

State of Matter and Pressure 159
Creative questions
Answer the following questions by ‘phe pte aero
observing the figure: Volume of water after
(a) What is density? a a
(b) Explain the cause of the floatation 62 cm?
of the body as shown in the figure. 52 cm’ Pe
(c) Determine the density of the body.
(d) Explain the effect of gradual
increase of temperature of the
liquid.
2. Fahim clamped one end of a rubber
band of length L, on a wall and hung a Figure 5.18
mass M at the other end. He saw that
the rubber band elongated to a length L,. It regain its initial condition after
removal of the mass. He records the result of his experiment in a table as shown
below.
Mass(ke) | o |oa| i [is[a2| 3/4 | 5 _
Length with
mass Z(cm)| 10 12 | 15 | 17 | 21 | 25 36
Length after
removal of 10 | 10 | 10 | 10 | 10 | 10 | 10.2 | 10.6
mass 7 (cm)
(a) Write Hooke’s Law .
(b) How stress leads to strain?
(c) If M=2.7 kg, then L=? Calculate it.
(d) Draw a picture of a machine which can be used daily by using the
information of the table.
z
&

Chapter Six
Effect of Heat on Matter

Heat is a kind of energy. From the concept of energy we may think that always
heat flows from higher heat energy to lower heat energy, but it is not true. In
which direction heat will flow, depends on the temperature. In this chapter we
will see how we can measure heat or temperature and what is the relation
between them.

Actually heat energy has come from the motion of molecules, atoms or their
vibrations. If the vibration of molecules of any solid object is increased to a great
extent, then molecules may go far from another one, that is, a change of state
may occur. In this chapter we will discuss the effect of heat on solids, liquids and ,
gases. s

Effect of Heat on Matter 161
® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-
e Explain heat and temperature.
e Explain the thermal properties of matter.
e Analyze the relationship among Fahrenheit, Celsius and Kelvin scale.
e Explain the increase in temperature with the increase of internal energy
of the substances.
e Explain the thermal expansion of substances.
e Explain the expansion in length, area and volume of a solid.
e Explain the real and apparent expansion of liquids.
e Explain specific heat and heat capacity.
e Explain the principle of measurement of heat.
e Explain the effect of heat in changing the state of matter.
e Explain melting, vaporization and condensation.
e Explain melting and boiling point.
e Explain the effect of pressure on melting point.
e Explain boiling and evaporation.
e Explain the latent heat of fusion and vaporization.
e Explain the cause of cooling and evaporation.
e Explain the influence of factors on vaporization.
Forma-21, Physics, Class 9-10

162 Physics
6.1 Heat and Temperature:
Heat is a kind of energy. We have seen that energy can do work. By applying
force it is possible to displace a body in the direction of the force, for example
heat is produced by burning fuel oil in a train or a car and this produced energy
creates motion in the train or car. So this new form of energy is called heat
energy like light, electricity or kinetic energy.
It is interesting that if we see on the molecular level i.e., looking at any substance
if we see its molecules, we should keep its name “kinetic energy” instead of the
new name “heat energy”. Because what we mean by heat energy is actually
nothing but the combined kinetic energy of the molecules of a substance. When
the molecules of a solid are heated then the molecules vibrate about their fixed
positions. The more the molecules are heated, the more the vibration increases.
If the molecules are heated enough the molecules become free by overcoming
the intermolecular forces among them. Then we call it a liquid. Then the
molecules move randomly among themselves. Since the molecules are in
motion, they have kinetic energy. The more the molecules are heated, the faster
they will move. If the molecules are heated more, they may be completely free
from their intermolecular forces. Then we call it a gas. The more a gas will be
heated, the faster its molecules will move. The more the velocity, the more the
kinetic energy.
Since we cannot see the molecules with our naked eyes, we cannot see their
movement, so we try to understand the whole thing indirectly, we call it heat
energy and try to explain the states of matter considering it as temperature. So
we can say that the energy which is obtained due to molecular vibration or
motion of a substance is called heat. As it is a form of energy like other energy,
so its unit is Joule (J). There is another unit of heat which is calorie (cal). The
amount of heat energy required to increase the temperature of 1 gm of water by
1° C is called 1 Calorie. 1 Calorie is equal to 4.2 J. You have heard about the
word “calorie” which is used in case of food. Food Calorie means actually the
amount of energy obtained from a definite quantity of food and the unit for this
is kcal or 1000 calorie. But we will not worry about this now. Here we will
discuss heat energy not energy gained from foods. 2
S
NQ

Effect of Heat on Matter 163

6.1.1 Internal Energy

If we accept heat as energy, at the same time we have to know how heat energy

is transferred from one place to another. Generally we think that energy always

flows from higher energy to lower energy. The amount of heat energy that is

contained in a glass of water is much more than that of a small hot pin. But if we

put the hot pin into the water, a small amount of the energy of the pin will

transfer to the water of the glass. Because of this, the flow of heat energy does

not depend on the amount of heat, it depends on the temperature. If two bodies

of different temperatures come in contact with each other, always heat transfers

from the body of higher temperature to

the body of lower temperature until the

temperature of the two bodies becomes

equal.

But we have not yet defined the

quantity called “temperature” yet. But

it is used so much in daily life that

nobody faces problems in RADA

understanding what temperature B= e2e=2 ==

means. According to physics we can GP fL========

say that it is the measure of average Se Se

kinetic energy of the molecules of ‘ : .

matter. From our experience we can Figure 6.01: Temperature is as like

say that temperature is the thermal aan her Le 1888

state which indicates whether an object =

absorbs or rejects heat when it comes in contact with another object. To

understand this, we can compare it with the height of the surface of water in

(Figure 6.01).

If the heights of the upper surface of water in the two containers are different,

and they are connected with a pipe, the flow of water will not be determined by

which container contains more or less water. Water flow will depend on the

height of the upper surface of water of the containers. Always water will flow

from higher height to lower height until the two heights become equal. Here we

can compare the amount of water with heat energy and the height of the surface
a of water with temperature. It is also true in case of temperature that the heat
S flows until the temperature of the two objects becomes the same.

164 Physics
6.2 Thermometric Properties of matter

To measure the temperature the special properties of special substances are used.
The property of a substance which changes with temperature and, measuring the
change accurately, the temperature can be measured, is called thermometric
property. The property of a substance which is used to measure the temperature
is called thermometric property. You have seen the mercury thermometer that
measures the temperature of our body. Here mercury is the thermometric
substance and the volume expansion of mercury is its thermometric property.
There is also an alcohol thermometer except mercury thermometer in which
alcohol is the thermometric substance and the expansion of alcohol is the
thermometric property. In a gas thermometer, gas is the thermometric substance
and the pressure of the gas at constant volume is the thermometric property. As
the resistance of metal changes with temperature, so the resistance also is used
as the thermometric property. Different thermometric substances are effective at
different temperatures, so to measure the very high or very low temperature the
special thermometric property of a special thermometric substance has to be
used. Copper and Constantan metals are used as thermometric substances. If two
junctions of different metals are kept at different temperatures, it produces an
emf and by measuring this, the temperature can be calculated. This
thermocouple is used in industries on a large scale because it can measure the
temperature from -200°C to 1000°C.

If we get the idea of temperature perfectly, then we have to know its unit in
addition to, the important question of how we will measure the temperature. The
conventional unit of temperature is Celsius (°C), generally it is said that on this
scale at one atmospheric pressure and at the temperature at which ice melts is
called 0°C and at the temperature at which water boils is assumed to be 100°C.
But it is interesting to know that when scientist Celsius introduced this scale of
temperature, he assumed the temperature of boiling water as zero degree and the
temperature of fusion of ice as 100 degree; opposite to the present scale!
Although we use the Celsius scale of temperature in our daily lives, its
international unit is Kelvin (K). Adding 273.15°C with the reading of Celsius
scale we get the reading of Kelvin scale. If we consider only the difference of
temperature, there is no difference between Celsius and Kelvin scale. That is, the
increase in temperature by 10 °C is the same as the increase in temperature by S

Effect of Heat on Matter 165
10 K. But if it is asked that what is the temperature of this room, the answer is
30 °C, but in Kelvin scale it will be (30+273.15) =303.15 K. You may think that
the two scales are completely same but the difference between the readings of
the two scales is 273.15 °C, what is the reason behind this? The reason behind
this is very wonderful. Generally, we may think that we can imagine any
7 3 temperature i.e., it may be very high or
ites t SI ffl2t2 e very low, but actually it is not true.
i HH HH There is no problem in imagining a
H Hl | temperature as high as you wish but it
Hi ‘ tt is not possible to imagine a
Hire Hy Te HiT temperature as low as you wish. There
i i | is a lowest temperature and any
il it it temperature below this is not possible.
ae CL tT Not only this, we can reach near this
1 + HH temperature but we can never reach at
H ofc Hi 2o73.15k HH 32F this temperature. This temperature is
1 Wp Cy called the absolute zero temperature.
On Celsius scale the value of this
temperature is -273.15 °C. Therefore,
Figure 6.02: Celsius, Kelvin and in Kelvin scale its value is zero Kelvin.
Fahrenheit scales of temperature In other words it is said that the Kelvin
scale has been made considering the

absolute zero temperature as zero Kelvin.
To make any scale of temperature two certain temperatures (or fixed points) are
needed. In the Kelvin scale one is absolute zero which is taken as zero degree.
Another one is the triple point of water. At this temperature and at a certain
pressure (0.0060373 atm) ice, water and water vapour can exist together, so this
temperature can be defined very accurately. In the Celsius scale its value is 0.01
°C and to make the similarity with Celsius scale its value is 273.16° in Kelvin

scale.
Besides, the Kelvin and Celsius scales there is an another scale called the
Fahrenheit scale in which the temperature of fusion of ice and vaporization of
water are 32°F and 212°F respectively. In the figure 6.02 three scales are shown
for comparison, where 0 °C is equal to the temperature 273.15 K, sometimes
co we take this as 273 K in our daily lives. This does not cause a major problem in
& our daily lives.

166 Physics
6.2.1 Relation among different scales:
A definite temperature is expressed in the Celsius, Kelvin and Fahrenheits scale
as T,, T, and T, respectively. Then we can write:
Te-0 Te - 273.15 _ Ty-32
100-0 37345-27315 212-32
Or,
Tc _T,—273.15  Tp—32
100 = 100 —S—t—éd118800
The readings of Kelvin and Fahrenheit scales with respect to T,, will be respectively:
Tr = Ty — 273.15°
5
To = 3 (Tp — 32)
@) Example
Question: At which temperature the readings in Celsius and Fahrenheit scales
are equal?
Answer: The relation between Celsius and Fahrenheit scale is
5
To = 3 (Tp — 32°)
9T¢ = 5Tp —5 X 32°
If 7, and T, are equal then we get:
4T, = —5 x 32° = —160°
Tc = —40°
That is, the temperature which shows - 40° C the same temperature also
shows - 40° F.
Question: At which temperature the readings in Kelvin and Fahrenheit scale are
equal?
Answer: The relation between Kelvin and Fahrenheit scale is
o> 6 a
Tq — 273.15° = 5 (Tr — 32°) S

Effect of Heat on Matter 167
9Tx — 9 X 273.15° = 5Tp — 5 x 32°
If T, and T, are equal then we get,
AT = 9 X 273.15° —5 x 32°
Te = 574,59°

Question: What is the temperature in Celsius if the temperature of a healthy

body is 98.4 °F?

Answer: The relation between Celsius and Fahrenheit temperature is

5
Te = 5 (Tr — 32°)
If T,, = 98.4°, we get
5
To = 5 (98.4° — 32°) = 36.89°
(i.e., it is nearly equal to 37°C)

Question: At which temperature the readings in Celsius and Kelvin scale are

equal?

Answer: Never.

6.3 Thermal Expansion of Matter

6.3.1 Expansion of Solids:

Volume of almost all objects increases to some extent if they are heated. It is not

difficult to understand the cause of heat and temperature if we explain them with

the help of an atomic model. We can imagine a solid as a collection of many

molecules. We can compare the molecular forces among them with a spring. We

have imagined a spring among molecules to show how molecules are arranged

in a solid as shown in figure 6.03. When the solid is heated, its molecules will
% vibrate. The higher the temperature, the more the molecules will vibrate. We
“have to improve this spring model to some extent to explain the real nature of

168 Physics
solids. We have seen in case of a spring the force by which it is pulled when it is
expanded to a certain distance and it pushes by the same force when it is
compressed by the same amount. This is not true completely for the
molecules of a solid. The amount force by which molecules pull each other
when they are moved away to a certain distance they push themselves by much
more force when they are brought close to each other by the same distance. That
is, this spring is a special type of spring. Less force is applied to extend but more
force is applied to compress it.

Now imagine that the molecules are oe

vibrating due to a certain temperature. ve piso a iy en

For being a special type of spring during lige , aie
vibrations molecules do not come very Sells Caso a

near but can move further away. Now if : & , :

the solid is heated more and the SS of ou Sy . “At,
molecules will vibrate much more. x - so
Already you have understood that since Ppa Pia

the molecules cannot come very close ‘OH

due to this special type of spring but can Figure 6.03: The molecules are
go very far easily, so all molecules will connected with each other by a
establish a new equilibrium to move imaginary spring.

away slightly from one another. When all molecules will move away from one
another, the whole solid seems to be expanded slightly.

Length, breadth and height of a solid are expand equally in three directions by
the application of heat. To analyze this expansion three quantities named
co-efficient of linear expansion, co-efficient of area expansion and co-efficient
of volume have been introduced.

Figure 6.04: Length, cross section and volume of a solid are increased by heating.
eI
3S
AQ

Effect of Heat on Matter 169
If the length of an object is L, at temperature 7, and the length is increased to L,
after increasing the temperature to T,, then the co-efficient of linear expansion
ais
_— (hz — Ly)/Ly
Tz _ Ty
so,
Lz = 1, +al,(T2 -T,)
Similarly if the area of an object is A, at temperature 7, and increasing the
temperature T, if the area is increased to 4,, then the co-efficient of area
expansion B is
B= (Az — A1)/A1
Tt, -T;
so,
Az = A, + BA, (Tz — T;)
Again similarly if the volume is V, at temperature 7, and if the volume is
increased to V,, then the co-efficient of expansion of volume is Y
_ (V2 — V1) /Vy
R=
so,
Vz = V, + WW (T2 — T1)
You see that the unit of three quantities a, B and Y is K-.
Dimension[a] = [8] = [y] = T~*
@) Example
Question: The length of a steel rod is 10m at 20 °C. If its length becomes
10.0167 m at 120 °C, then determine the co-efficient of linear expansion of steel
Answer:
Co-efficient of linear expansion,
Forma-22, Physics, Class 9-10

170 Physics
La —l4
a=—
Ly(T2 — 71)
Here, L,=10m
Ly = 10.0167 m
T, = 120°C
T, = 20°C
__10.0167m= 10m ys oct
~~ {0m(120T —-100T)
You have seen from the above examples that actually the value of the co-
efficient of expansion of solids is very small. For this reason, the three different
co-efficients a, B and Y were not necessary. For working we could explain the
linear co-efficient only. For example let us assume the matter of area expansion.
We see:
Az = Ay + BAi(T2 — T1)
But area A, is the product of length and width and if we consider the area of a
square whose length is L,, then its area, after increasing the temperature, will be
A, = 13 = [L, tol, (T -T,)/?
Or Az = 14 + 2aL3(T, — T,) + 07 Li (T, — T,)?
But A, = Lt
SO, Ag = Ay + 200Ay (Ty — Ty) + 07Ag (Ty — 7)?
We have seen that the value of a is very small, so the value of a? is smaller. In
fact it is so small that if we avoid the whole part with a7, then no problem will
arise in our analysis or calculation. So we can write:
Ay = Ay + 20A,(T2 — 7)
But we know,
Az = A, + BA, (T2 — 7) %
S
NQ

Effect of Heat on Matter 171
Certainly we can write:
Similarly we can assume a cube of L length, width and height. Its volume at
temperature T, is V, and the volume becomes /, after increasing the temperature
to T,, so we have
Vo = [Ly + aly (T, — 71)?
According to the same argument, also here if we avoid the parts with o? and o?,
then no problem will arise in our analysis or calculation. So only the first two
terms will be present, i.e.
V, = 13 + 3013 (T2 -T)..
But we know V, = 13
That is , V, = V, + 30V,(T2 —T1)
So, Vz = Vy + Viz — Ti)
Certainly we can write
In our practical life we have to keep in mind the matter of expansion of solids.
You have seen the gap between the rails of rail lines. This has been done taking
thermal expansion into consideration. If no space was left for expansion, the rail
lines would bend. Cavities develop in teeth due to lack of regular brushing. The
dentist fills these cavities with a special type of substance. The co-efficient of
expansion of the substance has been made very carefully which is equal to that
of the teeth. If the co-efficient of expansion were less than that of teeth, it would
come out from the cavity while eating something hot! Again, if the co-efficient
of expansion of the substance were greater, it would come out from the cavity of
the tooth while eating something cold! Many of the general people know the
matter of thermal expansion without studying physics. You will notice that when
the cork of a bottle is stuck, hot water is poured on it so that the cork becomes
c loose after expansion of the bottle.
>
N

172 Physics
@) Example
Question: Why does a glass crack when hot water is poured on it?
Answer: More expansion occurs at different parts of glass when temperature is
increased suddenly, this is why the glass cracks.
Question: The density of gold is 19.30 gm/cc and co-efficient of linear
expansion is 14x10 °C"'.What will be the density when the temperature is
increased to 100 °C ?
Answer:
; m
Density, P=
Here, V is volume and m is mass. Though the mass remains the same, the
volume increases when temperature is increased. So, if the temperature is
increased to 100° C, the volume will be :
Vi =V4+W(%—T) =V(1+3ax 100)
a=14x10-%°c?
Vi =V4+42x 1073)
=--_—__™ _____T x 9.9058 = 0.9958
P= Vas42x10) VX" anion
fp = 0.9958 x 19.30 gm/cc = 19.22 gm/cc

Question: What will be the density if the temperature is increased 1000°C more?
Answer: As the melting point of gold is 1064°C, so gold will melt.
6.3.2. Expansion of liquid
Liquids have no length or area. Liquids have only volume. So the expansion of
a liquid means its volume expansion. During measuring the expansion of a
liquid, we have to be alert, because a liquid is kept in a container. To measure the
co-efficient of expansion when the liquid is heated, the container which is also &

Effect of Heat on Matter 173
heated needs to be considered. So the expansion of a liquid in a container
observed is not real expansion, it is an apparent expansion. Therefore, to
measure the real expansion, the expansion of the container must be kept in mind
always. Usually, the expansion of liquids is more
than that of liquids. If it was not the case we could
not see the apparent expansion. It seems to be
apparent compression!
The most available example of the expansion of
liquid is a thermometer. These are many types of
thermometers, among them perhaps the clinical
thermometer (Figure 6.05) is the most familiar.
A glass tube contains mercury at the bottom. If heat
is applied, the volume of mercury is increased and it ( <— Fine curve
goes up through the capillary tube. To what extent it <— Mercury
teaches is the measurement of the temperature.
While measuring the fever by a thermometer, it isto Figure 6.05 : Fine curve
be taken out from the mouth or the armpit, avery fine _i8 made in tube, so that
curve is made at the bottom of the narrow tube. Due ™°"cury cam not fall in
to expansion, once the mercury level rises up, it so necinemniani
cannot come down even after decreasing the eae
temperature. Mercury is brought down by shaking.
Real and Apparent Expansion
It has been said earlier that a liquid is always heated in a container. If heat is
applied, the expansion of the container occurrs along
with the liquid. So the expansion of a container is kept (
in mind to measure the exact expansion of a liquid. A
The expansion of a liquid, without considering the B
expansion of the container, is called apparent
expansion. If the expansion of a liquid is measured
considering the expansion of the container, it is called
real expansion.
If a glass bulb with a long graduated stem is heated
liquid with filled up to mark A, first we observe that
the upper level of the liquid comes down to mark B Figure 6.06 : Real and
(figure 6.06). It will happen because due to the apparent expansion.
S application of heat the temperature of the bulb will
S increase before increasing the temperature of the

174 Physics
liquid, i.e., the bulb will expand a little bit.
After that if we continue applying heat, the height of the liquid will increase. As
the expansion of liquids is more than solids, we will observe that finally the level
of the liquid has reached mark C from B after passing the mark A.
If we multiply the height AB by the cross section of the tube, we will get the
expansion V, of the bulb. Again if we multiply the height B., by the cross section,
we will get the real expansion V, of the liquid. Here the apparent expansion V,
is
Va = Vi— Vp
6.3.3 Expansion of Gases
A solid has both shape and volume, so no problem arises in understanding the
expansion of the solid. Though a liquid has no definite shape, it has a definite
volume. So, we can explain or measure its expansion. It is very interesting in the
case of gases. Because neither does
c it have a definite shape nor a definite
9 volume. A gas takes the whole
N mii Gil volume of the container it is kept in.
If the same amount of a gas is kept in
be | containers of different volumes, the
i pressures of the gases will be
: 2 different. So, we can see that the
é increase of volume of a gas will be
j measured without changing its
| pressure as shown in the figure 6.07.
An object of definite weight is
Figure 6.07 : The volume of air placed on the piston of a cylinder so
is increased by applying heat. that it always applies equal pressure
to the gas contained in the cylinder.
By applying pressure, liquids or solids cannot be compressed very much. But a
gas can be compressed very easily. Therefore, at first we have to know the ~
relation between the pressure and volume of a gas. It is called the ideal gas s

Effect of Heat on Matter 175
equation and it is:
PV = nRT
Here P is pressure, V is volume, n is the amount of gas (measured in mole), R is
a constant (8.314 JK" mol) and T is temperature in Kelvin scale.
Now we can find out the co-efficient of expansion of a gas. At a certain pressure
if the volume ofa gas is V, at temperature 7, and the volume is V,, at temperature
f, the co-efficient of volume expansion B, of the gas will be:
B= VY - V/V
Po 12-7;
We know,
Hence
P(V, — V,) = nR(T2 — Ty)
Dividing the left side by PV, and the right side by nRT, we get:
w-VYU h-T%
UY TT
So, Va=VadM _ 1
!—-T, Ty
That is. ==
> Bp _— Ty
Therefore, you can see that the co-efficients of expansion of gases are not
constants at all. It is reciprocal to the temperature (7,"), i.e., the less the
temperature is the more the expansion of solid will be! In other words, at a
definite pressure and a definite temperature the amount of expansion due to
increase of temperature by one degree is less than the expansion due to increase
c of temperature by one degree at the same pressure but at low temperature.
S
N

176 Physics
(@)) Do Yourself
Take two balloons, put a small amount of water into one of them and air of
the same volume in another one. Now put the two balloons under hot water
for a small interval of time. You will notice that the balloon containing water
remains as before, because the expansion of liquid due to heat is smaller but
the balloons containing air has expanded in volume to a large extent,
because the expansion of gas is much more than that of liquid.
6.4 Effect of Temperature on Change of State
Already you have know that all solids consist of molecules and in solids
molecules attract one another from a certain position. If heat is applied, their
vibrations increase and the molecular bonds become weak. They start to move
rolling upon one another and we call it a liquid. If the temperature is increased
further, the molecules start to move freely. We called it a gas. Now we observe
this more deeply and we will be introduced to different quantities which are
telated to the change of state of matter.
When heat is applied to a solid, its temperature rises. (we will know later on at
what rate the temperature will rise and depends upon which factors.
If the temperature (at a definite pressure) reaches a definite value, the solid starts
to melt. This process is called fusion and the temperature at which the fusion
starts is called the melting point. If we continue to measure the temperature,
surprisingly we will notice that when fusion has started, the temperature of the
mixture of some amount of solid and some amount of liquid does not increase
any more even if heat is applied (as shown in the figure 6.08). During this time
the heat is used to loosen the intermolecular bonds of the molecules in the solid.
So, the temperature cannot rise because applied heat cannot make the
molecules move further. During fusion at a definite melting point the amount of
heat which is used to convert the whole solid into liquid, is called the Latent Heat
of Fusion.
x
§

Effect of Heat on Matter 177
On the solid being totally liquefied the temperature starts to increase again (as
shown in the figure 6.08). The temperature increases gradually and at one stage
the liquid starts to convert into gas. This process is called vaporization and the
temperature at which vaporization occurs is called the boiling point. Again,
everyone is being reminded that this boiling point depends upon pressure.
When the process of vaporization starts by absorbing the heat energy, the
molecules of the liquid start to become free from the molecular bonds among
themselves. Here also the temperature does not increase like fusion even if heat
is applied. During vaporization of liquid the amount of heat by which the whole
liquid is converted into a gas, that heat is called Latent Heat of Vaporization.
a ee ee
gl_| | | |

ge a A

PEE

B20 A

Sgt

ett tT | | ft tt

Time
Figure 6.08 : Melting and boiling point does not change during heat.

After converting the whole liquid into a gas the temperature of the gas continues
to increase if heat is being applied. If the temperature is raised to
extremely high levels, the molecules will become ionized and fourth state of
matter called plasma will start to form but this is something different.
All of us have seen at least one example of the process by which solids can be
converted into liquids and liquids into gases, that one is ice converted into water
and water into vapour. Although we do not see directly the latent heat of fusion
or latent heat of vaporization, but we have felt its effect. When we suddenly
come to an open place or in open air from a crowded or a closed place, then our
sweating body becomes cool. This is because during the vaporization of
sweat, the required latent heat of vaporization is absorbed from our body and our
body becomes cool. By applying heat solids can be converted into liquids and
liquids into gases, its reverse process also occurs. By extracting heat gas can be
Forma-23, Physics, Class 9-10

178 Physics
converted into liquids and liquids into solids. The process of converting a
gaseous substance from gaseous state to the liquid state is called liquification.
The process of converting a liquid substance from its liquid state to solid state is
called solidification.

During the change of state of matter, the transformation from solid to liquid and
from liquid to solid happens at a particular temperature. But without reaching
that particular temperature a substance can transform from solid to liquid, liquid
to gas or directly from solid to gas. It is not difficult to understand this if we go
back to the molecular model of a substance. If a molecule somehow gets
sufficient energy and due to this, its kinetic energy is increased sufficiently then
the molecule may come out from the surface of solid or liquid substance. Since
a large number of molecules from air are continuously striking the surface of
solid or liquid, so sometimes some of the molecules of solids or liquids may
obtain the required energy to become free. The more the surface area is, the
faster the process will be. All of us have seen this process e.g., a wet object dries
by itself. For this the temperature does not need to be at the boiling point. Drying
means the evaporation of the molecules of a liquid. This may happen at any
temperature and the process is called evaporation.

At the time of evaporation, water absorbs the latent heat of vaporization; the
reverse process is also true. If vapors transform into water by any process then it
delivers heat. During a cyclone the air filled with water vapour goes upwards,
when the vapor transforms into water the latent heat of vaporization is released
as energy. This energy acts as the source of the devastating energy of a cyclone.
Dependence of Vaporization

You have seen that wet clothes do not dry easily in the rainy season. On the other
hand in winter the clothes become dry naturally when they are kept inside the
house. After washing the clothes should be spread well for drying. If the wet
clothes are kept folded, they remain wet. The matter of drying of wet clothes is
nothing but the evaporation of water. So, you notice that the evaporation of
water depends on some factors. To speak the truth, what is true for water is also
true for other liquids. Therefore, we can make a list of the factors on which the
evaporation of liquids depends:

Flow of air: The rate of vaporization increases if the air flows faster over the
liquid.

The area of the exposed surface of the liquid: Evaporation increases as the
area of the exposed surface of the liquid increases. A glass of water takes quite 8S

Effect of Heat on Matter 179
some time to evaporate but the same amount of water poured into a plate
evaporate much faster.
Nature of liquid: The less the boiling point of a liquid, the higher would be the
rate of evaporation. The rate of evaporation of volatile liquids is a maximum.
Pressure of air: The lower the pressure of air, the more the rate of evaporation.
The rate of evaporation in vacuum is a maximum, so air is taken out to make dry
food with a pump for preservation of the food.
Temperature: If the temperature of the air in contact with the liquid increases,
the rate of evaporation will increase.
Dryness of air: The drier the air over the liquid surface is, the more the liquid
will evaporate.
6.5 Specific Heat
Heat, temperature and the relation between them are discussed, however amount
of heat needed to increase the temperature of an object has not been discussed
yet. You might have noticed that in order to heat some water, it needs to be kept
on the oven for a long time, but approximately the same amount of metal take
little time to be heated at the same temperature. This is because, the specific heat
of a metal is much less compared to water. The amount of heat required to
increase the temperature of a body of mass 1| kg by 1 K is called the specific heat.
That is, if an amount of heat Q is required to increase the temperature from T, to
T,, the specific heat will be:
_ Q
oo
m(T, — 7)
Heat capacity C is the amount of heat required to increase the temperature 1K of
a body. The amount of heat required to increase the temperature 1K of a body of
mass | kg is called specific heat. So we can easily find out the heat capacity C of
a body if we know the specific heat of that substance. If the mass of an body is
c mand the specific heat is s, then the heat capacity will be:
>
N

180 Physics
C=ms
The heat capacity of 10 kg gold is
C =10 x 230 JK? = 2300 JK*
In comparison the heat capacity of 10 kg water is
C =10 xX 4200 JK? = 42,000JK* i.e. about 20 times more.

This means that gold or any other metal can be heated quickly but water cannot
be heated so easily.
6.6 Fundamental Principles of Calorimetry
In winter during a bath we often pour a little boiling water into a bucket of cold
water. The boiling water slowly become cold by giving up heat to the cold water.
The cold water of the bucket also slowly becomes hot by absorbing the heat
from the boiling water. Within a short time, all the water will get to a
comfortable temperature by decreasing the temperature of the boiling water and
increasing the temperature of the cold water. If we wish, we can find things like
the amount of heat lost or gained, and their final temperature when various
objects of various temperature are mixed together. To do so we just have to know
a few rules. They are:

(1) The body at higher temperature gives heat to the body at the lower

temperature until they reach thermal equilibrium.

(2) The amount of heat given up by the bodies at higher temperature will be

equal to the heat gained by the bodies at the lower temperature. (We assume

that no heat is lost in this process by any other means.)
@) Example
Question: A piece of ice of mass 100 gm is dropped into water of 1 liter at
temperature 30 °C. What will be the temperature of the water after melting the
whole piece of ice?
(Latent heat of ice L=334 kJ/kg) S

Effect of Heat on Matter 181
Answer: Let us assume the temperature of ice is 0 °C.
Mass of ice m, = 100 gm = 0.1kg
Mass of lliter water mz = 1kg
Specific heat of water s = 4.2 x 10? J/°C
The water of 1kg has to supply the heat that is required to melt the piece of ice
and to raise the temperature of the ice melted water to its final temperature. Let
us consider the final temperature of water is 7, then the amount of heat absorbed
by the ice is:
Heat required to melt: mL
The heat required to increase the temperature from 0 °C to T after melting: m,s(T-0)
The mass of water m, supplies these amounts of heat, so its temperature will
decrease.
That is,
The heat supplied: m,s(30° C — T)
These two types of heat must be equal. Hence:
m,L +m sT = m2s(30T —T)
30°C X mgs — mL
T=
(m, + m2)s
pw BOX 1% 4.2 x 108 = 0.1 x 334% 107 _ 0,
~ (1+ 0.1)4.2 x 103 ~
Question: What is the final temperature if 1 liter of water temperature 20 °C is added
to 2 liter water at temperature 75 °C?
Answer: Let us consider the final temperature is T, so the temperature of 2 liter of
water reaches T by decreasing the temperature from 75 °C. Absorbing this amount of
heat the temperature of 2 liter water reaches T by increasing the temperature from
20°C.
Hence
Mass of 1 liter water m, = 1 kg
Mass of 2 liter water m, = 2 kg
x Specific heat of water s = 4.2x10? J/C
S
N

182 Physics
m,s(75° C—T) = m2s(T — 20° C)
75m, + 20 75X2+20
pf = Cems eM Ey cee
(m, + m2)s 2+1

Question : A piece of iron of mass 10 gm heated at temperature 120 °C is dropped

into a container of water of mass 1 kg of temperature 30 °C. What will be the

temperature of water?

Answer:

Mass of iron m,=0.01 kg

Mass of water m,=lkg

Specific heat of iron s,=0.45x10° J/°C

Specific heat of water s,=4.2*10° J/°C

The amount of heat given up by the piece of iron is equal to the heat gained by the

water. So, the temperature of iron T will be

m,5,(120° C—T) = m,s,(T — 30°C)
7 = 120mss1 + 30m252 _ 120 x 0.01 x 0.45 x 103+ 30x1%x 4.2 x 103 oc
~~ m48,+m2s2 0.01 x 0.45 x 103 + 1x 4.2 x 103
T = 30.1° C

6.7 Effect of Pressure on Melting Point and Boiling Point

If pressure is applied on a substance its melting point goes down, for this reason

when pressure is applied, two pieces of ice unite together to form a single piece.

Where pressure is applied on an ice, the melting point decreases there and the ice

melts, after the removal of pressure the melting point again goes back to the previous

value. As a result the water obtained from the fusion of ice again freezes into ice.

Attaching two masses to the ends of a string, if it is placed upon the surface of an ice

bar so that the masses are hanging at the two ends; it will seem that the string has cut

the ice bar into two pieces. But examining the ice we will see that the ice is still a

single piece (Figure 6.09). o
Ss
N

Effect of Heat on Matter 183
Due to pressure boiling point changes. Boiling point decreases if pressure is low,
boiling point increases if pressure is high. This is why those who go to big heights
while mountain climbing, they have to cook something for a long time because due
to low pressure water starts to boil at
comparatively low temperatures. As
temperature can not be increased, so it takes
a longer time to cook. Pressure cookers De Stes ~
have been made for this reason. During >
cooking pressure is increased by confining ‘
the vapors inside and for this reason, the
boiling point of water is increased so water
continues to boil at a high temperature. As
the temperature is high, cooking will be
done faster.
If pressure is applied, the melting point ofa Figure 6.09: It is possible to cut a
gas increases. So without too much cooling, _ice bar by pressing with a fine wire.
a gas can be liquefied by increasing
pressure. Then a lot of heat is evolved, which has to be taken out properly.
(?) Exercise
General questions
1. When a pot of mercury is heated, firstly the height of mercury decreases then
increases. Why?
2. In space where there are no atoms or molecules, is the existence of temperature
possible?
3. Why do we feel cold when we come from a hot and humid crowded place to an
open area?
4. Why do the drops of water condense on the surface of a glass when a piece of ice
is kept in the glass of water?
2 5. Why is cooking done faster in a pressure cooker?
>
N

184 Physics
Mathematical questions
1. Scientist Celsius introduced a thermometer in which the boiling point of ice was
100° C and the boiling point of water was 0° C! At which temperature the readings
in Celsius and Fahrenheit scales are equal?
2. At which temperature will the density of gold decrease to 0.001% ?
3. The temperature of water increased by 15° C after a piece of hot iron of mass 1
gm at temperature 30° C was put into water of | liter. What was the temperature
of the piece of iron?
4. If 10 J heat is supplied per second to a piece of ice of 1gm at temperature 0°C,
how long it takes to vaporize the ice?
5. If the temperature of a gas confined in a closed cylinder is increased from
30°C to 100°C, by what percentage will the pressure of the gas be increased?
OX) Multiple choice questions
Give tick (v) mark by the side of the correct answer.
1. At the time of construction of a rail line why is a small gap kept in between two
rails?
(a) To save iron.
(b) In summer to increase or to decrease the temperature of the rail line.
(c) To produce knocking sound when the trains run.
(d) To avoid bending of the rails due to its thermal expansion.
2. Why do we feel comfort when wind is blown by fans over our sweating body?
(a) The wind blown by the fan prevents sweat to go out of the body.
(b) Evaporation produces cooling.
(c) The air blown by the fan bears cold water vapors.
(d) The air blown by the fan enters into our body through hair follicles.
og
S
N

Effect of Heat on Matter 185
3. With the help of latent heat ---

i. The temperature of a body increases.

ii. The state of a substance changes.

iii. The internal energy of a body increases.
Which one is correct?

(a)i (b) ii (c) ti & iii (d) i, ii & iii
With the help of the figure answer the question no. 4 & 5

100°C
50°C
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
(Minute)
Figure 6.10 : Ice melting graph

4. How much time was required to melt all of the ice?

a) 2 min b) 4 min

c) 6 min d) 8 min
3. What is the required time in minutes for the water to reach the boiling

temperature?

a)6 b)8

c) 12 d) 18
Forma-24, Physics, Class 9-10

186 Physics

Creative question

1. The distance between two electric poles is 30 m. A copper wire with a length
of 30.001 m was connected to those two pillars on a day when the temperature
was 30°C. The coefficient of linear expansion of copper is 1.67 10°K"!. The
wire snapped on a winter day when the temperature of the air was 4° C.

(a) Define triple point of water.

(b) If two bodies have equal amounts of heat, can they be at different
temperatures? Explain.

(c) Express the temperature of air in Fahrenheit scale.

(d) Explain the cause for the wire to snap with mathematical logic.

2. The length of two metal rods is 6m. If one rod is heated to increase its
temperature from 30°C to 80°C, its length becomes 6.0051 m after
extension. If another rod is heated to increase its temperature from 20°C to
60°C, its length becomes 6.0041 m after extension. The co-efficient of
linear expansion is a, the co-efficient of area expansion is f and the
co-efficient of volume expansion is ¥.

(a)The exchange of heat between two objects depends on which factors?
(b) Write down why temperature and heat are different?
(c) If the temperature of a metal rod is 80° C, what is it in the Kelvin scale?
(d) Make comments about the material of the two rods with a mathematical
explanation.
<
&

Chapter Seven
Waves and Sound
ee es sO eee ee
ee
To understand physics perfectly we need a clear idea about some topics, one of
them is wave. In this chapter we shall limit our discussions on several types of
mechanical waves which are known to us.
Sound is one kind of a wave. In our daily lives, sound plays a very important
role, so we shall discuss sound, velocity of sound, echo and sound pollution in
this chapter.
=
&

188 Physics
® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-
e Explain the characteristics of waves.
¢ Set and measure the simple mathematical relation among the quantities
related to waves.
e Explain the characteristics of sound waves.
e Explain the creation of an echo.
e Explain the uses of echo in our daily lives.
e Set up the mathematical relation among the velocity of sound, frequency,
and wavelength and measure these quantities.
e Explain the change of velocity of sound.
e Explain the range of hearing and its uses.
e Explain the pitch and intensity of sound.
e Explain the reasons and consequences of sound pollution and the tech
niques to prevent it.
%
S

Waves and Sound 189
7.1 Simple Harmonic Motion
By attaching a mass at the lower end of a spring if we release it after pulling, it
will move up-down (In chapter 3 and 4 we have explained this motion). We have
seen that due to friction or other means, energy is lost; and it stops after a while.
Otherwise, it would move up-down for an infinite time. We have also seen that
in simple harmonic motion, the energy of the mass attached to the spring
exchanges between kinetic energy and potential energy. This occurs since the
spring obeys Hooke’s law. The Hooke’s law states, if the spring constant is k,
mass is m and position is x, then the applied force on it,
F =—kx
The harmonic or oscillatory motion that obeys Hooke’s law is called simple
harmonic motion. This is one of the most important motions in physics.
[E
T =22 |—
m
In your book, there is no scope of deducing it, but there is no harm in knowing
it.
If the spring constant of a spring is k and m is the attached mass, then the time
period of the mass is,
l
T=22 E
g
If instead of being a spring, it would be a pendulum hanging from a string and
if the length of the string is / and gravitational acceleration is g, then the time
period is: E
T =22 |—
g
(No, no mistake has occurred, whether you hang a light mass or a heavy mass,
the time period will be the same, it does not depend on the mass.)
@) Example
2% Question : Hang a stone of mass 10 gm from a string 1 m long. What is its time
& period?

190 Physics
Answer: [ | 1
T = 2a |—= 2a |— s=2.0s
g 9.8
The time period remains the same whether the mass of the stone is 10 gm or not.
If you wish, by measuring the time period you can determine the value of g just
now. Try and see!
Ifa mass is attached to the lower end of a spring, the mass will extend the spring
and. This extended length of the spring is called the equilibrium condition
(Figure 7.01-0).
Now we pull the mass downward by a short distance a and release it (Figure
7.01). Then the mass will moving upward, crossing the equilibrium condition, it
will move upward by a distance a. Then again it will be moving downward,
crossing the equilibrium condition, it will come down and this will continue.
is
= = = = , 3 = a
9poOroso7og,
a 7 v T v
T v=0 Vv re v=0 v a v=0
(0) = (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
Figure 7.01: (0) is equilibrium condition. After pulling at position (1), the spring is
oscillating in simple harmonic motion when it is released.
When the mass completes the positions 2 + 3 — 4 > 5 and comes to the
position (6) in the same way (moving upward with velocity v) from where it
started, then we say a complete oscillation has taken place. It has to be
remembered that completing 2 — 3 positions when the mass comes to the
position 4, it will come to the position from where it started, but it is not a
complete oscillation. Because at the first 2 position the mass moves upwards
and at the next 4 position it is moving downwards, therefore it did not come to ,,
the same or initial position in the same manner. S

Waves and Sound 191
To analyze the simple harmonic motion, it is better to explain some quantities.
The first may be the time period T. The time required for one complete oscilla-
tion is called the time period. Frequency fis the number of complete oscillations
per second. Therefore, f = : . if time period is expressed in second, then unit of
f will be Hertz (Hz).
In simple harmonic motion, amplitude is the maximum upward (or downward)
distance. As shown in figure 7.01, here the amplitude is a.
The next term is phase. When the mass attached to the spring is moving up and
down, if we follow the mass at any instant, we will see that it will stay in a
certain position from the equilibrium; this position is its phase. In simple
harmonic motion this definite condition of the mass and the spring will return
identically just after one time period. In terms of physics, we can say in simple
harmonic motion the phase that develops at any instant, after one time period,
this phase returns again.
7.2 Waves
All of us have seen waves, when a stone hits water then waves spread out in all
directions from that point. When a bulb is switched on in the room, the light that
spreads in the room is also a wave. When we talk the sound that reach from one
place to another place is also a wave. When a compressed spring is released, the
deformation that propagates through it is a kind of a wave too. In short, we can
say, we can realize what a wave is. But what will we say if we want to give a
nice definition for it in terms of physics?

place to another through a medium, where the particles of the medium

can oscillate about their position but are not displaced permanently from

there.
Now we can verify whether our definition of wave matches with our experience
or not. When a launch moves through the middle of a river, the waves that it

= creates hits the bank of the river. Therefore, surely we can say energy is
S transferred from one place to another. If we look at floating water hyacinth we

192 Physics
will see that when the wave is propagating, at that instant the water hyacinth is
moving up and down and after the wave has passed it becomes stationary as
before. The water hyacinth does not come to the bank with the waves at all.
You have now understood the relation between the simple harmonic motion and
the wave. If we look at a particular point of a medium, then this point executes
simple harmonic motion when the wave propagates through this point. In the
case of the water hyacinth this occurs, so far as the water wave propagates
through it, up to this time simple harmonic motion was present there. There is
no wave in the simple harmonic motion of a point, but every point of the wave
is executing individual simple harmonic motion.
Therefore the definition we have given for wave is correct. But we have to
remember that there are many types of waves, for which this definition may not
be perfectly correct. For propagation of wave we talked about a medium, but
when light reaches the earth from the sun, there is no need for a medium then.
Light is an electromagnetic wave. We will discuss this in chapter nine. The
scientists are talking about a new type of wave called gravity wave, which they
have observed, very recently, for the first time. It also does not need any
medium. In quantum mechanics, an amazing branch of physics, deals with
another type of wave known as wave function which is even more spectacular;
there the wave cannot be seen directly, only its effect can be experienced.

Therefore, for the time being we will limit our discussions only to those waves

which requires mediums like solids, liquids or gases. The name of this type of

wave is mechanical wave.

7.2.1 Characteristics of Waves

While discussing waves, several types of characteristics arise. Here, we will

discuss all the characteristics of waves, specially the mechanical waves.

(i) | For mechanical waves a medium is necessary. Waves can be created in
water, a wave can be transmitted ina spring,a wave can be created in
arope. The sound we hear is also a wave and its medium is air.

(ii) When a wave propagates through a medium, the particles of the medium
oscillate (vibrate or go up-down) about its own position but are not «
displaced permanently with the wave. S

Waves and Sound 193
(iii) Energy can be transferred from
[\v> one place to another through waves.
SS The more the energy, the more the
an oe PV amplitude of the wave. Energy is
ev\/ proportional to the amplitude of the
wave. If the amplitude is doubled,
p\e2 energy is increased four times.
(b) tv/\ [\ NP (iv) Every wave has a velocity; this
velocity depends on the nature of the
Figure 7.02: A wave is reflecting and medium. In air, the velocity of sound
refracting through a wire of different cross is 330 m/s, in water this velocity is
i ®) ie it oom Sei = hon 1439 m/s ! The velocity of a wave in
b) When ‘t rah bk a thick wire a a tight rope (under tension) will be
natrow wire another type of reflection occurs more than the velocity of the wave in
a loose rope.
(v) Reflection or refraction occurs for waves, it is discussed elaborately, for
light, in the next chapter. At present you know that at the time of travelling from
one medium to another medium, if part of a wave returns back to the first
medium, it is called reflection (Figure7.02). When a wave travels from the first
medium to the second medium, it is refrac-
tion. When we hear an echo of sound, it is
reflection. If we hear external sound when
we are submerged under water it is due to XY 7 e—
refraction. + +
(vi) Among all the characteristics of waves, / \ Z\
the most important is superposition, even
though this is not observed often by our eyes t tL
in our daily lives. Let us consider that two
waves coming from two different places
teache one place. When one wave is trying to —_— *«|
pull the medium up, another wave is then
trying to pull it down, what happens then?
These are the subjects of superposition, Figure 7.03: Addition of two
which will give you a deep insight into waves can create a large wave, one
waves, and you will be able be caneven cancel the other.
understand it very clearly. At present,
Forma-25, Physics, Class 9-10

194 Physics
only two easy matters are shown in figure 7.03. The two waves, can reinforce
one another or can destroy each other.
@) Do Yourself
Pour some water on a big plate in a resplendent or bright place. Confirm
that there is no vibration on the plate. If you touch any point of the
water, the wave will spread around from that point and at the bottom of
the plate you will see its shadow or reflections. Touching just the centre
of the water of the plate, you will see a wave starting from the centre and
spreading to the edge of the plate and again returning to the centre after
reflection from there. If the wave can be created properly, meeting at the
centre it will again spread around. If you try a little bit, you can measure
the velocity of this wave. Try and see.
What will happen if you touch a little distance away from the centre?
Try and see.
7.2.2 Types of Waves
Bo}
S
Figure 7.04: Sound is a longitudinal wave of compression and rarefaction
created by the pressure in air. Here A is the wavelength
a
3
nN

Waves and Sound 195
When a wave propagates through a spring the wave moves forward by
contraction and expansion of the spring. Again by shaking one end of a rope a
wave can be formed and can be sent through the rope. There is a fundamental
difference between the two waves. The wave formed in the spring was of
contraction and expansion, the direction of contraction and expansion of the
spring and the direction of wave is the same. The name of this wave is longitudi-
nal wave. Sound (Figure 7.04) is this type of a longitudinal wave.
1. Make a photocopy of this 3. Now put the rectangular paper
and cut it as a circle. on the circular paper and enter a
small pin through the cros mark (x)
y
_ PS aa
SS
2. Make a void by cutting along 4. Now rotate the circular paper upwords
the middle of the paper as shown as shown in the picture.
in the above picture.
oo Figure 7.05: Model of how longitudinal wave advances.
Ss
N

196 Physics
When we produce a wave in the rope by shaking it, there the vibration of the
rope does not take place along the direction of the velocity of the wave. The
direction of vibration i.e. up and down of the rope, is perpendicular to the
direction of the velocity of the wave. The name of this type of a wave is a
transverse wave. The wave produced in water is an example.
@) Do Yourself
Make a photocopy of the figure 7.05. Now cut it according to the way
shown in the figure, observe that a small window is made on the
rectangular paper below. Now put the rectangular paper on the circular
paper. Now enter a small wire or pin through the cross (x) mark and fold
the wire by pressing it. Now rotate the circular paper below and see
through the cut portion, clearly you will see how longitudinal waves
advance.
7.2.3 Wave related quantities
The quantities we have talked about in simple harmonic motion, actually all of
them can be used in case of waves. In a wave complete oscillation occurs, it has
a time period, frequency and amplitude. We have seen that when a wave
propagates, if we look at a particular particle of a medium, we will see that the
particle is executing simple harmonic oscillation!
In case of wave we can talk about two new quantities, one of them is the
wavelength. Wavelength is the distance from any phase of the wave to the next
identical phase (Figure 7.04). Therefore, the distance travelled by a wave in one
time period is the wavelength.
In waves there is a second quantity which is not present in simple harmonic
vibration, this is wave velocity. The distance travelled by a wave in one second
is called the wave velocity. The number of time periods present in one second is
the frequency, if the frequency is fand wavelength is 2, then the velocity can be
expressed as,
v=fa
When a wave travels from one medium to another medium, then change of its
velocity occurs. Since the frequency always remains the same, so when a wave S

Waves and Sound 197
travels from one medium to another then its wavelength changes. Therefore,
when waves propagate through different medium, its velocity or wavelength
changes, but frequency or time period never changes.
@) Example
Question: In figure 7.06 a wave is
shown. Among the wave’s amplitude, Bo.
wavelength, time period, frequency and ~—
velocity which magnitude can be 3 °
determined from the figure? Determine =
them. & i \ |
Answer: From the information that is 1 2 3 4
given in the figure, only amplitude (0.1 position (m)
m) and wavelength (2 m) of the wave . ;
can be determined. It is not possible to Figure 7.06 : A wave with respect
determine time period, frequency or to position
velocity from the information that are
given in the figure! The wave shown above is the condition of the wave at a
particular time. Here there is no information how the position changes with time.
Question: In figure 7.07 another wave is shown. Among the wave’s amplitude,
wavelength, time period, frequency and velocity which magnitude can be
determined from this figure? Determine them.
02 The amplitude (0.2 m) and time
Ee period (2 s) of this wave can be
ry of determined; from this figure other
£ information cannot be determined.
E \ | How the wave changes with time at
0.2 a particular position is shown in the
t ; = 4 ° figure. So, it is not possible to
time (s) determine the wavelength.
Figure 7.07: A wave with respect to time
=
8

198 Physics
Question: Figure 7.08 shows a wave at a particular time in different position and
for a particular positions in different times. Determine its amplitude,
wavelength, time period, frequency, and velocity.
Answer: From the first figure we see that, the wave has,
Amplitude, a = 0.1m
Wavelength, 2 = 1m
From the second figure we see that, the wave has,
Amplitude, a = 0.1 m (we know it from the first figure also)
Time period, T = 0.2 s
We can calculate frequency f from the time period,
P 11 4
=-- =o vA
T 0.2
@ o1 ee ol
¢ 1) [\ 3 [\
3, =
o o
bal MOM} tL MM
05 1 #15 2.0 0.1 O02 03 04
position (m) time (s)
Figure 7.08: A wave with respect to position and time simultaneously
Therefore, using the information of the two figures, we can say
v=Aaf=1mx5 Hz=5 m/s
Question: In figure 7.09 a wave is shown, at which positions the phases are
equal.
Answer: At A and C, phases are equal.
At A and B, though the amplitudes are equal their phases are opposite.
At D and E, though they are equal, phases are not equal. oo
S
N

Waves and Sound 199
aVAVe
A B C DE
Figure 7.09: Phase of a wave at different position

7.3 Sound Wave
To produce sound waves a source is needed, a medium to send it through, and
any type of receiver to receive that sound. There are many sources of sound
around us. Obviously, the most familiar source is our throat; sound is created by
the vibration of the vocal cord when air flows through it in our throat. We will
feel the vibration if we touch our throat during conversation.
Certainly you have noticed that the voice of a male is deep and the voice of
female and children is sharp. When we make a sound then air comes out through
throat from our lungs. In our throat there is a wind pipe through which air enters
the lungs and come out from the lungs. To produce sound larynx is situated upon
it. There are two membranes which work as valves, called the vocal cords.
These vibrate during the flow of air and produce sound. The vocal cords of
males become stiff with the increasing of age, whereas for females it remains
soft. This is why males produce sound of low frequency and females produce
sound of high frequency. Due to this, the voice of males is deep and that of the
females is high pitched.
Do Yourself

Cut a piece of paper as shown in Figure 7.10. Placing it in between the two

fingers, blow, keeping it on your mouth. The two pieces of paper will vibrate

co like vocal cords of the larynx and produce a sound. Cut the paper in different
3 ways and try to produce different kinds of sounds.

200 Physics
Besides the throat, sound can be
produced by vibrating the thin .
diaphragm. When you hit your | I :
school bell it starts vibrating and | ~
sound is produced. If you grip the q ff W))
bell then the vibration will stop and a >» Y
the sound will stop instantly. After ONE (
producing sound by vibration, we
need a medium to transmit it from Figure 7.10: Sound can be produced by
one place to another. Sound can preparing vocal cord using paper and
also be sent through liquids blowing it.
and solids but we are used to hearing sound using air as a medium. To show
that sound cannot propagate without a medium, we keep a calling bell as
shown in Figure 7.11 in the laboratory. The
calling bell can be sounded by supplying
electricity from outside. The sound of the
calling bell will be slowly dulled if it is
ii evacuated gradually by a pump. If the bell jar is
so completely emptied of air, though the bell will
[El vibrate inside but it seems from outside that
S there is no sound.
We can hear sound with our ears. The sound
(\ ) that can be heard has frequency between 20 Hz
—[—=— to 20,000 Hz or 20 kHz. (Usually hearing
capability decreases due to continuously
listening to songs with head phones or staying
Figure 7.11: The sound of the in sound polluted areas.) If the frequency of
: ‘ . ., sound is less than 20 Hz, it is called infrasound,
calling bell will not be listen if . ;
fis eomenided paar tard and if the frequency of sound is greater than 20
pump. kHz it is called ultrasound. If frequency less
than 20 Hz or greater than 20 S

Waves and Sound 201
kHz is generated, then the movement created in air will not be heard by us. To
detect such sounds we can use a special type of microphone or receiver. Many
animals can hear sounds of low frequency. Before earthquakes, sounds
of low frequency are generated, and
often hearing this sound animals panic go
and leave the area. Ba '
a oS
Characteristics of sound wave wt ;
Sound is a mechanical wave, because :
sound wave is produced due to the =e
vibration of a body, and for its transmission ~
all. clastic medium is needed. This is a Figure 7.12: “Phone” can be made
longitudinal wave, because the direction of Toy tying: tiene elite Gia land
propagation of the wave and the direction gles,
of vibration is the same. The velocity of
sound depends on the property of the medium. In gaseous mediums its velocity
is low, in liquids greater, and in solids it is much more. The velocity of sounds
depends on the temperature and humidity of the medium. The intensity of sound
is proportional to the square of the amplitude of the wave. Therefore, if the
amplitude of a wave is high, the intensity of the sound will be high and if the
amplitude is low, the intensity will be low.
@) Do Yourself:
Take two plastic glasses. Make two small holes on the bottom of the glasses
with a hot safety pin. Put thread through this hole and tie the thread inside
the cup (Figure 7.12). Tie the two plastic glasses with long thread. One
person should hold one cup and another should hold the second cup. One of
you speaks, and the other person listens. (Keep the thread stretched,
otherwise sound cannot be heard.) We are so used to hearing words in air;
we think that sound goes only in air. This experiment is proof that sound
Forma-26, Physics, Class 9-10

202 Physics
@) Example
Question: Sound of frequency 1 kHz is produced by a tuning fork. It was
allowed to pass through air, water and iron. It was found that the velocity
of sound in air is 334 m/s, in water is 1493 m/s and in iron 5130 m/s. What
are the wavelengths in these mediums?
Answer:
Velocity of sound= Af, here A is the wavelength, and f is the frequency.
Here frequency is 1 kHz or 1000 Hz.
v
A=
f
-1
Inair, A= 24" =03m
1035-1
1493 m—1
In water, A= Tost 149m
; _ 5130m-1
In iron, A= Tost =5.13m
7.3.1 Echo
Since sound is one type of wave, it can have reflection. If someone speaks in a
big empty building it creates a reverberating sound. This is due to reflection.
Within the building the distance is not enough to hear the sound separately.
When we hear something the feeling persist for around 0.1 s, so to hear two
sounds separately, it needs separation of 0.1 s differences between two sounds.
Velocity of sound is 330 m/s, therefore to create a difference of 0.1 s, sound has
to travel at least 33 m.
If we stand in front of a big wall, a building, or a high hill at least half of this
distance (16.5 m), the sound will take 0.1 s to come back after being reflected
and we will hear the reflection of sound or echo. °
S
aq

Waves and Sound 203
Bats have eyes and pretty good eye sight, yet they use echo during flight.
While flying a bat uses its throat to produce sound, if there is an obstacle in front
the sound returns after reflection, and the bat can estimate the distance from the
time of the returning sound. For this reason, the bat can fly even in the dark
without being obstructed. We cannot hear the sound produced by the bat;
because the sound is ultrasound i.e. frequency of the sound is beyond our
hearing range. Bats can produce sound of frequency 100 kHz or more.
7.3.2 Variation of Velocity of Sound Table 7.0: velocity of sound
In air, velocity of sound is proportional to the in different medium
square root of temperature. i.e.
va VT
Here the temperature is not Celsius temperature. Hydrogen
Temperature in the Kelvin scale.
The velocity of sound does not depend on the air
pressure. But it is inversely proportional to the
square root of the density of air. So if there is water
vapor in the air, its density decreases, hence velocity increases.
Sound is a mechanical wave. It depends on the elasticity of the medium. The
nature of liquid and solid is different from air and naturally the velocity of sound
is different there. In liquid the velocity of sound is more than that in air and in
solid velocity of sound is even more than in liquid.
@)) Do Yourself
Put your ear at one end of a table, tell someone to knock at the other end.
You will hear the sound of the knocking clearly, because solid substances
are much better medium for sound than air.
@) Example
Question: At a certain place, the temperature in the winter is 10°C and velocity
se of sound is 332 m/s, if the temperature is raised to 30°C in the summer what is
® the velocity of sound?

204 Physics
Answer: vot
V4 T,
y= of = 332 ms = 343.5 m/s
7.3.3 Uses of Sound
We need not talk about the common uses of sound. We speak, hear songs,
doctors hear the heart beat, engineers hear the sound of instruments etc. There
are other applications of sound, which you may not have heard about.
Previously we could not see from outside the fetus that grows in the womb of a
pregnant mother; this is now possible with the help of a process called
ultrasonography.
Three dimensional Seismic Surveys
Seismic Survey is done to explore
whether gas or oil is present inside, ie,
the earth. To do it a small blast is ‘oo=r® . 42 ee
, a
done a little below the earth. Sound ae
of the blast hits the different layers S
of the soil and returns after weaerw
teflection. The reflected wave is SWE;
detected by a special type of ——— ae
receiver named a geophone (Figure ae, ae
7.13). Analyzing all information a Oa >
perfect three dimensional picture of
the soil is formed, from which gas Figure 7.13: Information about different
or oil is present or not is layers of the earth can be known, by the
determined. Since we know the reflection of sound.
position of the source of sound and the geophone, the distance of the different
layers of soil can be calculated accurately from the time required for the sound SY
to reach from source to geophone. »

Waves and Sound 205
Ultrasound cleaner
Ultrasound cleaner is used when we need to clean small instruments perfectly in
the laboratory. The small instruments are immersed in a liquid, and subjected to
the ultrasound wave, the vibrations of which remove the dirt.
7.3.4 Musical Sound
We hear different kinds of sound, some
of these sounds are sweet and some of violin Wry
them are annoying. The sweet sounds a a a ae a
are the sounds of musical instruments. In T™™Pet! \ \ \ \ \
T

figure 7.14 the waves of sound of some —giyte Ap
musical instrument are shown. You can VV VV" Ve
see that all of them are periodic Flute @ |My} |
vibrations. In a tuning fork a perfect 2ms| time
vibration is created. But in a musical Figure 7.14: The sound waves of
sound there is not only a single wave, different musical instrument.
many waves superpose on one another to
make the sound melodious.
Among the many characteristics of musical sound, the important three are:
Intensity: Intensity is a measure of how loudly a musical sound can be heard.
Therefore, the amount of sound energy that flows per second per unit area is
called the intensity. The unit of intensity is Wm”.
Pitch: The characteristic of musical sound by which the sound of the same
intensity is sometimes heard dull and sometimes sharp is called pitch.
Timber: The characteristics of sound by which we can differentiate the sound
produced from different musical instrument is called timber or quality of sound.
Different types of musical instruments that are used to produce melodious
sound, can be divided into three groups:

=

8

206 Physics
Musical instrument made of wire: Ektara (Monochord), Violin, Sitar
Musical instruments based on air flow: Flute, Harmonium
Musical instrument made of percussion: Dhol, Tabla

Now-a-days melodious sounds are produced using electronics in a completely
different way.
7.3.5 Sound Pollution
Sound is essential in our lives, but excessive sound makes our lives intolerable.
Those who live in cities, especially those who live besides a road observe
that the sound produced from engines of
bus, car, truck and of continuous horns Table 7.02: Intensity of sound of different types
goes beyond our tolerance limit very
often. Most of the time we are used to
living in such types of pollution for a
long time. If we are fortunate enough to
go to a silent place where there is no
sound pollution then suddenly we can
realize the importance of life without
sound pollution. The intensity of
different types of sound are shown in ——

Table 7.02.

Due to sound pollution, we are losing our hearing capability. To intensify the

problem many of us listen to songs using headphones in the ears.

To reduce sound pollution the first step is to make laws against it. The second

step is to make public awareness. This issue has to be clarified to all, using horns

while in cars as little as possible, installation of sound absorbing machine in the
industry, making less uses of loud speaker, using vehicles of less sound etc. In
addition, steps be taken of plantation of trees in the empty places in cities.
%
ES

Waves and Sound 207
(?) Exercise
63) Genarel question
1. Show that a wave can bring energy from one place to another.
2. Why is sound produced in whistle?
3. “When a wave propagates, the medium does not flow. It executes
simple harmonic oscillation about its position”, True or False?
4. Why is sound produced in a thunderstorm?
5. What problem would arise for a bat if it creates infra-sound instead of
ultra- sound when flying?
Mathematical questions
= 01 mom 0.1
cS) &
3 of 0
-0.1 -O.1
a 1 2 3 4 d 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
position (m) time (s)
Figure 7.15: A wave with respect to time and position
1. A wave is shown in Figure 7.15 with respect to time and position. What
is the velocity of the wave?
2. The ratio of velocity and velocity of sound is called MACH. What is the
velocity of the fighter plane MACH 9?
3. In summer, the velocity of sound is increased by 0.5 % in a town. If the
% temperature in winter is 10°C, what is the temperature in the summer?
3
N

208 Physics
4. We can hear sound from 20 Hz to 20 kHz. What are the wavelengths of
sounds of 20 Hz and 20 kHz?
5. dB = 10 log (), here P, and P, are the sounds of a Jet plane and of a
1
mosquito respectively, how many times larger is the sound of a Jet plane
than that of a mosquito?
OX) Multiple choice questions
Put tick (V) mark on the correct answer
1. What type of wave is sound?
(a) Transverse wave (b) Electromagnetic wave
(c) Longitudinal wave (d) Radio wave
2. In which medium is the velocity of sound maximum?
(a) Solid (b) = Light
(c) Gaseous (d) Plasma
3. Why is a dead bat seen hanging from an electric line?
(i) The bat lacks a clear idea about the position and distance between the two
electric lines instantly. s
(ii) It did not hear the echo of ultrasonic sound ahead.
(iii) It is hanging with one wire and touching the other. 20m
Which one of the following is correct?
(a) i and ii (b) i and iii wll
(c)iiandiii © (d)i, ii. and iii Be tne
Figure 7.16
In Figure 7.16, S is a source of sound and AB is the surface of water. Answer
questions 4 and 5 on the basis of the given information and the figure
considering the velocity of sound as 332 m/s . a
3
N

Waves and Sound 209
4. What will be the maximum height of water to hear the echo?
(a) 1340cm (b) 13.40m
(c) 3.40m (d) 3.40cm
5. How much time is required to hear the echo in case of the given figure?
(a) 0.10 s (b) 0.12s
(c) 0.145 (d) 0.18 s
Creative questions
1. Rafsan is taking his test examination of class ten. His physics exam is the
next day. There is a marriage ceremony in their neighboring house. The music
was played loudly there till 2 am at night. This loud music hampers his studies
very much. His father is a patient of high blood pressure. It is also
uncomfortable for him.
(a) What is sound pollution?
(b) Explain the causes of sound pollution.
(c) What troubles may Rafsan’s father face due to sound pollution? Write
down the effects of sound pollution on public health.
(d) What measures can be taken to prevent sound pollution?
2. Using the information given
below and based on Figure 7.17 By
answer the following questions. Frequency of sound= 1200 Hz Oo—
: 2 Air temperature = 30°c NNN \aa
(a) What is periodic motion? NN
(b) Why is a water wave a RE
transverse wave? Explain. s Sound source \ Vea
(c) Find the wavelength of sound. "ie mi \ a
(d) Is it possible to hear echo at
position S? Verify the
mathematical logic.
Forma-27, Physics, Class 9-10

210 Physics
3. During summer vacation, Nusrat visited Sajek with her family. To hear an
echo she screamed loudly beside a hill. But, hearing no echo, she felt sad. Then
her father told Nusrat to move 3 m and to make a sound. This time Nusrat heard
the echo. On that day, the velocity and frequency of sound was 332 m/s and
1328 Hz.

(a) What is an echo?

(b) Why is a minimum distance necessary to hear an echo?

(c) What is the wavelength of sound produced by Nusrat?

(d) How far does Nusrat have to move backward if she wants to hear an

echo after 0.3 s of screaming?
S

Chapter Eight
Reflection of Light
ae
ios . . = _
tte — ] - _——— _
a a = “h) of
= =  —_— =
When light reflects on the objects around us and comes into our eyes, we can see
the objects. In the previous chapter we have learned about sound as a wave. In
this chapter we will learn about light as a wave. This wave is a different kind of
wave, called an electromagnetic wave.
When light is reflected in a plane mirror, it creates an image. All of us are
familiar with this image. Ifa curved mirror is used instead of plane mirror, it will
create a different kind of image. We will discuss different types of images in
different mirrors in this chapter.
fas)
8

912 Physics
® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-
e Explain the nature of light.
e Explain the laws of reflection of light.
e Explain mirrors.
e Explain images.
e Explain the formation of images in mirrors by drawing action line of
light rays.
e Explain some common phenomena of formation of images in mirrors.
e Explain uses of mirrors.
e Explain magnification.
e Demonstrate formation of images.
e¢ Understand the influence of different optical phenomena and their
contributions in our life.
5

Reflection of Light 213
8.1. Nature of Light
What we see in our eyes is light. We see trees, the sky, chairs and tables, human beings,
but that doesn’t mean that these are light. Light reflects from these objects and comes
into our eyes, and the retina of our eyes create and send signals to our brain. Then our
brain can recognize what is a tree or a human being. The whole process starts with light
entering into our eyes.
Wavelength (m)
__ 10" 10° 10" 110" Ce
“US =
a: ian q 8 = 8 _—_— }—---—
< s.
E = é é
& & é 3%
2 10 Visible light
YC TAN T
an aa
Boa] | el
ieay Sle
=” (ape
400 500 600 700
Wavelength (nm)
Figure 8.01: Spectrum of light and sensitivity of eyes to different colors
Light is an electromagnetic wave. Every wave has a wavelength, which means light
also has a wavelength. Those of us who have produced waves by throwing a stone in a
pond or by shaking a rope know that we can create waves of different wavelengths if
we desire. So light may have different wavelengths. Electromagnetic waves may have
any wavelengths.
These wavelengths may be greater than a few kilometers or may be one trillionth parts
of one meter. We can only see a small part of this possible large range of wavelengths.
9
Ss
Nn

214 Physics
We cannot see it if the wavelength is larger or smaller than this range. If the wavelength
is from 400 nm to 700 nm, we can see the electromagnetic wave, and we call that light.
The colors we see in our eyes are actually lights of different wavelengths. When the
wavelength is less, it becomes violet. When the wavelength increases, the light
gradually becomes blue, green, yellow, orange, and red, and at one point it disappears!
Human eyes cannot see beyond this range- but various insects or other living beings
can see outside this range. The sensitivity of human eyes to different colors of light is
shown in Figure 8.1.
Do Yourself
Hold a CD in the sunlight and reflect the light on a nearby wall. You can see
the full spectrum of light on the wall. CDs have sharp indentations which
work as grating and separate the colors.
In Figure 8.01, the name of different wavelengths is shown. If the wavelength is
less than the smallest wavelength of visible light, then we call it ultraviolet light.
If the wavelength is even smaller than it is called x-ray, and even smaller is
called gamma ray- which comes out from radioactive nucleus. If the wavelength
is larger than the largest wavelength of visible light, we call it an infrared ray. If
it gradually becomes larger we call them microwave, and then radio waves! To
learn physics this division of wavelengths is one of the most important topics.
Do Yourself
We cannot see infrared rays with naked eyes because of their high
wavelengths. A TV remote emits infrared rays that we cannot see. You may
see this through mobile phone camera because a special type of light sensitive
IC named CCD is used, which can detect some infrared light with visible
light. =
8

Reflection of Light 215

You can see that the wavelengths of visible light are very short but there are

many interesting experiments in physics, using these we can perform various

interest experiments of this wavelength.

If we want to know more about light, we can start with reflection.

8.2. Reflection

If we talk about reflection what we

imagine is standing in front of a

mirror, but reflection is much absorption

more than that. When light is reflection é

sent from one medium to another, Pe eacnen

three different phenomena occur

simultaneously. One of them is

reflection and the other two are

refraction and absorption. (Figure first medium second medium

8.02)

While traversing from the first Figure 8.02: Reflection, refraction and

medium into the second medium, if absorption of light from one medium to

a part of light returns to the first sia

medium, the phenomenon is called reflection. Some parts of it may enter the

second medium which is called refraction and some of it may be absorbed which

is called absorption. In this chapter we will discuss reflection and in the next

chapter we will discuss refraction.

It has been said earlier that light is a wave. Generally a wave needs a medium to

travel, (If there is no water how will a wave be created in it), But this is different

in case of light. As this is a wave consisting of electric and magnetic fields, so

light does not need any medium to travel. Light can create its wave of electric

and magnetic fields and can propagate by itself. So when we talked about the

first and second medium for reflection or refraction, one of this medium can

even be vacuum. To speak the truth, the examples we see for reflection and
« refraction in glass or water, there, one medium is glass (or water) and other is air.
& Airis sucha light medium that we can consider it as a vacuum.

216 Physics
8.2.1 Laws of Reflection
Before understanding the laws of reflection, we need to define some terms.
When lights incident from one medium to another, for the time being we assume
that it is a plane surface. To understand better, we will assume that the light that
will reflect is a light ray or a light beam. When a light ray from the first medium
to the second medium is incident on a point, first we have to imagine a
perpendicular at that point which is called a normal. Then imagine a plane that
contains this incident ray and the normal (Figure 8.03).
The ray, which is incident at a point,
from the first to the second medium
is called the incident ray (XO). The ;
ray which is reflected (OX’) is called Ex Rieti
the reflected ray. (You are realizing 907’) 0p
that the ray which enters the second
medium is the refracted ray- we will
angle between the incident ray and ae
the normal is called the incident
angle (0,) and the angle between the
reflected ray and the normal is the Figur 8.03: Reflection of light from first to
reflected angle (0). Now we can second medium
state the two laws of reflection:
First Law: The reflected ray will be in the plane which we imagined
through the incident ray and the normal.
Second Law: The reflected angle is equal to the incident angle.
@) Example
Question: Two mirrors are placed as shown in figure 8.04. A candle is placed at
point X between the mirrors. Where will the image of the candle be formed? &
S
AQ

Reflection of Light 217
Answer: The image will be seen in the mirror. An image of that image will be
seen eventually in two mirrors. Therefore, as shown in the figure, an infinite
number of images will be formed.
mirror mirror
Sa x’ x x' x" x
Figure 8.04: If a candle is placed between two parallel mirrors, the image
X' and image of image X’ i.e. X”, X’"...will be formed.
Here two laws of reflection have been stated. But everything about reflection is
not yet discussed. The most important matter has not been discussed yet, how
much will it reflect? If a mirror is used for reflection, it reflects fully. But the
word reflection is not only meant for mirrors, its may occur between any two
mediums. Fresnel’s law describes how much it will reflect. You will learn more
about it in higher classes. The main thing is, the larger the angle of incidence,
the more the amount of reflection (Figure 8.05). In normal glass, light is
reflected slightly (only 4-5%), and the rest is refracted through the glass. But if
the angle of incidence is higher (like 80° or 90°,) then reflected light increases
greatly. You can test it standing beside a window.
9 r 9 i
Figure 8.05: Reflection increases for higher incident angle
Forma-28, Physics, Class 9-10

218 Physics
Absorption
Much of the beauty of the world around us comes from different colors. But how
does the color appear? Why is color of a rose red and a leaf green? You will be
even more surprised to see a red rose as black under green light or a green leaf as
black under red light!
This is actually very easy to
explain; in normal light
(sometimes called white light) pit (all colors)
every wavelength is present. Since red
colors depend on the wavelength \\ yy,
of light, it can be said that light of \ Yd
all colors are present there. When Y, a
all colors are present together, then Yy
individual colors are not seen 3
separately- then we say the light is ts <
colorless or white light. When this : a a
light falls upon a red rose, then the ~ ee
tose absorbs all the colors except
red. The light that reflects and Figure 8.06: Absorbing all colors which
colour is reflected by an object that is
come to our eyes, only has red and sousidared ie walbe.
we see the rose appears as red.
Similarly, when light of all colors falls upon a green leaf, it reflects only green
light and absorbs others, so we see the color of the leaf as green. (Figure 8.06)
If the rose and leaf are seen under full red light then the flower will appear red as
it does not absorb red color but the leaf will appear to be black. Because the leaf
will absorb the color red and will not reflect any color. So we will see the leaf as
black. Similarly under green light we will see the leaf green but the rose black.
Because the red rose will absorb the green light totally and no light will be
reflected from the rose, so it appears black.
=
g

Reflection of Light 219

8.2.3 Reflection from smooth and rough planes

Parallel light rays become parallel after reflecting from mirrors or smooth plane

surfaces because each ray obeys the law of reflection and reflects with an angle

of reflection equal to the angle of incidence. Even if the plane is not smooth,

every ray of light will obey the law of reflection. But the rays are incident at

different angles at different points of the plane, therefore the rays will reflect in

different angles after reflection. After reflection, the reflected rays are not

parallel and spread in different directions. (Figure 8.07) These types of

reflections are called irregular reflection.

Figure 8.07: Light reflects from smooth surfaces and scatters from rough surfaces

8.3 Mirror

All of us have seen mirrors. In a mirror a

clear image is formed due to uniform

reflection. A silver layer is placed behind a v *

glass mirror for proper reflection. 4% light

is reflected from the front part of a mirror, ,

but the back part reflects fully and forms i

the original image. When the original RSs,

image is very important in optical oe

instruments like telescopes, the silver or x AY 5g

aluminum layer is coated on the glass B

surface, so that the two images, one 4%

lighter and other 96% clear are not formed, Figure 8.08: The image of X
~ rather it forms a 100% clear image. object will form in X’ position.

220 Physics
8.3.1 Image

When you stand in front of a mirror, you see your own image. The closer you
stand; the image seems to appear at the same distance behind the mirror. In
figure 8.08, X is an object from which three rays have been reflected in mirror
AB (therefore, incident angle = reflected angle). If we extend the rays behind the
mirror it will seem to converge to a point X’. This point is the image of object X.
For a real object, there are infinite number of points and each point forms an
image and collectively makes the image of the object.

If we want to define the position of the image using geometry we need to draw
at least two rays. It will be easier to draw the picture if we consider XP (normal
to the plane) and XO as ray as shown in figure 8.09. Triangle OPX and OPX’ are
congruent. Therefore XP = X'P, which means the image has formed at a distance
equal to the distance of the object from the mirror.

@) Example

Question: Show that, triangle OPX R

and OPX’ are congruent. ‘

Answer: Here, ZXPO = ZX'PO 6

because both of them are at right 4 s 4

angles, as XP is normal to the plane. 8 ber

According to the law of reflection, Ry

incident angle is equal to angle of ¥ ie $e
reflection, therefore, 7XOP =ZROA.

Again ZROA =Z X’OP. B

Therefore, between triangle OPX and

GPX. OPis thecammon amand.fwa Figure 8.09: Two light rays XP and
angles on both sides are equal. So, : ;
triangles are congruent XO are sufficient to draw an image
Therefore, XP = X’P. of the object at position X

The image we see in a mirror is not actually real even though it seems real. This
is because light is not actually coming from the place it appears to be coming. &

Reflection of Light 221
Later, we will see that sometimes images are really formed by converging light
and light rays come from there. This type of image is called a real image and it
is possible to do many things with this type of image. In case of the image
formed in a mirror, light does not actually come from the image, so this is virtual
image.
In Figure 8.10, how an image is formed for an extended object has been shown
instead of a single point. Light coming from points X and Y reflect from the
mirror and form a virtual images at point X’ and Y’ respectively, light appears
to be coming from X’ and Y’. You can clearly see that length of XY is equal to
the length X’Y’. If the arrow head of XY is on top, the arrow head of X’Y’ will
also be on the top. &
So the image in a mirror is: ee ee

(a) Equidistant from the mirror oO oe

(c) Straight and Pai —

(d) Equal to the size of the object Y’ Y

Figure 8.10: XY object’s imagex'y'
We are reminding these separately, because later we will find that if we use
mirrors of other types instead of plane mirrors, the image may form at different
distances, may be real, may be inverted, may even be small or large.
Do yourself
As B ] a
o.
S Figure 8.11: Kaleidoscope can be made using three glass pieces.

222 Physics
Take three pieces of glass of similar size (you can find this from
photo-frame stores). Form a triangular shape with these three pieces and
wrap them with paper. Stick them in a triangular shape with glue as shown
in Figure 8.11. Cover one side with thin paper. Now put some colorful
stones or colored beads or pieces of bangles inside it and look from the other
side. You will see some beautiful designs. This setup is called a
kaleidoscope. If you rotate this instrument, you will see patterns are in
movement. Continuous reflections on the glass create this pattern. You may
think that in normal transparent glass the reflection is less, but in a
kaleidoscope the incident angle is larger, therefore the amount of reflection

@) Example

Question: What is the required

length of a mirror to see a av = =e

full-length image? i A

Answer: From the geometry NN Ny . MY

shown in Figure 8.12, it can be [| Zi hy, yy

said that the length of the mirror / 7 Me A i \ 1.5m

is 0.75 meter. The interesting ee vi, b) M34

thing is that, whether you stand at é ra b r

a distance of 1 m or 10 m from the , ed

mirror, the size of the mirror i ~

needs to be half of the length of

you for you to see your whole Figure 8.13: To see the full image it is not

body. If your mother or father or necessary of a full length mirror.

anyone wants to buy a full-length

mirror, you may suggest them to

buy a half-length mirror!

=<
Rg

Reflection of Light 223
Question: Two mirrors are placed mutually at 60°
angle (Figure 8.13). If light is incident on the first
mirror at an angle of 60°, what will be the direction 8
of light? 60 | 7
Answer: From geometry it can be said that 3 (oo
the ray will incident on the point B
perpendicularly, and reflect in the opposite Figure 8.13: Two mirrors kept at
direction. an angle of 60°, light is incident at
point A on a mirror at an angle 60°.
@) Individual work
J | 5
Figure 8.14: Image of an object can be formed using fine holes.
In a dark room, make a very small hole in the middle of a piece of
cardboard and place a candle before it. On the opposite side of the board,
hold a white paper, as shown in Figure 8.14. If you do not allow any other
light to fall on the white paper, you will see an image of the flame of the
candle. By moving the white paper in forward or backward, the size of
the image can be made small or big. Is the image real or virtual? Straight
or inverted? Is it equidistant or not? Large or small?
You can understand, the image is real, inverted, clear at all distances and
as far as it forms, larger in size. Through this process, a pin hole camera
is made.
=
8

224 Physics
@) Example

Question: As shown in Figure 8.15, two B

mirrors AO and BO are placed y i IN
perpendicularly to each other. Hold your left 12 & yr
hand in front of it. Now draw the images of -

A O A'
your hand. en
Answer: Your hand is in AOB. In A'OB is i \ a
the front-back image of your hand. In AOB' 1s @ | _|
is the up-down image of your hand. Notice » | B' (/
that in both cases your left hand image !
appears to He yoursight seman ISOS you Figure 8.15: Different reflections
will see the image of the image. of the left hand grip in two mirrors

kept perpendicularly
This can be the up-down image of A'OB or can be the front-back image of AOB'.
Notice that after one reflection your left hand seems to be your right hand, but
after two reflections (reflection of the reflection) your left hand appears as your
left hand.
8.4 Spherical Mirror
We all have seen ordinary plain mirrors but
may not have seen a real spherical mirror. But
the main concept of a spherical mirror can be
seen in a new shiny spoon. Spherical mirrors Wh :
are of two types- concave and convex. We can hk
make concave or convex mirrors by cuttinga y
portion of a hollow sphere and coating its NG aes
surface with a silver or aluminium layer. cS -@
Whether the spherical mirror will be concave eo ae
or convex depends on which surface is coated Figure 8.16: The opposite plane
with silver or aluminium. of a spoon works as convex °
mirror. S

Reflection of Light 225
8.5 Convex Mirror
An actual convex mirror is a part of a real sphere. Let, the radius of the sphere
be r (Figure 8.17). A part of it has been cut to make provision for reflection of
light from the convex side.
If a parallel light beam is incident on the mirror, the light will scatter in all
directions. If we extend the scattered light rays towards the center of the mirror,
it will seem like they have come from a point. This point is called the focal point.
The center point of the surface of a convex mirror that reflects the light is called
pole and the distance of the focal point from the pole is called the focal
length (f).
We can imagine a spherical mirror as a part of a sphere. If the radius of this
sphere is r, its focal length would be = 1/2 .
focal
length
> >|
Ne
Nw i pole
Figure 8.17: Focal length of a convex mirror is half of the radius of the sphere.
@) Example
Question: Prove that, f= r/2
Answer: Interestingly, you cannot prove this completely. You can only go close
to it. Let two rays parallel with the principal axis of a spherical mirror
Forma-29, Physics, Class 9-10

226 Physics
come from A and B respectively. The first ray has come to point X and the
second one has come to another point Y. The ray coming to point X will be
reflected back the way it has come. Let us extend this ray to the center of the
sphere, O. We can see that OX=r (radius of the sphere). The ray coming from
point B to point Y will create an angle of incidence Oiwith perpendicular
ON at that point. The angle of é
reflection of the ray BY is 8, and it will 6 N

be reflected towards YP. If we extend @ 2

PY, it would intersect line OX at point € | i

F. i) F X A
FO=FY because in the triangle OFY,

ZFOY=ZOYF , as FOY= 6; and

ZFYO= 6..

FY = FX when XY is small compared

to radius r This is true for most Figure 8.18: A spherical convex mirror
convex mirrors. is a small part of a hollow sphere.
So, FO=FY=FX= 1/2

or focal length 1/2

Question: If a plane mirror is considered as a spherical convex mirror then
what is its focal length?

Answer: Infinite.

We will now see how the image is formed for a spherical mirror. You will see
that in a convex spherical mirror, images are always virtual where as in a
spherical concave mirror it may be both real or virtual, depending on the position
of the object.

8.5.1 Image in a Spherical Convex Mirror

We have already said that the outer part of a spoon acts as a spherical convex
mirror. You can see an upright and small image of yourself there. This means w=
that the image in a convex mirror should always be small. s

Reflection of Light 227
To understand how an image forms in a spherical convex mirror, we first need
to understand how light rays reflect on such a mirror. This depends on what
angle the light rays are incident on the mirror. If we know the rules of reflection
of only three special light rays, we can easily explain how an image is formed:

(i) If light rays are travelling towards the center (Figure 8.19, XN or YR ray),

they are reflected perpendicularly and go back along the line they were as
incident on.

(ii) If light rays travel parallel to the principal axis (Figure 8.19, XP), they will

appear to have diverged from the focal (F) point.

(iii) If the direction of the light ray is changed, it goes back the way it has
come. When the light ray is travelling towards the focus (Figure 8.19, QP),
it will be reflected parallel to principal axis (PX).

We can now create an image using these three rules. In figure 8.19, an object XY
is kept in front of a convex mirror. The light ray travelling from point Y towards
R will be reflected back along the same path towards Y, which means the image
of the point Y will be created somewhere along the line YO. To know exactly
where the image is formed, we Q
have to draw another light ray from 3 Oy
the point X in another direction but _ ama] x
that’s not necessary because we ene N
will find it by knowing where the nn ai . ™ oY
image of point X is formed.
To find the image of the point X we Fioure 8.19: In convex mirror if an object XY
have to draw two rays, one by is placed inside focal length, the image XY’
connecting the points X and O as we locks smaller.
have done before. (As the YR ray was
reflected back to the point Y, similarly this ray will be reflected back towards X
from the point N on the mirror.) The second ray can be drawn parallel to YR, which will
be incident on point P of the mirror and will appear to have diverged from the point F.
co So we join the line FP and extend it towards Q.
Rg

228 Physics
The line FP intersects line OX at the point X' i.e. the image of the point X will
be formed on the point X’. The perpendicular drawn from X’ to OY will intersect
line OY at Y'. Since it appears that the reflection of X is coming from point X’,
similarly it will appear that reflection of Y is coming from Y'. Hence, X'Y' will
be the image of XY.
We can observe that X’'Y’ is always smaller than XY and the further XY is from
the convex mirror, the smaller X’Y’ will get! One should know how to draw the
image of an object placed in front of a concave or convex mirror using the laws
of reflection. It is a very important procedure in physics.
It is clear that actually no light is coming from X'Y’, it just appears that the
image is there. Hence it is a virtual image. Comparing this with the images
formed by a plane mirror, we can see that-

(a) The position of this image will be between the focus and pole of the

mirror. The further the object is, the closer the image to the focus.

(b) This image is virtual.

(c) This image is upright.

(d) This image is small, and the further the object moves from the mirror,

the smaller the image becomes.
8.6 Concave Mirror
The inside of a shiny spoon is an example of
a concave mirror. Those of you who have
looked at the inside of a spoon must have ~
noticed (Figure 8.20) that the image is ¥
small, and the interesting thing is that the , ae
image is inverted! You can take your finger CE an .
very close to the spoon and notice that the ag \— \/ YZ
finger is upright. Now move your finger Fr (S<
slowly away from the spoon, notice that (ae = : La
your finger is starting to look bigger (we
were able to produce images in plane mirror 7
. : Figure 8.20: A spoon works as a

or convex mirror but never images larger :
than the real size of the object— this concave MITTOr ~
is the first time we are seeing larger S

Reflection of Light 229

image). If you are moving your finger away slowly then you will notice at one

point, that the image gets inverted! No matter where you are while moving away

from that point, it will always remain inverted. (We were never able to create

inverted images using plane mirrors or convex mirrors— this is the first time we

are observing an inverted image!)

So you can see that the outside part of a spoon works as a convex mirror and the

inside of a spoon works as a concave mirror! A real concave mirror is actually a

part of a sphere. In the case of a convex mirror light was reflected from the

outside convex shape and in the case of a concave mirror light will be reflected

from the inside concave shape. focal

If parallel rays are incident on a concave le eed

mirror the light rays will converge at a 2 :

point after reflection (Figure 8.21). You

can understand that this point is the focal

point of the concave mirror and the

distance from the pole to this point is pole a

known as the focal distance. Light rays a

don’t have any option of stopping, so after — r

converging at a point they will travel aa

straight forward and it will look like light is

diverging from that point! Therefore before

reaching the focal point the rays are Figure 8.21: The focal distance of a

converging (convergent) and after reaching concave mirror is half of the radius of the

the focal point the rays are diverging sphere

(divergent).

@) Example

Question: If we imagine a plane mirror as a spherical concave mirror, what will

be its focal distance?

Answer: Infinite!

We got the same answer in case of convex mirrors, which means when the focal

distance increases to infinity then both convex and concave mirrors turn into
« plane mirrors! The focal distance is half of the radius in concave mirrors as in a
S convex mirror.

230 Physics
8.6.1 Image on concave mirror
Now we have entered the most exciting part! In plane mirrors and convex
mirrors only one type of image was formed. Two types of images can be formed
on a concave mirror. If an object is placed within the focal distance it forms one
type of image, if it is placed at a distance greater than the focal distance it creates
another type of image.
Before starting that, let us know how light rays reflect from a spherical concave
mirror. If we know the rules of reflection of three special light rays in a concave
mirror, we can explain how the image is formed:
(i) If light ray travels along the radius or starts from the center (Figure 8.22,
OP or ON ray), it will reflect perpendicularly and go back the way it has
come.
(ii) The ray parallel to the principal axis will go through the focal point (F) after
reflection (QF).
(iii) If the direction of light ray is changed, it goes back the way it has come.
So a light ray (figure 8.22, FQ) going through the focus will reflect parallel
(QX) to the principal axis.
Now we can create image for concave mirrors.
At a distance less than focal length
In fig 8.22, a concave mirror is shown. This mirror is part of a sphere whose
center is O, focal point of the mirror is F and we want to determine the image of
the object XY. Light coming from point Y reflects from point P of the concave
mirror and again goes through point Y towards point O. So it can be
comprehended that it will stay on a point of line OP or on an extended part of
line OP. To determine this exact point another ray has to be drawn from point Y
towards the concave mirror, but we are not doing that. If we can determine the
image of the point X as before we can find the exact location of the image of
point Y. To determine the image of point X, two lines have to be drawn from this
point. The first line will be an extended part of the line OX. It will touch the ,
Ss
N

Reflection of Light 231
concave mirror perpendicularly and after reflection will go back the way it has
come. As shown in figure, another ray from point X can be a ray parallel to the
principal axis. Because we have already known that parallel ray goes through the
focal point after reflection. So it will be incident on the point Q and after
reflection will go through the point F,
a a
y" P Y oF Oo”
Figure 8.22: Image appears larger than the object in the
concave mirror placed inside the focal length.
After emerging from point X two rays of light will travel towards NO and QF
and we can see that these two rays have no chance of intersecting. So there
cannot be an image formed on the right side. But if we are able to look at the left
side from the right side then it will look like line ON and line FQ coincide at X’
point- so X’ will be the image of X. If we draw a perpendicular from this point
on OP axis then we will get X’Y’ which is the full image of XY. No light is
coming from X'Y’, only we are thinking that the image is being formed there. So
this image is a virtual image. We can see from the figure that the image is larger
than the object. Not only will the image be larger but moving the object closer to
the focal point will create a yet larger image. (If the object is placed just on the
focal point then the reflected rays will become parallel meaning that the light
rays won’t be able to coincide to create an image.)
Now let’s see what happens to the image when we place an object within the
focal distance of a concave mirror:
(a) The position of the image will depend on the position of the real object. The
closer the object is placed to the focus further the image will be created.

(b) It is virtual
(c) Straight

« (d) The length of the image will also depend on its position, the closer it gets to

s the focal point the larger its length becomes.

232 Physics
At a distance greater than focal distance
Among all the images we have seen so far, this image is amazing, because we
will witness a real image for the first time, where light will be centralized where
the image will be created (Figure 8.23).
Let, the object be XY and like other
cases, the image of point Y will be on the
line YP. We have to draw two lines in 2
order to determine the image of point X. wi
One line XQ will be parallel to the axis, -
and after reflection it traverses through 1
the focal point F as QF. We can draw the wo,
second ray through the point F. This will ® y s
reflect in the concave mirror and after
reflecting, it will become parallel to rs, Figure 8.23: The image becomes inverted if
as after veflection in the concave minor 22 object is placed outside focal length of a
parallel rays traverse through the focal eye
point, the reverse is also true. Light always follows its path in reverse direction. Lines
QF and RS intersect at the point X’ and point X' is the image of point X.
So, the normal drawn on line PO
x from X' intersects at the point Y’ and
L\ X’Y’ is the image of object XY. This
[NO image is unique compared to other
eS images. This is shown in Figure 8.24.
yo NG o The object XY is placed at a distance
Vs more than two times of focal
‘ x distance. This time the image has
become shorter. If the object is
Figure 8.24: In a concave mirror if an placed at a distance of two times of
object is placed at a distance more than two focal length, its image would appear
times of focal length the image formed is °° the same point as shown in Fig
cwverted and hort 8.25. Not only this, the image's size 3

Reflection of Light 233
would be the same as the object. These three different cases can be written precisely
when the object is outside the focal distances. If any object is placed outside the focal
length, the images will be as follows:

(a) The position of the image depends on the position of the object. When the
object is placed within the focal point and concave mirror's center, the image
will form outside the center. As the object is placed outside the center of
curvature of the concave mirror, the image will form inside the center.
If the object is placed at the center, the image will also form at the center.

(b) The image is real. So, as we can say that if the image itself is the object, the
object becomes the image.

(c) The image is inverted.

(d) The height of the image will depend upon its position. If it is formed in
between the focal point and the center of curvature, the image of the image
will be greater than the object. The nearer to the focal point, the greater it
is. If the object is outside the center of curvature, its height will be shorter
than the real object. If the object is placed at the center of curvature, the
size of the image will be the same as the object.

We applied geometry to determine the position, shape etc. of images for convex

and concave mirrors. We could do these works using a single formula. The

formula is :
1 1 1

Where, u is the distance of object from the plane of the mirror, v is the distance

of the image and f is the focal distance.

Real image is a very important idea. We will find in the next chapter how real

images can be formed with a lens. You have already seen that there are real light

trays in a real image, so if it is projected on a screen, it is possible to see the
image. In ordinary mirrors, you can look at yourself but you cannot project
yourself on screens with ordinary mirrors.

Forma-30, Physics, Class 9-10

234 Physics
@) Example
Question: Figure 8.24 shows that the
image of object XY is formed at
X’Y’. If the object is XY’, where will Q x
the image be formed? 1
Answer: This is a real image. So if SJ y
X'Y’ is an actual object, the image Cy’
will be XY. 1

\/
Question: : If an object is placed just R x
at a distance double of its focal length
wens she formed? where will the Figure 8.25: In concave mirror, if an

8 : object is placed at a distance double of its
Answer: (Figure 8.25) The image focal length, the image will form at the
will be formed at the same position, same position in inverted condition.
be of the same size but in inverted
form.
Till now we have learnt the science of concave mirrors, now we will see how to
use it.
8.7. Magnification
We have seen that an image can be larger or smaller than the real object, this is
called magnification. Magnification refers to how much larger the image is than
the real object. If the length of an object is | and length of its image is I’, then
magnification is
I
m= T

When we see an object through a telescope, how large the object is when seen
with the naked eye as compared to its size as seen by a telescope is known asthe
telescope's magnification. S

Reflection of Light 235

8.8 Use of Mirror

8.8.1 Plane Mirror

Simple mirrors are most commonly used in our daily lives. Ordinary mirrors are

used whenever a light ray travelling in one direction is to be redirected in another

direction. You must have noticed that in a plane mirror right and left side

alternates. So if we want to keep the right and left unchanged, the image of one

mirror is to be reflected by a second mirror.

The left and right are interchanged in a plane mirror image. Right and left do not

interchange if two mirrors are used as a single mirror by keeping them at 90°

angle with each other. You may demonstrate it by using two mirrors (Figure

8.26).

py < NN ek De
Figure 8.26: In ordinary mirror the left and right are interchanged, where as two
mirrors are kept at right angles to leave left and right unchanged.

An important point to note is, when a good reflection is necessary, quite a

different kind of reflection is done instead of using an ordinary plane mirror. We

will see in the next chapter how light is reflected by a completely transparent

medium.

8.8.2 Convex Mirror

A diminished and erect image can be created by using a convex mirror. So a
a convex mirror is used to see a large scene in a small region. Expert drivers
$ always trying to notice of what is happening behind the car while driving. So,

236 Physics
there is a rear view mirror in front of the driver. Convex mirrors are used in these
mirrors so that drivers can see a vast area behind the car with the help of a small
mirror.

8.8.3 Concave Mirror

The most important use of concave mirrors
is in telescopes. Concave mirrors are used in
the largest and the smallest telescopes of the
world. Many of us generally think that the
only function of a good telescope is to create
a large image of the small objects situated = it
far away. Actually that’s not true, the iil
function of a good telescope is also to create
a distinct image in very dim light. That is
why the bigger the concave mirror is, the
more light it can converge to create a clear
image. Concave mirrors are used in all of
the large telescopes of the world. Figure 8.27: When an intense
Another use of concave mirrors is to create a ligt cubis placa nad the aes
parallel beam of light. Concave mirrors are pecin, Thnear thea Hight iereleedind
used in search lights of ships or launches. The ate ats sae aay raalls!
light source is kept at the focus of the mirror, beam of light.
so the light rays are incident on the concave mirror and reflected back as parallel
beams of light. The torch lights you use in your daily life, also have the bulb kept just
at the focus of a concave mirror!

Since an erect and magnified image is formed when an object is placed within the focal
length of a mirror, we use concave mirrors if we want to see a magnified image of any
object. Doctors and dentists often use concave mirrors when they try to observe
something.

8.8.4 Safe Driving
Development of the transportation system of a country is necessary when a country is
trying to develop. New roads are constructed and vehicles of many types start moving
on those roads. You must have noticed that the huge number of vehicles travelling
through the roads in our country and how the number of vehicles is increasing day by s

Reflection of Light 237
day. A huge amount of time is wasted because of traffic jams created due to insufficient
roads and many people die due to accident on highways. These deaths occur mainly
due to the reason that drivers jeopardize safe driving for reaching destinations quickly
rather than safely. Many kinds of awareness is required for safe driving, correct use of
light is one of them.
Brake lights play an important role while driving. Seeing this light the driver of the
preceding car can be sure if the car in front is trying to slow down or in which direction
the car will go. Whether the car will change lanes or not, the turn lights are used to
inform others. The head lights in front of the car illuminates the dark roads but there are
some specific rules for using headlights. The high beams are not used when a car is
coming from the opposite direction so that the eyes of the driver are not dazzled by the
bright lights. A driver has to be aware of the sides and back of the car besides the front.
That’s why there’s a rear view mirror in front and side view mirror on both sides of the
car. Convex mirror are used here so that an image of a large area can be created in such
a small mirror. A good driver always keeps track of what is happening on all sides of
the car as well as what’s happening in front of the car.
8.8.5 Invisible Curves of Hilly Roads
Hilly roads are usually curved as well as uneven. Besides, there are hills on one side
and a deep ditch on the other side of the road. This is why the drivers should be careful
while driving on hilly roads. Still driving in some areas can be very risky. Especially
when there is almost a 90° turn ahead and the driver cannot see what is coming from
the other side. In these circumstances, a plane mirror is placed at 45° at the turns. Then
the drivers can see what’s happening on both sides and driving in those areas becomes
comparatively safer.

x

&

238 Physics
(?) Exercise
) General questions
1.How the of sensitivity of eyes can determined?
2. Why are the danger signals shown using red colors though human eyes can see
yellowish green the most?
3. In mirrors, right and left interchanges, Why do the top and bottom not
interchange?
4. Why colors cannot be seen in moonlight?
5. Why concave mirrors are used in the telescopes used by astronomers?
6. What do you mean by reflection of light?
7. What do you mean by regular and irregular reflection?
8. What is a mirror?
9. What is called an image? How many types of images are there? What are
they?
10. How real image is formed in a concave mirror? Demonstrate with the help
of a ray diagram.
Mathematical questions
1. A mirror is placed as shown in figure 4
8.28. In which direction will the light ray, 90° |
shown in figure 8.28, g0?
2. For a convex mirror (figure 8.29a)
show where the image will be formed for 45> “
an object XY by drawing a ray diagram. "
75°) ‘ase
3. For a concave mirror (figure 8.29 b) a
show where the image will be formed for Figure 8.28
an object XY by drawing a ray diagram. ~
Ss
XQ

Reflection of Light 239
\ , '
fe) F R ¥i Pp Y F 0
(a) (b)
Figure 8.29: (a) An object placed inside the focal length of a convex mirror.
(b) An object placed inside focal length of a concave mirror.
4. For a concave mirror (figure 8.30a) show where the image will be formed for
an object XY by drawing a ray diagram.
x x
P F ¥ fe} = F fe) Y
(a) “
Figure 8.30: (a) An object placed outside focal length in concave mirror.
(b) An object placed outside focal length in concaves mirror.
5. For a concave mirror (figure 8.30 b) show where the image will be formed for
an object XY by drawing a ray diagram.
OSS) Multiple choice questions
Put the tick (Vv) mark on the correct answer.
1.Where are convex mirrors used?
(a) Cars (b) Torch light
% (c) Solar oven (d) Radar
S
Nn

240 Physics
2. How many types of reflections are there?
(a)4 (b)3
(c)2 (d)1
3. Image produced in a plane mirror -
(i) equal to object in size
(ii) can be formed on a screen
(iii) formed at a distance equal to the distance of the object from the mirror.
Which one of the following is correct?
(a) i and ii (b) ii and iii
(c) i and iii (d) i, ii and iii y
y 6
Answer question number 4 and 5 in light of the above ||
figure. | FBC
4. What will be the size of object BO?
(a) magnified (b) diminished \
(d) extremely magnified (d) extremely diminished .
Figure: 8.31
5. What will be the position of the object BO?
(a) between the focus and the pole (b) at the principal focus
(c) at the centre of curvature (d) between the centre of curvature and
infinity
Creative questions
R
P | .
0 Cc oF
<— i» —*
1 2
Figure 8.32 20
8

241
1. Figure 8.32
(a) What is a plane mirror?
(b) Why is a metal coating given behind a mirror?
(c) Determine the position of the image of the object PQ by drawing a
figure.
(d) Compare the mirrors 1 and 2 in the formation of images.
2. Figure 8.33
(a) What is an image? Q
(b) Why rays incident normally on the mirror turns back
along the same path?
(c) Determine the value of the angle of reflection in se
light of the figure above?
(d) The image formed in the plane mirror PQ is virtual;
explain with the help of diagram. ‘
3. A group of students found that if a stick of 2 cm length is
placed in front of a concave mirror an image of 3.51 P
magnification is formed on the screen in the first step. Inthe Figure 8.33
second step of the experiment they found an image on the
screen of magnification 6.
(a) What is magnification?
(b) Why plain mirrors are not used as view mirrors?
(c) Calculate the length and property of the image of the stick in the first step
of the experiment.
(d) What are the changes made in the second step of the experiment?
Forma-31, Physics, Class 9-10

Chapter nine
Refraction of light
\ . Sig? S00
. — — ‘So A »
——— - ea
— @ege®, % r)
—— % ®
=)
8 ®
i]

The velocity of lightina vacuumis 3x10* ms". If light enters a medium, its
velocity decreases from this velocity. To explain this process a quantity named
tefractive index is defined. You can show that light changes its direction due to
the change of its velocity while passing from one medium to another. Due to this
property of light, or refraction, a wonderful event may happen named total
internal reflection. We will discuss various uses of total internal reflection in this
chapter.
Convex and Concave lens can be made by using refraction. Which types of
images can be formed using these two lens will be discussed in this chapter. %

S

N

Refraction of light 243
® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-
e Explain the laws of refraction.
e Explain the refractive index.
e Explain total internal reflection.
e Explain the use of optical fibers.
e Describe lenses and their classification.
e Describe the different qualities of lenses by drawing a ray diagram.
e Describe the image formed by lenses by drawing a ray diagram.
e Describe the power of lenses.
e Describe the function of eyes by drawings ray diagram.
e Describe the least distance of distinct vision.
e Describe the defects of eyes.
e Describe the uses of lens to remedy the defects of the eye by drawing ray
diagram.
e Explain the perception of coloured objects.
e Describe the uses of refraction of light in everyday life.
i}
g

244 Physics
9.1 Refraction of light
You know that when light moves from one medium to another, three different
events may happen . One is reflection, where some amount of light come back
to the first medium while entering the second medium. We have discussed in
the previous chapter. Another one is refraction, when light passes from the
first medium to the second. We will discuss this in this chapter. Another one
is absorption, when some amount of light is absorbed, which we will not
discuss here.
In order to understand refraction a quantity named the refractive index (n) is
used. We know the velocity of light in a vacuum is 2.99x108 ms" and when it
passes through a medium this velocity decreases. In a medium, the factor by
which the velocity of light reduces is the refraction of light of that medium .
For instance the velocity of light in water is 2.26x108 ms" therefore the
refractive index of water is
_¢ _ 2.99108 ms? _
n= 5 226x10ms
i.e. the velocity of light in a vacuum is 1.33 times greater than the velocity of
light in water .
The refractive index of the glass fiber in a ‘Tabihe Rs: Recioxityes nade
: ; of some substance
fiber optic cable is 1.5.
Therefore the velocity of light in the fiber is
v=3%X108 ms?/1.50 = 2.00 x 10® ms?
Refractive index is a number and. it has no
unit. As the maximum velocity of light is c,
the value of n always greater than 1 . In :
Table 9.01 the refractive index of some substances are given.
Naturally, the refractive index of a vacuum will be 1.
The refractive index of air is 1.00029 which is so close to 1 that we will take it as
1 during calculations.
@) Example
Question : Calculate the velocity of light in the mediums shown in Table 9.01 .
Answer : Velocity of light in any medium: v = £ S

Refraction of light 245
In vacuum v = 3 x 108 ms?/1.00 = 3x 108 ms?
In air vy =3X 108 ms7/1.00029 = 310° ms?
Inwater v=3%x108ms'/133= 2.26 x 108 ms?
In normal glass v = 3X 108 ms7/1.52 = 2108 ms™
Indiamond v = 3 x 108 ms'/2.42 = 1.24 x 108 ms*
To say what the refractive index of a
medium is, the wavelength of light
for which the refractive index is 4,
measured must be stated, because the first medium
Tefractive index depends on the 90° (] “a
wavelength of light.
9.1.1 Laws of refraction second medium
The things needed to understand the Ri. é
laws of refraction are already known. a
In the case of reflection of light we
have imagined a normal from the Figure 9.01 : Refraction of light from
point of incident. We do the same _first medium to the second
here . In Figure 9.01 we will call the
angle between the incident ray and the normal as the angle of incidence and the
angle between the refracted ray and the normal as angle of refraction.
First Law of Refraction: The refracted ray will lie on the same plane as the
incident ray and the normal.
Second Law of Refraction: If the refractive index of the first medium is n,,
the refractive index of the second medium is n,, the angle of incidence is 9, ,
the angle of refraction is 0,, then
msin&: = nz sin &
If you remember this, you will be able to solve all problems about
a refraction of light.
~
>
a

246 Physics

If the first medium is air then taking n, =1, (Figure 9.02)

we can write ‘a

yea
sin 6,

As the value of n, is greater than 1, #, < 0, i.e after refraction, the ray of light

will bend towards the normal . We say the medium is denser if the value of n is

greater . We are not calling the medium denser due to its mass . Here the

meaning of a denser medium the that the value of n is more . Therefore,

according to the second law of refraction, when a ray of light enters from a rarer

medium to a denser medium, the refracted ray bends towards the normal. When

it enters from a denser medium to a rarer medium, it goes away from the normal

(Figure 9.02).

® | rarer medium rarer medium &
denser medium Goma ec s 2
Figure 9.02 : The refracted ray bends towards the normal when entering
from a rarer medium to a denser medium, and it goes away from the
normal when entering from a denser medium to a rarer medium.

Here only the incident ray and refracted rays are drawn, as refraction of light is

discussed, but we must remember that when a ray of light goes from one

medium to another every time some amount of light is reflected. How much light

will be reflected and how much light will refracted depends on the angle of

incidence. When there is an increase in the angle of incidence, the reflection

increases.
x
S
Q

Refraction of light 247
(@)) Do Yourself
Wo eS
TS
Figure 9.03 : Refraction of light in water and glass

Put a coin in a cup and place the cup in front of you so that the coin is

not seen . How is it possible to see the coin without moving your head?

After pouring water in the cup, the coin will be seen. Due to refraction

light will bend and reach your eyes. If will also seem as if the coin is

moving upwards.
@) Example
Question: A ray of light is incident on a medium of n= 1.6 with an angle
of incidence 45 (Figure 9.04 a) . With what angle will it enter into the
second medium ?
Answer: We know 7 sin@, = nz sin &

ind, = “sino, => x= = 0.44
Therefore sin ®2 = i. sine: = 75 7 es
0, = 26°
Question : In Figure 9.04 b, a ray is incident from air to another medium at an
angle of 60° and refracted at angle 6f 45 . What is the refractive index of the
second medium?
=
8

248 Physics
a air | med
other m= 1.6 other n=?
medium > medium
182 i 45°
(a) (b)
Figure 9.04: (a) Angle of incidence of light is 45° (b) Angle of
incidence is 60° and angle of refraction is 45°
Answer : We know 7, sin@, = nz sin &
1x sin60°= n, sin 45°
_ sin60°_ 459
me ints?
9.1.3 Relative refractive index
We said the refractive index of a medium is always greater than 1. Because , as
the refractive index of a medium is a comparison of the velocity of light in that
medium with the velocity of light in a vacuum, it will be greater than 1.
Sometimes the refractive index of a medium is expressed in comparison with
another medium. Then the refractive index may be less than 1 depending on
which medium is being compared with which.
Such as, if water is the first medium and glass is the second medium (Figure
9.05) then
n,sin@, = nz sin @
ny = 1.33
Ny = 1.52
The refractive index of glass in comparison with water:
nz sind _ 114
nm sin@, %
which is greater than 1 . 8

Refraction of light 249
The refractive index of water in comparison with glass
“= ~ = 0.88

which is less than 1. ,

You therefore divide the refractive

index of the medium that you want to

determine by the refractive index of ;

the medium with respect to which ni

you want to determine the refractive wane

index . : 8

Diamond with respect to water : 1.82 8 |

Water with respect to diamond : 0.55 : A

Diamond with respect to glass : 1.59 ~~ %

Glass with respect to diamond : 0.63 :

But in physics usually the refractive

index of a particular substance is

used, not the refeactive index of one Figure9.05: Refraction of light from
substance in comparison to another. water to glass

9.2 Total Internal Reflection
When discussing reflection, we learned that when perfect and total reflection
is needed, then instead of mirror a perfect transparent medium is
used, and a kind of reflection is made. This is total internal
reflection. It is a very easy and exciting process. Here, light rays are sent
to a rarer medium from a denser medium using the refraction of light. We
know (and have used many times) that the law of refraction is
n,sin@, =n, sin@, ic if n, is greater than n, then 6 is greater than 6,.
Suppose you are sending a ray of light from a denser(n, ) medium to a rarer(n,)
medium (Figure 9.06).According to the laws of reflection and refraction some
amount of light will be reflected and some will be refracted . As 6, will be greater
than 6, therefore staying 9,(90°,0, will be equal to 90° and after this there will
be no scope of light to be refracted, ic when 96, will be equal to 90°, total
light has to be reflected . The value of 0, at which @, = 90° is called the critical angle 4,.
Forma-32, Physics, Class 9-10

250 Physics
n, sin90° = n, sind,
sing, =
n,
L 8, 1 6,
1 mn i my j ™
| 02! &
6, < 8c 8, = Oc 8, >8c
Figure 9.06: When passing from a denser medium to a rarer medium, total internal
reflection of light may occur .
i.e nz,sin90° = nz sin 6,
or sin 9, = =
n2
If we know the values of n, and n, we could calculate an angle 9, for which
the above law is true. Therefore the law can be written as
6, = sin™ ) NS).
nz for glass = 1.52 and o O7iN
7 for air = 1.00 al && ot Ns
. Bees
n, 1.00
— =~ = 0.66 i . ?
MN, 1.52 Figure 9.07 : Most teeming reflection
occurs in total internal reflection .
It is possible to show that, sin 41.8° = 0.66 or sin™1(0.66) = 41.8°,
therefore the critical angle 6, = 41.8° %
S
N

Refraction of light 251
When sending light from transparent glass to air, if the ray of light is incident at
an angle greater than 41.8°, the ray of light will not emerge from transparent
glass and will be totally reflected . If you have a prism then you will be able to
see total internal reflection with your own eyes. In Figure 9.07, at the glass-air
separating surface the incident angle is 45° ,which is greater than the critical
angle 41.8° of glass-air. Therefore total internal reflection will occur here.
() Example
Question : What will occur if you want to do this experiment when immerse in
water ? (n, for glass is 1.52 and n, for water is 1.33)
Answer: In water z= 0.88 ,therefore the critical angle of glass will be 61.6°
because sin 61.6° =0.88
or sin!(0.88) = 61.6°
As the angle of incidence is 45° , which is less than the critical angle 61.6°, total
internal reflection will not occur.
Question : Light incidents at an angle of
75° from a medium of refractive index
1.45. With what angle will the ray of
light emerge if there is air on the other ae nets
side . {—
Answer : We know i\ mao
n, sin®, = nz sin 8, 8
1.45 x sin75° = 1x sin®,
sin. = 1.40 Figure 9.08 : Light incidents at angle 75°.
We know the value of sin 6, will not be greater than 1, but here it happens
because light is totally reflected without refracting . Therefore whenever we
want to see the refraction of light from a denser medium to a rarer medium then
it is better to determine the critical angle first. If light incidents at an angle less
« than this critical angle, only then it is possible to get refraction.
Ss
nN

252 Physics
In this case if the critical angle is 9,
1
sind, = [45 — 0.69
0, = 43.6°

Therefore if light incidents at angle 75° , then total internal reflection happens

instead of reflection.

9.2.1 Rainbow

You may be thinking that you have never seen total internal reflection. But those

who have seen a_ rainbow have seen total internal reflection . A rainbow is

formed by the total internal reflection of water. Those who have not separated

white light into different colors with prism , have seen this in a rainbow . If the

sun rises after rain, we see a rainbow . Because there are water droplets in the

air, in that water total internal reflection occurs, where different colors of light

bends in different angles . The bands of different color of the rainbow are formed.

by these light rays . Those of you who have seen a rainbow have seen that the

rainbow always forms in the sky opposite to the sun. Surely how you have

understood the reason for this.

9.2.2 Mirage

Mirage is a common phenomenon in the desert .You will be surprised to hear

that a mirage also happens due to total internal reflection. The word comes from

changes of density of air due to heat in the desert. We know heated air, being

lighter, goes up, but due to the heated sands in the desert the nearby air may

hotter than the upper air. Therefore we can imagine the air in desert as in Figure

9.09.

In order to illustrate this easily only a few layers are shown. The density of the

air in upper level is high and so the refractive index is high. Air in the lower level

is heated, so density is low and its refractive index is also low. During refraction

of light from the tree, in each layer the angle of refraction will increase and at the

lowest level total internal reflection may happen. When entering a medium of

lower refractive index from a medium of higher refractive index there isa ,,
Ss
N

Refraction of light 253
possibility of crossing the critical angle because the angle of incidence is higher
if it is seen from far . So a mirage is seen from far and cannot be seen from near.
If a person looks at a tree from far away, he can see the tree directly, and due to
total internal reflection he can also see an image of that tree under the tree. It will
seem that the image of the tree is seen due to the existence of water under the
tree. After coming closer, it will be clear that there is no water.

me 5 on
(aN cS re
\ \ \ > y p i iy
Figure 9.09 : Mirage is seen due to the difference of density of the air in the desert.
While driving a car on a heated road in the summer, a wet road is seen far away
for the same reason. After coming closer it is seen that the road is dry. This is
also a kind of mirage.
9.3 Uses of refraction
There are different uses of refraction. The uses which are playing
important roles in our lives are:
c=)
FS

254 Physics
9.3.1 Optical fiber

Electric wire is replaced by thin glass fiber for communication of the new world.
In the past, information was sent with

electric signals; now information is sent

with light signals. In a free state light

goes in straight line, but in an optical

fiber the light is trapped so it is possible

to turn it in any direction by rotating on

any side . Figure 9.10: Light can pass through
An optical fiber is a very thin fiber of optical fiber by total internal
glass. The inner part of it is called the reflection.

core and the outer part is called clad . Although the two are made of same glass,
the refractive index of the inner part (core) is greater than that of the outer part.
For this reason light can be taken very long distances by trapping it in optical
fibers the through total internal reflections (Figure 9.10). Light can be taken
hundreds of kilometers through optical fibers, because the absorption of light in
optical fibers is very low. Absorption would have been greater if the visible light
was there so infrared rays of long wavelength are used in optical fibers. How
optical fibers are used in a process called endoscopy of medical science is
described in the last chapter.

®) Example

Question: If the refractive index of the §=£=———____
core in an optical fiber is 1.50 and the oo
refractive index of the clad is 1.45, (Figure ee a
9.11) what is the angle of incidence of ie

light for totalinternal reflectionto occur? =—s—“‘“‘“‘SOSC;O~*~*~*~:~C~™
Answer: @, = sin (=) Figure 9.11: Total internal reflection

? occurs from core to clad in optical
Here fiber
m=1.50 48 nn, =1.45
s
&

Refraction of light 255
0, = sin () = sin-1(0.97) = 75°
Therefore light has to incident at an angle of 75° or more.
9.3.2 Periscope and binocular
There is something called a periscope
in submarines and it is possible to see AY
above the water while under water by SY |
periscope. The periscope is made by a
prism and its total internal reflection
is more effective than a periscope
made of ordinary mirrors (Figure
9.12). In order to reduce the length of y
binoculars, total internal reflection is {s
done using prisms in it. NS
9.3.3 Prism oe OO
If the two surfaces of a transparent rea
medium are not parallel, this is called —
prism. The light goes out in a Figure 9.12: Prismis used instead of
direction parallel to the direction mirror in periscope
in which it enters the transparent
medium. Though the direction
remains unchanged, the light ray bends a little bit from the main ray. In the case
of prism the direction of light changes (Figure 9.13). While entering the first
surface the ray bends toward the normal. The second surface is not parallel, so
when going out from this surface the light ray moves away from the normal but
cannot move towards the main ray. Though in a prism the direction of light
changes, it is important for another reason. After entering the prism, how much
the ray of light will deviates from the main direction depends on the refractive
index of the prism. We know that the refractive index depends on the wavelength
or the color of light. So there is a different refractive index for different colors.
Therefore if there exists different colors in the same ray of light, when passing
through a prism the ray of light of each color will change its direction in different
angles. Therefore we will see that when coming out from the prism the light is
co separated into its component colors. This was first shown by Newton.
Ss
N

256 Physics

9.3.4 Lens

A lens is created using the refraction of ag?

light. Using lenses, starting from original direction

spectacles, sensitive optical instruments ~. Ux Not light

like telescopes and microscopes are > — =

created. A lenses are also used in video se

projectors and cameras. In this chapter, emithed light

we'll broadly discuss about lenses, direction

iyper of lenses and their propextios: Figure 9.13: In prism rays of light
deviate towards the base of the

9.4 Types of lenses a

In convex and concave mirrors, we’ve seen that, when light enters these mirrors,

sometimes it focuse to a point (converging ray) or sometimes it diverges

(diverging ray) and the image is formed. That image is sometimes real and

sometimes virtual. Sometimes it is big, sometimes it is small. Using these images

in many ways, optical instruments have been

developed.

Many types of images is made by convex or

concave mirrors can also be made by lenses

and they are used in many ways. We have all

seen lenses (because the spectacles are

actually a kind of lens). Those of you who

have used spectacles or have seen others using

spectacles have certainly noticed that lens of

spectacles can be divided into two types.

Small things can be seen bigger with one kind Figeve 9.14: Grows sention off

of lens (usually the lenses of spectacles for old ssa taveitnetl ataanmamae tears

people are like this). Again big things can be

seen smaller with another kind of lens.

( Usually the lens of spectacles of the young people are like this). The lenses with

which small things are seen bigger are called convex or (sometimes) converging

lenses. The lenses with which big things are seen smaller are called concave or

(sometimes) diverging lens. Mid portion of the lenses with which small things

are seen bigger or convex lens is thicker than the edges. And the mid portion of 5

x

Refraction of light 257
the concave lens is thinner than the edges as shown in 9.14.If we see the cross
section of the concave or convex lens we can understand that both are bound
with two round circles. The radius of these two circles can be different or the
same. The centers of these circles are called the centres of curvature. In the
picture 9.15, C, and C, are the centres of curvature.
Different kinds of lenses are used in everyday life or in different subjects of
science.
+ ( + + I +
C1 C3 C1 C2
Figure 9.15: Convex and concave lens can be imagined as the part of two
circles.
We will keep our discussion limited to
thin lenses. Though the difference
between thin and thick lenses can be
understood by their names, let us
explain this more. Looking at the cross .
j deviated ray
section of the lens, we can see that giootion
though the lens has a curvature in the
surface, at the middle the two surfaces
are almost parallel. We know when light
passes through a parallel surface it is ofiginal ray
deviated a little from the main direction
girtion due to refraction (Figure Figure 9.16: When passing through
-16). . thick glass light rays are deviated
As the parallel surface thickens, the from main rays due to refraction.
rays of light will deviate more. If the
parallel surfaces are close to each other
;we can say that main rays of light go
Forma-33, Physics, Class 9-10

258 Physics

out out roughly in the same direction, there is no deviation .

In the case of those lenses in which light ray passing through it, the direction of

the ray remains unchanged is called a thin lens. (Figure 9.17). We can say that

the point of the middle of a thin lens through which light rays do not deviate

when passing through it is called the center of that lens (Figure 9.17, point O)

or the Optical center.

, ~
Figure 9.17: When passing through a thick lens rays of light deviate a little;
when passing through a thin lens light rays do not change direction.

9.4.1 Concave lens

While discussing about convex and Yai

concave mirrors, we first learned ‘|

about convex mirrors. In the case of te

lens at first we will discuss concave fn |

lens. Because a concave lens forms the [SL |

image a like a convex mirror. | oN] ~S

In the case of a convex mirror we saw

that parallel rays diverts in all —s| facal S

directions during reflection. In the length

case of concave lens the same thing

occurs. The incident parallel rays On Figure 9.18: Rays of light diverges

this lens are diverted during refraction. when passing through a concave lens.

If we extend the refracted rays of light

backwards, it would seem that they

are spreading out directly from a point. oo
3
N

Refraction of light 259
That point is called the focal point and the distance from the focal point and the
center of the lens is called the focal length. (Figure 9.18)

In the case of a convex mirror, light is incident from one side. In the case of a
lens, light can be incident on it from both sides. Every lens has a focal length
.The focal length of a lens remains the same whichever direction the light is
incident on it. If parallel light
incidents on this lens, the rays spread
out, and appear to diverge from focal
point. If the direction of the rays of
light is reversed then they goes back °
through the direction they came. So if :
we can reverse the direction of :
divergent rays, then they will emerge :
in parallel and will go in the inverted :
direction (Figure 9.19).
To understand how an image is
jomed in vet deus, WE need a Figure 9.19: While passing through
ow’ Row Henk tye ate xehacte concave lens rays of light converging
through a concave lens. It depends on rays emerge in parallel.
the angle with which the light ray is
falling. If we know the three special rules of refraction of light, we can explain
how the image is formed:
(i) Ifthe ray of light is centripetal (Figure 9.20, YO or XO ray) it goes
straight after refraction.
(ii) The rays which are parallel with the principle axis, (Figure 9.20 XP) will
(PS) appear to diverge from the focal point (F) after refraction.
(iii) If the direction of the light ray is reversed then it goes back through
the way it came. Therefore, if any ray goes (Figure 9.20, SP) towards
the focus then it will be refracted in parallel with the principle axis.

Now we can find out how the image of an object will be in a concave lens.
Suppose an object XY is kept near a concave lens. (Figure 9.20) To make the
analysis easy, we have taken the point Y of that object on the principle axis YR.
To find where the image of a point will be formed, at least two rays should be
drawn from that point. But we can find the image of Y without drawing two rays.

«itis possible to draw a ray along the principle axis YR, so we know the image of
§ this point will be formed on this axis. We will get the image of point Y if we

260 Physics
draw a normal on this axis from image of X.
Imagine two rays from point X, one is XP which is incident on the lens in
parallel with the axis. This will diverge when emerged and will appear to
diverge from the focus, so if a line is drawn from the focus F to P and
elongated, then we’ll find
that ray. Let us draw the
second ray from point X Va S
towards the center of the x
lens. According to the ) |
tules of thin lenses it will
emerge directly along the ~- i} ~~]
direction of XT. The point E "3 inh a
where XT and FS T
intersect each other is the
image X' of X. If we draw
a normal from X' on the
axis we will get the image
X'y'of XY. Figure 9.20 : An object looks small in a concave
lens

The things which are seen in the case of convex mirror are true in the case of
concave lens.

(a) Its position will be in between the center and focus of the lens.

(b) It is virtual

(c) It is erect.

(d) It is small.
9.4.2 Convex Lens
The images in convex lens are amazing. The image which we got from a
concave mirror, is the same as the images in a convex lens. We have seen in the
case of a convex mirror that if a parallel ray falls on it, then it converges at the
focal point. The same thing happens in the case of a convex lens, if parallel rays
fall on it, they will meet at the focal point (Figure 9.21) and again spread out.
Therefore, using previous logic we can say that if light diverges from a point and
the source of the divergent light (Figure 9.22) is placed in the focal point of a
lens, then while passing through the lens, rays of light will emerge as parallel ©

S
N

Refraction of light 261
rays (in the case of light, it is always true that if the light goes from A to B and if
the direction of the ray is changed, it will always go from B to A). Now let us find
the position of the image for different positions of an object .

Y a
focal length focal length
Figure 9.21: When passing through a Figure 9.22: If the light spot is kept
convex lens, parallel rays of light at the focal point ,the converging lens
converge at the focal point. makes the rays parallel.
Before starting, let us learn how light ray refracts in a convex lens. If we know
three special rules of the refraction of light through convex lens, we can describe
how the image is formed .

(i) Ifthe rays of light is centripetal (Figure 9.23, YO or XO ray) it goes

straight after refraction.

(ii) The rays which are parallel with the principle axis, (Figure 9.23, XO) will

(CT) pass through focal point (F) after refraction.

(iii) If the direction of the light ray is reversed then it goes back the way it
came. Therefore, if any ray goes (Figure 9.23, TC) through the focus then
it will be refracted in parallel (CX)

Now we can form the image for a convex lens.
2
8

262 Physics
The distance less than Focal length
Imagine an object XY, which is kept between the lens and the focal point (Fig-
ure 9.23). By the same logic described before, we can say that the image of point
Y will be formed on YOF line. Ifa perpendicular is drawn from the image of X
on this axis, we’ll get the position of the image of Y.
I L\
o IN
Y \ Fos,
¥:
S
Figure 9.23: A bigger image is seen in a convex lens if the object is placed within the
focal length.

Now let’s draw two rays from the point X. XC line, which is parallel with the
axis will go towards the direction of T through the focal point F. If a ray from
point X is drawn through the center point of the lens, it will go straight along XO
towards S. CFT and XOS will not meet going forward, which means there is no
chance of forming a real image. If the two lines are extended backward, they
will meet at point X', which is the image of X.
The normal which is drawn from the point X'on the line YF touches YF at the
point Y'. This is the image of point Y.
The closer the XY object is to the lens ,the bigger the image will be. The closer
the object is to the focal point F, the bigger the image will be. When the object
will be exactly on point F, the size of the image will be infinite. Now we can say,
if an object is kept between the center of the lens and the focal point of a convex
lens, the image of the object:

(a) Will be formed in the same direction as the object.

(b) Will be virtual.

(c) Will be erect and

(d) Will be big. co

Ss
aq

Refraction of light 263
Outside the focal length
Now let’s see what happens if the object is kept outside the focal length. Three
different things can happen in this case, like in a concave mirror. (i) The object
is outside the focal length but inside twice of the focal length. (ii) The object is
outside twice of the focal length and (iii) The object is exactly on the twice of the
focal length. Let’s examine this
one by one. x Cc
(i) First, the object will be kept A [\
outside the focal length but IN|
inside twice of the focal IN \e Y'
length. In Figure 9.24, the Y iN (>
image of the point Y of the =
object XY will be on the YO |
line. So, we find the image
of the point X, as before. f f f \y
The ray from point X which is x!
parallel to the axis will
go through the focal Figure 9.24: If he object is at the outside the
point F. Another ray will focal length but inside the twice of the focal
pass through the center length, the real, inverted and bigger image is
point along line XO. formed.
The point X', where the two
lines meet, is the image of point X. If a normal is drawn from X' to the axis
YO, then the point will be the position of the image of the point Y. Therefore, for
the image of XY. we can say:

(a) The position of the image will be outside twice of the focal length

(b) It is real

(c) It is inverted

(d) It is bigger than the size of the object
(ii) Now let’s see what will happen if the object is kept outside twice of the focal
length. It is seen that if the object XY is kept at exactly twice of the focal length
(Figure 9.25), then the size of the image will be same as the object XY and the
position of the object will be at the same distance from the center of the lens.

= The closer the object will be brought to the focal point, the further away the
Nn

264 Physics
image will be formed, and the size of it will start to increase. As the ray of light
actually goes through the image, it is a real image and it is seen clearly in the
picture that the image is inverted i.e:
x & [\
a | Is
{, ~~
|
x!
2f——j f -f Z
Figure 9.25: If the object is placed at a distance twice the focal length, the
size of the image will be same as the object.
(a) The position of the image will be on the twice of the focal length
(b) It is real
(c) It is inverted
(d) It is the same size as the object
(iii) Now let’s see if the object is
placed out side of twice of the Xx Cc /|
focal length. Where and what ra
kind of image of the object is II iN
formed? o ba sk 5
The process of drawing this ¥ Ni
image is the same as the x'
previous one but (Figure 9.26)
the object is to be drawn outside
twice of the focal length. We f f f
know that if the object is kept on
twice of focal length, then a Figure 9.26: If the object is placed at outer
same size image is formed at the side of the twice of the focal length then ce
same distance. small, inverted, real image is formed. S

Refraction of light 265
As the object is gradually moved away, the image becomes smaller and starts to
come near the focal point. If the object is brought to infinity, the image of it will
be formed exactly on the focal point. Therefore, if an object is kept at the
distance outside twice of the focal length, then the image is :
(a) Between the focal length and twice of the focal length
(b) Real
(c) Inverted
(d) Small
@) Example
Question: If an object is kept outside twice of the focal length, then a real image
of the object is formed. If the object is kept at the place of the image, then where
will the image be formed?
Answer: If the direction of the light ray is changed, then one is converted to another.
@ Do Yourself
If the light from a far away object falls on a lens, then it forms its image on
the focal point of the lens. Using this process you can find the focal length of
a convex lens. In order to do it you should move the lens forward and
backward until a distinct image is formed on the wall. When the image is
distinct, then measure the distance from the lens to the wall. This is the focal
length of this lens.
If you don’t have any convex lens, you can do the experiment using the glass
of spectacle. Often the spectacles of elderly people are made with convex
lenses. If closer things are seen bigger by the glass of the spectacle, then
you’ ll understand that it is a convex lens.
9.4.3 Power of Lens
The most familiar use of lens is in spectacles. If you have experimented with the
lenses of spectacles of many people, you have seen that many of their spectacles are
made of convex lens, and many are made of concave lens. Usually we explain the
lenses by discussing power.
Forma-34, Physics, Class 9-10

266 Physics

You have certainly heard people say that the power of a lens of somebody is high.

What do we mean by the word power?

The conception of power comes

from the matter of seeing big x!

and small using a lens If we Ao (\

place a body in front of two | ie

different lenses at the same CI] IN

distance, and the object looks | — Ms —=

bigger in one lens than in anoth-

er lens , then we say the power \) 5

of the lens is higher in which the x!

object looks bigger. If you think A

about it you will see that the lens A We /\

with the smaller the focal length, Nee

the object is seen bigger (Figure |_| ir

9.27) . Therefore the power of a \) 6

lens P is inversely proportional wee \ fT

to the focal length. If the focal

length is fin meters then unit of 5

power P is the diopter. If the

power of the glass is 2.5 Figure 9.27 : The lens which have as much as

(Nobody uses diopter in smaller the focal length , the object is seen to be

general conversation). Then the bigger

focal length of this glass will be

f =; =35 m = 0.4m (the unit is in meter)

Power is not only used only for convex lens to show bigger objects. In the case of

concave lens the same power is used to show smaller images. In the concave lens in

which the object is seen as much as smaller, the power will be greater or the focal

length will be smaller. In the case of a convex lens the power is positive and in the

case of a concave lens the power is negative.
hs)
S
N

Refraction of light 267
9.5 Function of the Eye
9.5.1 How we can see
The parts of the eye are the retina, eye lens, aqueous humour and vitreous humour,
comea. You have got an idea about how lenses works. So you certainly have
understood the eye lens works like a convex lens. We saw that a convex or
converging lens always forms an inverted image. To take a picture in a camera the
image is formed in this way.
Whenever we have some thing in
front of us, then light from that
thing refracts by this lens and Comea A Retina
forms an inverted image on the Leng IN <\
retina. If there is light on the retina, . fl
the light sensitive small cells Envi Ne j |
connected with the nerve accepts Tia V .
that light and turns it into \ SF
electrical signals. The nerve sends /
this electrical signal to the brain Optical nerves
through the optic nerve /
immediately. The brain turns Byeall
upright the inverted image formed
on the retina so we see the object
as it is. The iris increases or decreases light inside the eye. If you shine light from a
torch on the eye, the iris is compressed and makes the pupil small.
9.5.2 Accommodation of eye
We place an object close to our eyes to see it clearly. You surely have noticed that if
we get the object too close to the eyes it starts to become obscure again. The human
eye is wonderful, muscles are attached to it and these muscles push the lens and make
it thick or thin and thus can increase or decrease the focal length of the eye lens.
So, to form a distinct image on retina, the lens is always increasing or decreasing its
focal length. You can do this experiment easily by yourself. Keep your finger in front
x of your eye and try to see your finger and other things which are situated far from
S
i)

268 Physics
your eye at the same time. When you'll see your finger distinctly, then the object
which is far from your eye will be fuzzy. Again when you’ll see the object distinctly,
your finger will be fuzzy. The capacity of the eyes to change their focal length to see
objects of any distance is called the accommodation power of eyes.

9.5.3 Least distance of distinct vision

If the object comes too close to the eyes from a fixed distance, the object is not seen
distinctly. The nearest point at which the eyes can see distinctly is called the least
point of distinct vision, and the distance from the eye to that point is called the least
distance of distinct vision. This distance changes with people’s age. This distance for
the children is near about 5 cm and for adult it can be till 25 cm.

The point of maximum distance for which an eye to see an object distinctly is called
the farthest point of distinct vision. The far point for a normal eye is at infinity, so we
can see the stars of several light-years away.

9.5.4 Defects of vision and it’s remedy
We know a healthy and normal eye can see an object clearly between the ‘near point’
and the farthest point (infinity). This is the normal power of vision of eyes. If this
normal power of vision is obstructed, then it is a defect of the eye.
Though there are many defects of eye, we’ll discuss about two principle defects.
These two defects are:

(a) Myopia or Nearsightedness

(b) Hypermetropia or Farsightedness
Myopia or Nearsightedness
When an eye can see near objects but can’t see distant object, then this defect of eye
is called Nearsightedness. Farthest point of these kinds of eyes are near, instead of
being at infinity and the object is seen clearer if it is brought inside the least distance
of distinct vision. This defect happens for two reasons :

(i) If the power of the lens increases or the focal length decreases and

(ii) If the radius of the eye-ball increases for any reason.

5

Refraction of light 269
For this reason after refraction, the rays of light from a distant object forms the image
in front of the retina (F) instead of forming it on the retina (Figure 9.29a). The eye
then can’t see the object clearly.
jo NN i ~
A = 1 a rc
\ \}
NF
(LZ% N A \
V a,
(a) (b)
Figure 9.29: A Lens is used to solve the problem when the eye
lens can not form the image in the right place.
Remedy
To rectify this defect, a spectacle of a concave lens is used. The diverging action of
this lens of the spectacle is opposite to the converging action of the convex lens. So,
as the focal length of the eye will increase, the image will be formed further back. i.e
the parallel rays from an object at infinity, while passing through the concave lens of
the spectacle diverges (Figure 9.29a) as needed and falls on the eye lens.
This divergent ray refracts through the eye lens and form a clear image right on the
retina.
ce
S

270 Physics
Hypermetropia or Farsightedness

When an eye can see distant objects but cannot see near objects then this defect is
called Hypermetropia. Generally this defect is seen in older persons. This defect
occurs because of the following two reasons:

(i) if the power of convergence of the eye lens decreases or the focal length

increases.

(ii) if the radius of the eye ball decreases for any reason.

For this reason light rays coming from a distant object can make an image on the
retina but rays coming from the near point, after refraction through the eye lens,
converge to a point (F) behind the retina (Figure 9.29 (b) ). For this reason the eye
cannot see the near object clearly.

Remedy

A spectacle of a convex lens is used to rectify this defect. So rays coming from the
near object (Figure 9.29 b) will refract two times, one time through the lens of
spectacles, and another time through eye lens. The focal length will decrease and the
rays will converge as needed to form an image on the retina (R).

9.5.5 Eye and the properties of vision of eye.

The eye is a wonderful thing, it has many types of properties. Some properties of eye
and vision the are discussed here.

(a) The image of an object is formed on the retina if the object is placed in front
of eye, and we can see the object. If the object is removed from eye sight, the sense
of vision does not go away immediately, it remains for about 0.03 second. This
period is called persistence of vision. Due to the persistence of vision ,we can watch
films and videos .

(b) Our two eyes are both in front (Not on two side as like as birds, but the matter of

owls is different; the eyes of owls are in front like in human beings ) so we see two

images at a time . Our brain superimposes these two image and gives us the sensation

of distance. 2
&

Refraction of light 271
®) Do Yourself
Because we have two eyes, when we look anywhere, we get the perception
of distance. This is called binocular vision. If we use one eye then we do
not get the perception of distance. To examine the matter, try to insert
thread into a needle with one eye closed. You'll see how hard it is. Before
inserting the thread, move the hands with which thread and the needle is
held forward and backward with the eye closed.
Figure 9.30:The presence of blind spot can be find out by this picture
(c) We know that though an inverted image falls on our retina, we get the perception
of viewing the object upright because the perception of vision does not come from
eyes, it comes from the brain .The signal of light from the image which is formed on
the retina goes to the brain through optic nerve and, analyzing that, the brain gives us
the perception of vision.
@) Do Yourself
The part of the retina where the optic nerve is connected does not make the
perception of vision . So, it is called the blind spot. Do you want to test this?
Closing your left eye, look at the cross sign at the left side of the Figure 9.30.
Move your head down to the picture. When the image of the black circle at the
right side will form at the blind spot, the connecting part of the optic nerve, then
suddenly it will disappear.
20
s
N

272 Physics
9.6 Perceptions of Colored Objects
When we see an object, the light comes and fall on our eyes after reflection from the
object. The cornea and lens of eyes together makes a perfect image on the retina.
There are two types of light sensitive cells in our retina, rods, and cones. The rod
cells are highly sensitive and can work in less light, but they can’t identify the colors.
For this, we can see indistinctly in the moon’s gentle light but we cannot see colors.
If the sharpness of the light is high, then the cones of the retina can work. These
cones are colour sensitive.
If you can see colorful pictures in television, computer’s monitor or in books,
accurately then you’ll see the colors come from red, green and blue colored narrow
points . That is, all other colors can be made by mixing the intensity of these three
colors.
@) Do Yourself
Put a drop of water on the screen of mobile, television or laptop. This will then
work like a convex lens. You will be able to see the pixels of the screen. Look
at the colors of the pixels by which different colors are made. What is the color
of the pixels for yellow?
Do Yourself
Look at Figure 9.31, which is drawn by opposite color, in bright light at least for
one minute. Don’t move your eyes. Then look at the gray colored rectangular
shaped place. There, you’ll see the correctly colored picture. The color sensitive
cells of your eyes get tired looking at a color for a long time. When you look at
the colorless gray area, then the cells which are not used or not tired remain
more active. Then, the opposite color sensitive cells of the retina shows that
color, so this image is seen. S
N

Refraction of light 273
yp,
>
Figure : 9.31: Picture drowned in inverse color.

Group work
Objective : Determination of the relation between the power of spectacles
and the least distance of distinct vision of different persons.
Aparatus: Book printed in small alphabet, measuring tape or ruler.
Procedure : (a) Select 10 persons from your teachers, classmates, parents,
or siblings who use spectacles with positive or negative power, as well as
people who do not use spectacles.

(b) Ask them to read books or newspapers and measure the distance at
which they can read comfortably. This is the least distance of distinct vision.

(c) For those who use spectacles, ask them to read books or newspapers
without spectacles and measure the least distance of distinct vision .

(d) Write the name of persons, estimated age, and power of spectacles of
those who use spectacles and the least distance of distinct vision with and
without spectacle in the table below.

Explain the difference in the least distance of distinct vision due to the
positive and negative power of the spectacles.
Forma-35, Physics, Class 9-10

274 Physics
Observation table
. Power of Least distance| Least distance
Name Estimated| spectacle of |of distinct |of _ distinct
Age spectacle vision __ with | vision without
user spectacle spectacle
(?) Exercise
General questions
1. The lens of the eye makes inverted image on retina. Why we do not see
everything inverted?
2. What is an important difference between eye and camera.
3. The velocity of light in a denser medium is less. Is there anything which can
go with the velocity greater than the velocity of light?
4. At noon why is rainbow not seen ?
5. Drops of water can work like a lens. What is focal length of this lens ?
Mathematical questions
Pes — ree —
\ ae Se) \ = ;
ea
Figure 9.32; Total reflection angle will be changed if liquid drops of different
refractive index are placed on the point of incidence. S
rx

Refraction of light 275
1. If a ray of light passes through glass
having shape shown in Figure 9.32, then
the critical angle of total internal
reflection 65° is found. Due to a drop of x
liquid at the point of incidence, total
internal reflection happened at angle y F
75°. What is the refractive index of the
liquid.
2. The focal length of a convex lens
made of glass is 10 cm. If a lens of ; ’ . oe
exactly the same size is made of — me ch = oe - om
diamond then what will be its focal iia oe tensth, an
length? .
3. Draw the rays for object XY and show the position of the image as accurately
as possible (Figure 9.33).

x x

E
¥ F Y
(a) (b)
Figure 9.34: (a) An object kept inside of the focal length of a convex
lens (b) an object kept outside of the focal length of a convex lens.
4. Draw the rays for object XY and show the position of the image as accurately
as possible (figure 9.34 a).
5. Draw the rays for object XY and show the position of the image as accurately
as possible (figure 9.34 b).
=
&

276 Physics
EX) Multiple choice questions
Choose the correct answer.
1. Where will the image of an object be when it is placed in a denser medium
and looked at from a rarer medium?

a) raised upward b) gone downward

c) remained at the same place d) moved aside
Answer the questions 2 & 3 from Figure 9.35
2. What is the angle of refraction here?

a) 0° b) 90° N

c) 180° d) 45°
3. What will happen if the angle of incidence is & ° B
bigger?

a) Total internal refraction P

b) Total internal reflection i

c) Refraction '

d) Reflection Figure 9.35
4. The ray diagram usually used to draw the image for a convex lens is —

on 00 MING F F
V
(i) (ii) (iii)
Figure 9.36
(a)i (b)ii
(c)i&ii (d)i, ii & iii &
S
NQ

Refraction of light 277
5. Which is the unit of power of a lens?
a) Dioptre b) Watt
c) Horsepower d) kilo-Watt Hour
Creative questions
1. Sheuli, a student of Class10, cannot see the written words on the blackboard.
She consults with the doctor and the doctor advised her to use a lens of
power -2D as spectacles.
(a) What is a lens?
(b) How do you identify a lens without touching it?
(c) What is the focal length of Sheuli’s spectacles?
(d) Explain why it is logical for Sheuli to use a spectacle of (-)ve power.
2. Topu discover that holding his magnifying glass in the sun, the paper at 6 cm
from glass starts burning. He tried to see the image of a 2 cm high eraser
keeping it 8 cm away from the glass. He also discovered that to see the image
without spectacles he has to go backward from the position of the eye the
where he can see the image with spectacles.
(a) Write down the classification of lenses.
(b) What does it mean that the refractive index of glass with respect to air is
1.11?
(c) What type of image of the eraser will be formed with its position ? Draw
the ray diagram.
(d) Explain the problem of Topu’s eye.
ES
&

Chapter Ten
Static Electricity

If you comb your hair in winter and then hold the comb near some small pieces

of paper, you will notice that the pieces jump towards the comb. Again during

storm, flashes of lightning and thunder bolts rumble and shake up the whole

area. Static electricity is responsible in both the cases. Everything around us

consists of molecules and atoms the nucleus is the center of an atom and the

electrons revolve around the nucleus. An electron is negatively charged and a

nucleus is positively charge. If one or more electrons can be separated in any

way, static electricity is produced. We will discuss the various processes of static

electricity in this chapter. We will moreover know how force acts between two

charges when they are kept near to each other. 20
S
N

Static Electricity 279
® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-
e Explain the basic causes of production of charge on the basis of the
structure of atoms.
e Explain the causes of production of charges by the processes of induction
and friction.
e Detect the nature of the charge by an electroscope.
e Measure the electric force applying Coulomb’s law.
e Explain the causes of production of an electric field.
e Explain the direction of electric lines of force that can represent the
direction of the electric field.
e Explain the electric potential.
e Explain the function of capacitors to preserve electrical energy.
e Explain the usage of static electricity.
e Explain the strategy to be safe from the risk of danger of static electricity.
8
8

280 Physics
10.1 Charge

If you comb your hair in winter and then hold the comb near some small pieces
of paper, you will notice that the pieces jump towards the comb. In cold
countries during winter air is very dry. When babies crawl on carpet, their hair
seems to stand straight and it seems one hair is pushing the other. All of you have
seen thunder bolts during stormy night and observed how flashes of lightning
comes towards the earth.

In the attraction of paper, repulsion of hair or thunder bolt- the basic thing behind
these three phenomena is charge. To know what charge is and why charges
attract or repulse or create thunder bolts, we have to understand the basics, we
have to know how atoms and molecules are formed.

We all know everything is made of an atom and molecule. There are 118 number
of atom in this world, among which 83 are stable, only with these atoms millions
of different molecules are formed. Water is made of two hydrogen and a oxygen
atom, a sodium atom and a chlorine atom forms table salt, a carbon with four
hydrogen atoms form the cooking gas, etc. (You need not be surprised, there are
only 50 letters in Bengali, with these alphabets thousands of words are built!)
Atom is the building block of everything. Nucleus is the center of an atom and
electrons revolve around the nucleus. The nucleus consists of a proton and a
neutron. A proton is positively charged while a neutron is chargeless and an
electron is negatively charged. The charge of a proton and electron is equal but
opposite and the magnitude of this charge is 1.6 x 10° coulomb. In an atom
generally there are the same number of electrons and protons and so an atom is
charge neutral. Hydrogen is the simplest atom. The nucleus of hydrogen atom
consists of only one proton and only one electron is revolving around it. The
next atom is helium which consists of two protons in the nucleus (and two
chargeless neutron) and two electrons outside the nucleus. In this way larger
atoms are formed. Excluding hydrogen atom, we can say the number of protons
that a nucleus there is at least the same number or generally more than this
number of neutrons present.

Electrons outside the nucleus do not revolve in the same orbit. As shown in
figure 10.01, electrons on filling up one orbit go to the next orbit. Electrons in
orbits close to the nucleus are strongly bound, but for some atoms electrons in
the outer orbits can be separated with a little effort. Ionization is a process of
removing the electrons. ES

Static Electricity 281
Normally atoms are charge neutral and that means there are an equal number of
electrons and protons in an atom. But if an electron is removed from the
outermost orbit, then the number of protons is more than the electrons and the
atom is not electrically neutral anymore, the amount of positive charge within it
increases. If one electron is removed, one positive charge is developed in the
atom, if two electrons are removed,

two positive charges are developed.

We then say that the atom has been

ionized or charged. As an atom is Electron

positively ionized, it can also be \

negatively ionized or charged. That

is, when one or more isolated

electrons are attached to an atom,

then the total charge of the atom is

negative.

The electrons of an atom revolve

around its orbit; there are certain

tules about how the electrons will be

distributed in the orbits. You have Nucleus

learnt this elaborately in your

chemistry book. So we will not go

deeper. You know sometimes in the Figure 10.01: An atom of argon. Electrons
last orbit, there are one or two fill up one orbit and then other orbits
electrons that are nearly free; in such

materials electrons can make

movement very easily within the

materials. We call these materials

electric conductors. Again, there are some materials within which there are no
electrons that can move freely, in these materials electrons are tightly bound.
These are called nonconductors. Metals like gold, silver, copper etc. are good
conductors of electricity. Wood, plastic, glass, rubber etc. are nonconductors of
electricity.

If we have understood the topics explained till now about the structure of atoms,
the next topics after static electricity will be very easy to understand.

Forma-36, Physics, Class 9-10

282 Physics
10.2 Static Electricity by Friction
If a glass rod is rubbed by a piece of silk (Figure 10.02) electrons start to move
from glass to the silk. So the glass rod becomes positively charged and the silk
negatively charged. This happens because silk has more affinity for electrons
than the glass. Again if a plastic is rubbed using a flannel (or wool), electrons
will move to plastic from the flannel. Because plastic has more affinity for
electrons than the flannel.
flannel ; <2)
dans Y plastic . ee,
) "T |
Figure 10.02: If glass is rubbed with silk and a plastic is rubbed with flannel
positive and negative charges can be produced,
Now we can do an experiment. Suppose, using glass and silk we have positively
charged two pieces of glass. If we carefully hang one piece of glass with
insulator silk and then bring the other close to it then we will notice that the glass
that is hanging is going away due to repulsion (Figure 10.03).
Similarly if we charge negatively two pieces of plastic and hang one of them
with silk thread and bring the other near to it, we will see the same result, one is
repelling the other. Now if we bring the positively charged glass rod near to the
negatively charged plastic rod, then we will see, they will attract one another.
When we learnt gravitational force, there was only one type of mass, so only one
type of force, and it was attraction. Now we see there are two types of charges ~
and so forces are of two types, sometimes attractive, and sometimes repulsive. s

Static Electricity 283

If we have done the experiment properly, we will find that like charges repulse

each other and unlike charges attract each other.

fA A A i
Figure 10.03: Like charges repulse each other and unlike charges attract each
other.

10.3 Electrical Induction

At the beginning of this chapter it was said that if you comb your hair and then

hold the comb near some small pieces of paper, you will notice that the pieces of

paper jump towards the comb. The comb is attracting the pieces of paper. We

know that negative charge has been gathered in the comb and due to this reason

the comb is attracting the pieces of paper. But there is a slight complexity.We

know opposite charges attract each other, so to attract the pieces of paper

opposite charge of the comb has to be created in the paper. Since we know the

pieces of paper have no charge, then why is the comb attracting them?

This happens due to a process called electric induction. If charge is

accumulated in glass or plastic and brought near a neutral body, then charge will

be produced in the neutral body. To explain it, a metal sphere is shown in Figure

10.04 and kept on a non-conducting stand. Now if positive charge is

accumulated in a glass rod by rubbing it carefully with silk, and this is brought

near the sphere, negative charges of the sphere will come closer due to attraction

and positive charges will move away towards the back portion of the sphere.
« Now the glass rod is positively charged and the part of the sphere near the glass
S rod is negatively charged, so they will attract each other.

284 Physics
Now we will understand the phenomenon of attraction of paper by the comb.
When a negatively charged comb is brought near the pieces of paper, then the
SA)
2 XS .
& . =
a
(i —_ aaa
Figure 10.04: If a charged body is brought near to a chargeless body, opposite
charge is induced.
part of the paper closer to the comb is induced with a positive charge, while
negative charge is induced in the farther parts. The positively charged part of the
paper is attracted by the comb and the negatively charged part of the paper is
repulsed by the comb. But as the positively
charged part is closer to the comb, the attraction ‘ p
is more than the repulsion. As a result, the Va
pieces of paper jump towards the comb, being im ).
attracted by the comb. (Figure 10.05) AANA
Another thing happens then which you may Z « WN \\\
have noticed yourselves. Pieces of paper which Oia
jump to the comb and attach to the comb | 3.
almost immediately fall away. a » we
You may understand the reason of this too. If ~
the piece of paper gets attached to the comb due
to attraction, then it does not stay induced Figure 10.05: During
anymore. It itself becomes accumulated with winter, combing hair and
negative charge by obtaining negative charge the comb is hold near the
from the comb. As a result it gets repulsed by pieces of paper, they feel
the comb and falls down . You can do the attraction.
experiment. 2
N

Static Electricity 285

If water vapor is present in the air, the accumulated charge gets lost quickly. As

a result, these experiments of static electricity work well in winter.

@) Example

Question: Suppose there are two metal spheres. Is it possible to create two types

of charge in the two spheres with a positively charged glass rod?

a
ti 1. >
OUT WHA mw! mY UW
Figure 10.06: It is possible to induce different charges in two spheres in contact.

Answer: As shown in Figure 10.06, it is possible to induce different charges in

two spheres and separate them.

We have talked about three different phenomena at the beginning of this chapter.

You have understood by now why they happen.

The event of the comb has been explained. The crawling of the little baby is also

easy to understand. Due to friction with the carpet, charge accumulates in its

body and spreads to the hair also. All hairs have same charge. We know similar

charge repulses, so each hair repulses each other and becomes straightened. Now

we can explain the event of the thunderbolt too. Due to friction among clouds,

charge gets separated. When a large amount of charge is accumulated in the

clouds, it creates induction of opposite charge below. Sometimes that is so large
« imamount, it becomes connected with the clouds by piercing the air. We call this
S lightning. (Figure 10.07).

286 Physics
10.3.1 Electroscope
An electroscope is a wonderful equipment for test of static electricity. The
equipment is very simple. To determine
the presence of charge, it contains two .
light leaves of gold, aluminum or some ., ee f
other metal. These two leaves are connect- * Teg
ed to a metal disc by a highly conducting 7 . us
rod. The whole setup is kept inside a glass Pe A Se
bottle with a nonconducting stopper so NL Je
that it can be seen from outside, but air or is ae
anything else cannot touch the light metal ‘ee
leaves. A.
Charging the electroscope . we Figure 10.07: When a large amount
If a glass rod is rubbed by silk, positive of charge comes down to ground
charge is accumulated in the rod. Now if from clouds, we call it lightning.
the glass rod touches the metal disc of the
electroscope, some charge will immediately go to the disc. As the disc is
connected with the metal rod and the leaves, the charge will spread
everywhere. When similar charges appear in the gold leaves, the leaves will
tepulse each other and create a gap
between them.
~
CC Similarly, if a comb is rubbed with
Paint flannel, negative charge will accumulate
ad in the comb. Now if this comb touches the
ae disc, negative charge will spread up to the
gold leaves and they will repulse each
Be other and create a gap.
Determining Nature of Charge
If charge is accumulated in an object, we
can determine whether it is positive or
Figure 10.08: Due to presence of | negative using an electroscope. At first,
charge in the electroscope, thin metal we have to give some known charge to the
leaves move away fromeach other. disc of the electroscope. If we create |
a positive charge in the glass rod by 3

Static Electricity 287
rubbing it with silk and then touch it to the disc, the reduction of gap between the
leaves will indicate the electroscope has negative charge. If the gap increases,
then it will indicate the presence of positive charge.
Induction of Charge
We can determine if an object contains charge without touching the disc. Let us
imagine, a positively charged rod is brought near the disc. Then the disc will
have negative charge due to induction (Figure 10.08). To make induction of
negative charges, negative charge from other parts of the electroscope will have
to come in the disc and as a result positive charge will be created in the gold
leaves too. This positive charge will create a gap between the gold leaves.
Instead of bringing a positively charged object, if we bring a negatively charged
object, then gap will also be created between the gold plates. This time it will be
due to accumulation of negative charges there.
10.4 Electric Force
We have seen earlier that opposite charges attract each other and similar charges
repel each other. But we do not
know yet how attraction or
repulsion works. To know this, we
need to look at Coulomb's law. r
Coulomb determined how much
force works between two charges.
We have already seen such a law,
Newton's gravitational force law, 91 G2
as follows:
Figure 10.09: The force F acting
between two charges q, and q,, can
mM, either be attractive or repulsive.
=
S

288 Physics
The interesting thing is, if mass ml and m, is replaced by q, and q,, we get
Coulomb's law. G was the constant for gravitational force, now we will use the
constant k. This is the difference. That is, if two charges q, and q, are placed ata
distance 7, the force (Figure 10.09) working between them will be,

1192
Here the unit of the two charges q, and q, is C and of distance (or r) is m, so we
may say, the unit of & will be Nm?/C’, so that the unit of F becomes N.
The value of k:

k =9 x 10° Nm2/C?
Coulomb is the unit of charge. We will see in the next chapter that the flow of
charge is electricity or current, and the unit of current is ampere. If one ampere
current flows for one second, the amount of charge that flows is called one
coulomb (C).
But, the authentic way to understand the coulomb is to understand the amount
of charge of an electron or proton. Its amount is:
Charge of electron : —1.6 x 10-19 C
Charge of proton : +1.6 x 1071°C

You can see, if g, and q, both are positive or negative, then the value of F is
positive and they will repel one another. If one charge is positive and the other is
negative, then the value of F will be negative, which means the direction of the
force is changed, that is, the charges will attract one another. We have seen this
earlier and now the formula shows this too.
@) Example
Question: A +1 C charge and a -1 C charge are placed at a distance of 10 cm.
How much force is acting between them?
Answer: Two opposite charges will attract each other. The force acting between
them: (Figure 10.10 a)

9192

F= k 72,
2
8

Static Electricity 289
Here, qa =1C€
q2=—1C
r=10cm=0.10m
k =9 x 109 Nm2/C?
So, _ 9x 10°x1x(—1) __ ti
P=——ape N= —9x 104N
>  € an
x dn X
+1
“ia
(a) (b}
Figure 10.10 : (a) Distance between +1C and -1C is 10cm (b) Distance
between +5C and +3C is 1m.
Question: Two charges of +5 C and +3 C are placed at a distance of 1 m. Now
a third charge +q is placed in between them, where it does not feel any force.
(Figure 10.10 b).
Answer: The +5 C charge will repel +q charge towards the right and the +3 C
charge repel towards the left. When two charges will repel by equal force, +q
charge will not feel any force.
So, 4 ot224 _ , (4304
x2 (1 —x)2
5(1 — x)? = 3x?
2x? —10x+5=0
_ 10 + ¥100 — 40
** 4
x=4.435 or 0.565
As the value of x will be between 0 and 1, so the value of x must be 0.565.
(Can you try what it would be if the value of x was 4.435?)
Forma-37, Physics, Class 9-10

290 Physics
Question: There is a proton in the center of a hydrogen atom and an electron
outside it. The charges of the proton and electron are +1.6x10" C and -1.6x10"
C respectively. If the distance of the orbit of the electron from the nucleus is
0.5x10% m, how much attraction is between them?
Answer: rk nM
2
Here, gq, = +16 10°C
qz = —1.6 x 10-19C
k =9 x 10° Nm2/C?
r=05x10%m
9 -19 -19
therefore, _ 9x10? x 1.6 x 10719 x (-1.6 x 10779) __ x 10-22
Pea ON 79.22. 10717 N
Question: How much charge should be stored in the earth and the moon so that
the gravitational force becomes zero and the moon goes out of its orbit?
Answer: The gravitational force acting between the earth and the moon:
mM
Here, G = 6.67 x 10-1! Nkg2m?
m = 7.35 x 107? kg
M = 5.97 x 10% kg
r = 3.84 x 10° km
So R= 6.67 x 10714 x 7.35 x 102 x 5.97 x 1074 N= 1,98 x 102° N
7 *6e= (3.84 x 108)2 “"
sy
S
Q

Static Electricity 291
If an equal amount of charge is kept in the earth and moon, the repulsive force:
_ 9 x 10° x q? get

(3.84 x 108)2
Two forces must be equal for reducing gravity by Coulomb force.
That is Fg = Fr
9 x 10° x q?
20, — DO 2
1.98 x 10° N = Ea oayg NC
q2 = 3.24 x 1027 C2
q = 5.69 x 1023.C
Therefore, the number of electrons,
_q_ 569X103 _ a2
i= 16x 1076 = 36x 10
The mass of an electronis 9,11 x 10-31 kg, so the mass of all electrons:
(3.56 x 1032) x (9.11 x 10-31) kg = 324 kg
So, if we can keep 324 kg electrons both in earth surface and in moon, the moon
would come out of its orbit. (The mass of a moderate cow!)
10.5 Electric Field
The force between two charges can be determined by using Coulomb's formula.
You may remember, for gravitational force, we have determined gravitational
acceleration without beginning from gravitational force separately. Multiplying
that acceleration with mass, we determine force.
In the case of electric force, we can do that, we can define a new quantity called
electric field. Multiplying charge g with this, we will get the force F acting on it.
Therefore, any charge g creates an electric field around it. That electric field E
is:
q
re
R

292 Physics
If any charge q is brought in this electric field, then it will feel F force on it and
the magnitude of F will be,

F = Eq

As force F is a vector and charge q is a scalar, so, E itself is a vector and its unit

is N/C. You will see, this topic is easier to explain with the help of electric fields.

Electric field cannot be seen, but to make it easy to understand, sometimes one

type of completely imaginary

lines are drawn, called the

electric lines of force (first

introduced by Michael

Faraday). Our known world is

three dimensional, so the lines

of force will spread in all

directions. To show you, these . . ;

are drawn in a plane (Fig Figure 10.11: Lines of force diverges from

10.11). positive charge and converges into negative

There are some rules of mnie

drawing lines of forces:

(a) Incase of positive charge the lines of forces emerges from positive charges,
and in case of negative charge converges into negative charges . In a specific
point, the direction of lines of force is the direction of the electric field.

(b) The more the amount of charge, the more the number of lines of forces.

(c) The nearer the lines of force, the more the magnitude of the electric field.

(d) The lines of force of one charge never intercept the lines of force of another
charge.

In Figure 10.12 (a), the lines of force of two opposite charges are shown. You

can see, the lines of force of one charge ended up in another charge. Where the

magnitude of the electric field is higher, the number of lines of force is higher.

Also, when the figure is seen, it gives a feeling that the two charges are

attracting one another. In Figure 10.12 (b), both the charges are positive and

from the figure it can be seen that, the two charges are repelling one another. Not
only that, in the middle portion of two charges the electric field due to one
charge is neutralized by the electric field of the other. As a result the number of ~
lines of force is less, and there is a point in the middle where the magnitude of S$

Static Electricity 293
the electric field is zero. If both the charges were negative, then the direction of
lines of force, would change only, besides this everything would be as before.
Figure 10.12: Lines of force of (a) opposite charge and (b) same charge
@) Example
Question: What is the magnitude of the electric field at a distance of 10 m for 5
C charge?
Answer: We know,
Bok SS >)
SSS
Here, q=5C Sa
q2 = -1.6 x 10719
r=10m
k =9 x 10° Nm?/C? Figure 10.13: Lines of force for +q
and -2q charge.
So,
9x10°x5
E=——,.— N/c =4.5 x 10° N/c
9 102
S
XQ

294 Physics
Question: A charge of 3 C is experiencing a force of 10 N. What is the electric
field?
Answer: We know F=qE
So, F

E=-

q
Here, F=10N
q=3c
Therefore, _ F 10N_ —
“q 3c ™
Question: If there are two charges q and -2q close to each other, what will be
their lines of force?
Answer: This is shown in Figure 10.13.
10.6 Electric Potential
You remember that if there is water in two containers and a pipe is used to
connect them, then water will go from the container with higher water level to
the container with lower water level. From which container the water will go
does not depend on the amount of water, but on the height of the water level.
Similarly, we have also seen that if two materials of different temperature are in
contact with each other then from which material the heat flows and where it
goes does not depend on the amount of heat, it depends on the temperature. Heat
will flow from the material with higher temperature to the material with lower
temperature. Heat can even flow from a material with high temperature and less
heat to a material with more heat.
3

When we discussed static electricity we said several times that if we &

Static Electricity 295
accumulate charge in a material and if it touches another material then charge
will flow into the second material. Is there anything as charge and level of charge
like amount of water and height of water level or amount of heat and
temperature? What will decide from which material the charge will go to the
other material? There is actually something like that and it is known as potential.
If two materials have different amount of charges inside and if contact is made
between them, then charges will flow to the material with the lower potential
from the one with the higher potential.
If ris the radius of a metallic sphere and if it is given charge Q then its potential
will be V
Q
Here C is the capacitance of the sphere. The value of C for a metallic sphere is
nal
k
Where, k=9x10?Nm?/c?
So, if there are two metallic spheres of >| li kk >| ele IK
radius RX, and R, and both are given the —_
same amount of charge Q, then the Q | C) Q
sphere having the lower radius will
have the higher potential. If the two
spheres are connected using a wire, Ri > Re
then charge will flow from the smaller Vi < Ve
sphere to the bigger sphere until the — Figure 10.14: Charge flows from
potential of the two spheres become the _the higher potential to the lower
same. (Figure 10.14) potential,
We all are familiar with the unit of potential which is a volt. Now we will try to
know what we really mean by the potential.
We have compared potential with height of water surface or temperature, this
comparison is right when we are concerned about the direction of charge flow
but if we believe it literally then this is not alright, because potential is a more
a important quantity.
S
N

296 Physics
For example, let’s assume positive Q charge is given to a metallic sphere of
radius r, and then the potential of its surface is

V= ue
What is its potential outside the surface? It is not zero at all. It is possible to
determine potential around the sphere.
You know due to the presence of charge in a sphere, electric field E is created
around it. So if a charge q is brought to it, the charge will experience a force F
where,

F=E£Eq
As the charge Q on the sphere is positive and the charge outside the sphere q is
also positive, so it will experience repulsion and if we release the charge q then
it will have acceleration due to this force, velocity will increases etc. Again if we
try to move the charge g closer to the sphere (Imagine the metallic sphere is
fixed strongly and q charge is not able to move it) then work has to be done
against the force, so the closer we take the charge towards the sphere the more
potential energy it will have.
Potential is the amount of work done to move a unit charge (that is the value of
q is 1) somewhere. (Assume it starts from far away, where electric field is not so
prominent, so almost there is no force) If there is no charge around, then there is
no electric field also, the charge will not experience any force, so no work will
have to be done to bring the unit charge, so we will say, there is no potential.
But if there is charge around then some work has to be done to bring the unit
charge and the exact amount of work done is the potential. If W is the amount of
work done to bring the charge g then potential V is,

WwW
V=—
q

It the charge of the sphere is negative, then reverse things will happen, if the
charge is released then the charge will rush towards the sphere due to its
attraction. So if we want to move the charge slowly from far away without
creating any acceleration and giving no extra kinetic energy then we have to
always pull the charge with a force which can balance the attractive force, that %
is, the charge is moving in a direction opposite to the direction in which we are 8

Static Electricity 297
applying the force. So, the force we apply is doing negative work and we are
withdrawing a part of the energy of this charge.
But in this case also, the potential is

Ww

V=—

q
We only have to keep in mind that as W is negative, so the value of V is negative.
Let’s recap what we have learnt so far:
As there is an electric field where there is a charge, so potential exists where
there is charge. To speak the truth if we know why the potential exists then we
will be able to find the electric field. How to find the potential, and then
determine the electric field will be explained in the higher classes. In general,
you may know one thing, the higher the change of potential, the higher will be
the electric field.
@) Example
Question: What will be the state of the NO fe
Potential around a positive and a negative 7" sf fats,
Answer: For the equal and opposite COMB EA pod
charges equipotential lines are shown in VOSGES P EAS
figure 10.15. On the left side the potential Soe ff 1 aa
is positive and it turns negative on the right i
side by decreasing equally. Just at the . may: . ”
center, the potential is zero. eqn . = SapOneaine

lines for opposite charges.

10.6.1 Potential Difference
You must have seen different warning signs on electric lines, like, “DANGER
10,000 VOLT.” You all know that there is a thing known as electric shock, it is
very dangerous. There are also examples that careless people died from being
electrocuted. If you have understood potential then you can guess what actually
happens.
Forma-38, Physics, Class 9-10

298 Physics
If somewhere potential is high and if you touch it, since your body’s potential is
low so charge will flow into your body from the high potential region. Your body
will have different consequences depending on the amount of charge passing
through your body.

The potential of what you touched might be positive or negative. In one case
charge will leave your body and in the other charge will enter your body, both
are electric currents- just with different directions.

You surely understand that charges flow due to a potential difference, not due to
the value of the potential. That’s why when a crow sits on a high voltage electric
cable it’s doesn’t get electrocuted, because the potential of the cable and the
crow are equal. There is no difference. Not only this, but also workers work on
high voltage cable of ten thousand or twenty thousand volts from a helicopter,
use only bare hands. They don’t get any electric shock. Because when they touch
the high voltage cable, the potential of their body becomes equal to the potential
of the cable as they are in air. There is no difference in potential, so no charge
flows. They don’t get an electric shock. This means the voltage difference is
important, not the value of voltage- everyone should know this.

After all, when we need to measure voltage, it is good to have a fixed definite
voltage for this. In the case of temperature there was an absolute zero
temperature, here too there is something similar. We assume the earth to have
zero potential. The earth is so large that if it is given some charge, earth can take
it and the potential will not increase, again if some charges are taken the
potential would not decrease. So everything is measured with respect to the
earth, considering it as zero potential. You must have noticed that heavy electric
equipments are always attached to the ground very well (Earthing). This means
if a lot of charges start flowing after an accident then the charges can immediately
and safely pass to the ground, without harming those who are around.

10.7 Capacitor
When heat is applied to a body, the amount by which its temperature will rise
will depend on the heat capacity of that body. When the value of heat capacity is
large enough, temperature rise will be small even if huge amount of heat is given
to that body. On the other hand, if heat capacity is less, application of a small
amount of heat will give a huge rise in temperature. Similarly, the increase in the
potential of a body when charge is given to it depends on the capacitance of that
body. When the capacitance of a body is large, and if a huge amount of chargeis
given to it, then a small amount of potential rise will takesplace, again when the 3

Static Electricity 299
capacitance is small, and if a small amount of charge is given to it, the increase
in potential will be high. We have discussed earlier that, when the capacitance of
a body is C and if Q amount of charge is given to the body, then the potential V
will be

_Q
VEC
We have seen already that for a metallic sphere of radius r, the capacitance C is:
gall
~k
But the most simple and

effective capacitor is made by ‘Or:
keeping two metal plates side Ba . io
by side (Figure 10.16). If one So ee. _—
and the other is charged or: aa
negatively, then an electric
field is developed between the . . .
plates and energy is stored in ee cae Capacitor formed by
that electric field. For a = P&aalici metal plate.
capacitor, if capacitance is C and voltage is V , then the energy stored in it is:

1

@) Example
Question: What is the amount of stored energy if 10 V electric potential is
applied to a 20uF capacitor?

Answer:

Energy = =CV? == x 20x 10-6 x 10? J = 10-3 J=1 mj
=<
8

300 Physics

10.8 Uses of Static Electricity

We use electricity in our daily life, in industries, laboratories, educational insti-

tutions and hospitals etc. But we use current electricity (we will discuss it in the

next chapter) in almost all of these cases. But static electricity is also used in

some special cases:

10.8.1 Photocopy

All of us have used a photocopy machine now and then to make a copy of some

writing. In this machine, light is projected on the paper which creates an image

of the writings on a special kind of roller. Static charges are created on the roller

similar to the writings on the paper. After that, the roller is brought in contact

with very fine powder like ink, and black ink is absorbed at the parts of the roller

where charges are formed. Then this ink is imprinted on a new white page. The

ink is attached very well to the paper by heating so that the ink doesn’t

scatter, and the process is finished in this way.

10.8.2 Van de Graaff Machine

Different types of work are done with high voltage. This can be done with a Van

de Graaff machine using static electricity. Static charges are sprayed on a

rotating insulating belt, by rotating the

belt it is taken inside a metallic sphere 4 tet4

(Figure 10.17). A tangent (comb of + a

sharp needle) receives the charge from -4 tangent “ 4

above the belt and sends it to the + a +\ +

metallic sphere. We know, charge + (N")}) +

always flows from higher potential to + id +

lower potential. It always happens in La wy ,*

the Van de Graaff generator, because Pe + H+

inside the metallic sphere the potential metallic | ha

is equal to the potential of the surface. sphere I+ static charge

The excess voltage that is created on _ it spray

the belt due to the excess charge on the insulating || @y} a

belt, is always higher than the voltage belt WS

of the sphere. Due to this reason, any ra

charge inside the sphere goes to the , :

surface of the sphere. In this process, Figure 10.17: Van de Graaff Machine

by accumulating huge amount of charge on the sphere it is possible to develop

high potential. x
N

Static Electricity 301
10.8.3 Fuel Truck
When petrol or other fuel trucks supply fuel, then they have to be very careful so
that no electrical sparks are created suddenly which may produce a big
explosion. This may happen if static electricity is generated due to friction
between truck wheels and the road. So behind the truck, a metal chain hangs
from the tank and stays in contact with the ground. In this way, any static
electricity produced is directly transferred to the earth through the chain.
10.8.4 Electronics
In cold countries, the amount of water vapor in air is very low and the effects of
static electricity are very high. Many types of IC (Integrated Circuit) are used
while working with electronics. Some IC’s can be damaged by even a slightest
change of voltage to their pins. That is why a touch of the hand while working
with electronics can damage a valuable IC or the circuit board. For doing work
under these circumstances, the upper part of a table is connected to the ground
with a conducting wire. Simultaneously, the hands of the person working are
connected to the ground using an electrical conducting strap.
10.8.5 Lightning and Lightning Arrestor
When water vapor rises to form clouds, the negative charges (electrons) created
due to friction between water vapor are stored in the lower altitude clouds. So
naturally a shortage of electrons is developed in the higher clouds making them
positively charged. When a large amount of charge is accumulated in the clouds,
a huge spark is formed inside the clouds to return to neutral state (which we
know as lightning). Sometimes so much charge is accumulated in the clouds that
they ionize the air and literally travels to the ground. We call that a thunderbolt.
A huge amount of charge is brought to the earth during a thunderbolt. It ionizes
the air while travelling through it, so a huge amount of heat, light and sound is
produced, and such amounts of charge can cause serious harm to the places
nearby.
Millions of amperes of electric current can flow during a thunderbolt and for this
flow of current, the temperature of the air can rise up to 20-30 thousand degree
Celsius which is even more than the temperature of the sun!
For this temperature we see a bluish white sparkling in the sky. Another thing
occurs due to this temperature; the air expands to a great extent and moves
outside, and in the very next moment air from the outside fills in that blank space
s created. This whole thing occurs faster than the speed of sound and an incredibly
§ loud noise is created. When the speed of air exceeds that of sound, it is called a

302 Physics
shockwave. The sound of a thunderbolt is a kind of shockwave. Although the
flashing of light and sound are created at the same time, we see the light first,
since the speed of light is so much that it reaches us within the next moment. The
speed of sound is 330 m/s which means it takes 3 s for it to travel one kilometer.
That is why; we can guess the distance at which the lightning is created by
calculating how many seconds later we hear the sound of thunder. Roughly
3 seconds for a kilometer.

Since electric current flows down from the clouds during a lightning, it usually
strikes tall structures. So to protect tall buildings from thunderbolts, more than
one pointy metal needle is set up on the roof. This current is then transferred to
the ground by some heavy conducting wires. The science behind this is very
simple. We have seen earlier that when a charged object is brought near an
uncharged body, the uncharged body becomes induced by opposite charge. So
while the possibility of a thunderbolt occurs, the pointy needles become
positively charged and an intense electric field is created due to pointy needles.
The surrounding air and water vapors become ionized due to this electric field
and these rises above and neutralizes the negative charges of clouds and reduces
the possibility of being a thunderbolt. When thunder needles are kept on the roof
of a tall building they often absorb the thunderbolt and the bar carries the huge
amount of charges directly to the ground. So the current coming down from the
sky doesn’t go to the ground uncontrolled; rather it goes to the deep ground
through the heavy wire.

Not only thunderbolt occurs in the pointy needles, but also the needles can pass
opposite charges to neutralize the charges stored in the clouds. That is why,
when lightning arresters are installed in tall buildings, the risk of that building
being thunderstruck is reduced greatly.

10.8.6 Static Electric Color Spray

Static electric color sprays are used now-a-days to paint cars, bicycles, steel
cupboards and other metallic things. In these sprays very small particles of
colors are created and since they are charged, while getting out one particle
repels another particle and spreads out. So a large space can be smoothly painted
using spray.

To charge the color particles, the pointy head of the spray is connected with a
high potential source. The thing to be charged is connected with the opposite
potential or the earth. As the color particles are charged, they are attracted =
towards the body and firmly attached with the body. Not only that, the color &

Static Electricity 303
particles can travel along electric lines of force and can reach the hidden corners
and create a layer of paint in there.

Investigation 10.01
Friction and induction

Objective: To create charges from friction and induction
Apparatus: Comb, aluminium foil.
Theory: While combing hair in winter, negative charges get stored in
the comb.
Working Procedure:
1) Take a very small piece of aluminium foil and roll it into a ball.
2) After combing the hair, bring the comb close to the aluminium foil
ball. If enough negative charges are accumulated on the comb, it will
induce a positive charge in the front side of the ball. (Since aluminium
foil is a conductor, the electrons in front will easily move back.) The
front side will be attracted by the comb and the ball will jump and
stick to the comb.
3) Again since the aluminium foil is a conductor, negative charges will
get absorbed immediately and will fall down being repelled by the
comb.

=

8

304 Physics
(?) Exercise

General questions

1. There is a minimum value of charge; this is 1.6x10"°C, is there a similar min-

imum value of mass?

2. Why is it that static electricity experiments don’t work properly during rainy

season?

3. Can you give equal and opposite charges to two similar metallic spheres

without touching them?

4. If capacitance is compared to a container, then what should potential be

compared to?

5. Is it possible for a point to have zero potential but non-zero electric field?

6. Explain the phenomenon of charging a body based on the basis of structure of

atom.

7. Describe how a body can be charged by the process of friction.

8. What is electrostatic induction?

9. What is inducing charge and induced charge?

10. Describe how a body can be charged by the process of electrostatic

induction?

11. Describe the construction of a gold leaf electroscope.

12. Describe how a gold leaf electroscope can be charged positively.

13. How can the nature of charge of a charged body be determined by a gold leaf

electroscope?

14. What are the factors on which the electrostatic force between two charges

depends?

Mathematical questions

1. 4C and -1C charges are kept 1 m apart. At which point of the line joining

them, is the magnitude of the electric field zero?

2. An electron in a hydrogen atom revolves around the nucleus due to Coulomb’s

force. The mass of electron is 9.11*1073! kg and proton is 1.67x10?’ kg and for

this there is also a gravitational force between them. Which of these two forces «

is greater and by how much? BS

Static Electricity 305
3. Draw the electric lines of force for the two charges mentioned in question
number 1.

4. Equipotential lines for opposite charges are shown in Figure 10.15, show
electric field from there.

5. Electric field for two charges is shown in Figure 10.13, draw the potential.
Oy Multiple choice questions

Choose the correct answer

1. The name of the apparatus used to determine the presence of charge is —

a) Ammeter b) Voltmeter

c) Microscope d) Electroscope

2. On which factor does the electrostatic force between two charges not depend?
i) the distance between the charges

ii) the nature of the medium in which the charges are placed

iii) the masses of the charges

Which one of the following is correct?

a) i and ii b) i and iii

c) ii and iti d) i, ii. and iii

3. The unit of electric field intensity is-

a)N b)Nm

c)Nm! d)NC!

4. Volt is the unit of what?

a) electric field b) electric potential .y av

c) electric charge d) electric current ed C2)

5. In Figure 10.18 P A

i) some charges will flow from eis =

sphere Ato sphere B ee - —

ii) some charges will flow from

sphere B to sphere A Figure 10.18

iii) the charge difference remains same

Forma-39, Physics, Class 9-10

306 Physics
Which one of the following is correct?
a)i b) ii
c) iii d) i. ii. and iii
Creative questions
1. Rima, after combing her hair, observes that her comb attracts small pieces of
paper. Shima says that it happens because the comb is positively charged. Rima
says that the comb is charged negatively. To solve the problem, Rima and Shima
look for their physics teacher and find him in the physics laboratory. Hearing
everything he asks them to find the nature of the charge with the help of an
electroscope.
(a) What do you mean by charge?
(b) Explain why an object is charged by friction?
(c) Describe why the comb is charged?
(d) Explain how the nature of charge of the comb can be determined by the
electroscope.
2. Figure 10.19 oc / oc |
(a) What is an electric field?
(b) If the position of the object at P is a ig
changed, what kind of change of force it
takes?
(c) Find the electric field intensity at point P
of Figure (a). A B
(d) Explain the change of force of Figure (a) =A
than in Figure (b). Figure 10.19
3. q,(2C), q,s(-1C) and ¢,(1C) are three charges placed on a straight line
sequentially and equidistant from each other.
(a) What is electric force?
(b) Why are electric field and electric field intensity not the same?
(c) Draw the lines of force produced by three charges.
(d) What does the the magnitude of charge q, have to be, so that charge q, will ~
not feel any force on it? Explain. 3

Chapter Eleven
Current Electricity
=e
Now-a-days, we cannot spend a single moment properly without electricity. To
operate machines and other instruments around us, we need electricity. In
the previous chapter we discussed static electricity. When charge flows through
a conductor, we call it current electricity or, in brief, electricity. We will describe
the terms required to explain current electricity and learn the rules of flow of
electricity. How electricity in a circuit and potential difference can be measured
using these rules will also be discussed in this chapter.
2
&

308 Physics
® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-
e Demonstrate the production of current electricity from static electricity.
e Explain the direction of electric current and flow of electrons.
e Draw a circuit by using the symbols of electric devices and appliances.
e Explain conductors, insulators and semiconductors.
e Establish a relationship between electric current and potential difference
by using a graph.
e Explain fixed resistance and variable resistance.
e Explain electromotive force and potential difference.
e Explain dependence of resistance.
e Explain resistivity and conductivity.
e Use series and parallel resistance.
e Use an equivalent resistance in a circuit.
e Calculate electric power in a circuit.
e Explain system loss and load shedding in a circuit.
e Describe the safe and effective use of electricity.
e Draw atypical house circuit and demonstrate the use of AC sources in its
different parts.
e Draw a poster to build consciousness about dissipation and conservation
of electricity.
=<
S

Current Electricity 309
11.1 Electric current
We have discussed in the previous chapter that if two bodies have a
potential difference, then charge flows from the body of higher potential to
the body of lower potential. The flow of charges continues until the
potential becomes equal. This flow of charge is the flow of current or
electricity, which we generally call “electricity”. Using this electricity,
lights turn on, the fan rotates, and the phone charges!
A B A B
—s a4
eee
+
_t. tt a= I
Figure 11.01: Electricity flows from a charged sphere to an uncharged sphere.
11.1.1 Electromotive Force and Potential Difference
You can understand that electricity flows only if there is a potential
difference. If we want to get a continuous flow of electricity, we have to
always maintain a potential difference and cannot let it be equal. If
potential is created using a positive charge in a sphere and then connected
it with another uncharged sphere (Figure 11.01) by a metal wire, as the
electricity starts flowing the potential difference will start decreasing and
the potentials will be come equal! It is possible to develop a potential
difference between the two plates of a capacitor by accumulating charges
there. But if the plates of the capacitor are connected with a wire, the
potentials will become equal due to flow of charge.
So you can understand that if we want a continuous flow of electricity, we
need some other process which will maintain a potential difference that
will not decrease with the flow of charges. All of you have seen such
= technique; these are battery cells or generators. Potential difference is
N

310 Physics
produced by a chemical reaction inside the battery cell, if the flow of
charge starts, chemical substances start decreasing. When chemical
substances are finished, battery cells cannot create a flow of electricity.
The ordinary battery cells that we see regularly have a potential difference
of 1.5 volt.
For the supply of electricity that you have in your school or residence,
there are two points for using it, one of them is at higher potential and the
other one is at lower potential. This difference in potential is maintained by
a generator, which develops this continuously. A battery cell or a generator
has to send charges continuously from low potential to high potential for
continuous flow of electricity, and for that it needs energy. If W amount of
work is done to bring Q amount of charge from low potential to high
potential in a battery, then the electromotive force or e.m.f of the battery
is: w

EMF = 0
A battery cell or a generator which supplies electric energy has an
electromotive force or emf. When a battery cell or a generator is connected
to a circuit, this electromotive force brings the charge through the whole
circuit.
The amount of potential a battery 415V C -15V¢
produces is its electromotive force or emf. il |
In English it is called “force” but in
Bengali it is “energy”. Actually, this emf I |
or electromotive force is not force or ae oe
energy at all. We said earlier that in = a
physics terms like “force” and “energy” (a) (b)
are very definite. We cannot use one word Figure 11.02: It is possible to
instead of the other. Unfortunately this make positive and negative
has been done here. But don’t be voltage by a battery cell
confused, because the potential that a battery or generator creates is its
EMF, so we will start from there. We will use the word potential
everywhere and will not face any problem.

a9

We said earlier that the magnitude of the potential is not important, the &

Current Electricity 311
difference of it is important. So you will see that the value of potential of
one terminal of a battery cell can be made different, but the difference will
remains the same.
@) Example
Question: The potential difference of
a battery cell is 1.5V. What is the Ba o o "6.
actual potential of both terminals? lal i i iL
Negative is zero and positive is 1.5V? L We
or negative one is -1.5 V and positive il il I T
one is zero? BE = sv" =
Answer: Both of them can be true. If
it is like Figure 11.02 (a) then the
negative is zero and the positive is Figure 11.03: Different positive
1.5 V. But if it is like 11.02 (b) then and negative voltages are made
the positive is zero and the negative is using two battery cells.
-1.5V.
Example: Make voltage 1.5 V, 3.0 V, -1.5 V, -3.0 V using two 1.5 V battery.
Answer:This is shown in Figure 11.03.
11.1.2 Conductor, Insulator and Semiconductor
Conductor: If we have understood the structure of matter properly, then we
have understood one thing clearly. In solids the atoms and molecules strongly
hold their own positions. If temperature is increased the atoms or molecules start
vibrating, staying at their own position, and don’t move away from their
positions. When you learnt metallic bonds in your chemistry book, you have
seen , some electrons of metal atoms are in a free state which can move from one
place to another. For this reason, those are called conductors. Gold, silver,
© copper, aluminum etc. are good conductors. Charge can be transferred through
§ conductors, but we have to remember that this transfer of charge is done by

312 Physics
electrons; flow of electricity is done by electron, negatively charged electrons!
Insulator: The substance which has no free electron for conducting electricity is
called an insulator. Plastic, rubber, wood, glass are examples of insulators.
Mainly, non-metals are insulators.
Semiconductor: There are some substances whose conductivity lies between
insulators and conductors at normal temperature, but their conductivity
increases with the rise of temperature. These types of substances are called
semiconductors. Silicon or germanium examples of semiconductors.
Semiconductor are elaborately discussed in the last chapter of this book.
11.1.3 Direction of electric flow
We have seen that if two bodies of different potentials are connected by a
conductor, charge starts flowing and it continues until the potentials become
equal and we say electric current is flowing. Many of you may have started
thinking because when we talked about equalizing two different potentials by
flow of charge, we said that it is true for negative charges, as only negatively
charged electrons can go from one place to another. Then what happens in case
of positive charge? As the positive ions are strongly bounded in their own
position, then how does positive charge move from one place to another?
You may have already realized what happens. The deficiency of electron is
positive charge. So increasing the deficiency by moving electrons means a
supply of positive charge! So, if it is said that in Figure 11.01 positive charge
moves from A to B by flow of electricity, actually it means that electrons move
from B to A.
The flow of charge is electric current. So far, we have tried to understand it
normally. Let us specify it a little bit now. Electric current means the rate of
change of flow of charge with respect to time i.e. if Q charge flows in time t, the
electric current is:
-2
t
a
8

Current Electricity 313
If the unit of charge is the Coulomb (C) and of time is second (t), then the unit
of electric current is ampere A. Interesting thing is, to find the unit of charge we
said, if one ampere electric current flows for one second then the amount of
charge that flows is called 1 Coulomb. Electric current is the rate of flow of
charge; if 1 ampere current flows from A to B, it means 1 coulomb positive
charge has been moved from A to B. Which actually means that the amount of
electrons equivalent to 1 Coulomb charge has been moved from B to A.
Therefore, you see that the direction of electric current is opposite to the
direction of flow of electrons. (All problems could have been solved if we
assume the charge of electron is positive, but it has been too late!)

11.2 Relationship between Potential Difference and Electricity
Now we will discuss actual flow of current in a real circuit. We have said before
that if there is a potential difference between two points and if we connect these
two points with a conducting wire, electric current will start flowing between the
points, but we haven’t discussed the amount of electric current. Not only that,
will the amount of current that flows if the connection is made by a gold wire be
equal to the current that will flow if the connection is done by a iron wire?
11.2.1 Ohm’s Law

To see the relationship between 3

potential difference and electric a

current we can do an experiment. = 2

The equipment used for measuring = Bs ib)
voltage is called a voltmeter, and E 1| wf 9

the equipment used for measuring ° Be

current is known as ammeter. : —T a ae
(Actually the same equipment can ox potential difference ()
be used sometimes as a voltmeter © 5

and sometimes as an ammeter by 6 a

turning a switch.) Let us take a few é 2

battery cells. If the voltage for one

battery cell is 1.5 V, for two cells it “3

will be 2x1.5 = 3 V, for three cells it

will be 3x1.5= 4.5 V. We can apply Figure 11.04: Current flow relative to
different potential differences in potential difference due to resistance
Forma-40, Physics, Class 9-10

314 Physics
this way. Not only this, we can also change the direction of the potential
difference by reversing the cells. So if we apply different positive and negative
potential differences between two sides of a wire or some other conductor and
try to measure the current that flows, we will see that

a) The higher the potential difference the higher the current flow.

b) If potential difference is negative, the electric current also changes

direction.
If we put the result of the experiment on a graph, it will be like figure 11.04 (a):
Therefore,
Iav
If we do the same experiment by using a wire of some other material, we will get
similar results. But the slope of the straight line may be different. (Figure
11.04(b)) Now if we analyze the results of these two experiments, we will
understand that for a certain potential difference, the current that flows through
the first conductor is more than the current that flows through the second
conductor for the same potential difference. It is as if the flow of current is easier
through the first conductor and a little difficult through the second one. To
explain the matter, a quantity named ‘resistance to current flow’ or simply
‘resistance’ has been introduced. We can see that the relation between voltage
and electric current can be expressed by a law which is known as Ohm’s law.
au”
"R
So, the higher the resistance, the lower is the electric current. And the lower the
resistance, the higher is the current.
The unit of resistance is Ohm and it is expressed by the Greek letter Q. If 1 V
potential difference is applied in an electric circuit and if it is seen that 1 A
current flows as a result, it can be said that the resistance of the circuit is 1 Q.
@) Example
Question: To make fun you can write Ohm’s law differently:
Vv
IxXR 0
S

Current Electricity 315
After writing in big size, cover any one of V J or R with a finger. The value of
the covered one will be obtained from the uncovered ones.
Answer: It is shown in fig 11.05.
V V V
IXR oO RoI Cs IXR
Figure 11.05: Ohm’s law can be used by this figure. The value of the covered
quantity by the finger can be expressed by the two other quantities.
11.2.2 Resistance
Resistance is the obstacle to the flow of current. So the more the length of a
material L, the higher will be the hindrance, and the higher will be the resistance.
ROL
Again current can flow more easily through a wide path than through a narrow
path. So, the higher the cross sectional area A of a conductor, the lower is the
resistance.
R« 1
A
If we want to write these two things as an equation rather than in proportional
form, a constant p has to be used. So, resistance R is,
R= L
z A
Where the constant p is, p=R Z
oS
S

316 Physics
For a certain materi al, p is specific Table 11.01 : Specific resistance of matter
resistance and its unit is Q m.
Specific resistance (Qm)
To measure how conducting a 1.59 x 10-8
day is, k a term = 1.68 x 10-2
The more 2 substance is electrically 004 | 244x105
The more a substance is electrically Gald ana
conducting, the more the value of the 2.50 x 10
electrical conductivity. It is reciprocal 1.00 x 102
to the specific resistance o. (Table
11.01)
1
oc=-
fe)
The unit of conductivity o is: (Q m)7?
We have to remember one thing; the resistance of a substance is the hindrance
to electron flow.
The more the atoms and molecules vibrate the more the barrier the electrons will
face while going through them. In other words, the more the resistance. As the
vibrations of the atoms and molecules increases with the increase in
temperature, so the specific resistance of a conducting substance also increases
with temperature. So the temperature has to be specifically mentioned while
expressing resistance or specific resistance of a substance.
Fixed Resistance: Resistors with a definite value are used in different circuits.
They can be of different shapes and of different types. The resistances that are
used in laboratory uses, generally the value of the resistances are expressed by
using bands of different colors on them. How much electric power they can
tolerate is also specified along with the value of the resistance.
| ‘ a | cw
| | ey te (iat
; | 4
(a) (b)
Figure 11.06: (a) Fixed and (b) variable resistors S

Current Electricity 317
Variable Resistance: Sometimes an electric circuit needs a resistance, the value
of which can be changed as per need. The type of resistance, whose value can be
changed within a certain limit, is called a variable resistance or a Rheostat. A
fixed resistance has two ends, whereas a variable resistance has an additional
terminal in the middle, where the changed value of the resistance is obtained. It
is shown in Figure 11.06.
@) Example
Question: The specific resistances p of silver, copper, tungsten and nichrome
wire are 1.6x10*, 1.7x10*, 5.5x10*, 100x10* Q m respectively, using these
make a 1 Q resistance.
Answer:
We know, pL
R=—
A
where, L is the length and A is the cross-sectional area.
So, if we consider, 4 = 1 m2
RA 1x1 1
L=—=—_ = -
For Silver, p p °
a
= = 7
L= Fe qoce = 6:25 x 107 m
For Copper,
1
ee 7
b= Ta Gps = 89x 107 m
For Tungsten,
1
-— 9
L= 55x 10-8 18x 10’m
For, Nichrome i= 1 =i
“joox108 — ™
You can see, to create a 1 © resistance, the length has to be very very long
(almost 1 Lac kilometer). Practically, very thin wires are used, so A = 1 m? is not
usually feasible. If we fix the radius as 0.1 mm, then how long will a wire need
- to be to make a 1 Q resistance?
Sy
XQ

318 Physics
We know, RA
L=—
Pp
A= ar? = 7(107*)*m? = 3.14 x 1078 m?
For sil k= 3.14 x 10°8 — 98
or silver, =Fexige = 196m
For copper, _ 3.14x 1078 | nea
, “q7x108 "™
3.14 x 10-8
For tungsten. = —_____ = =
gsten, L 355x108 0.57m = 57 cm
: 3.14 x 10-8
For Nichrome. aoe =
2 L Too x 10-8 0.03m = 3 cm
If the temperature of a conductor is raised, its resistance increases, but the case
is the opposite for a semiconductor. The resistance decreases if the temperature
goes up in a semiconductor. The reason is, there are free electrons in a conductor
for the flow of current, but a semiconductor does not have free electrons. If the
temperature is raised, some electrons are found for the flow of current, so a
temperature rise causes the decrease of resistance of a semiconductor.
11.2.3 Circuit
If we have understood Ohm's law, then we can analyze circuits now. Before that,
let us introduce some of the symbols that are used in circuits: (Figure 11.07)
Every substance has some resistance, but we do not consider the resistance of
electrical wires while using them in circuits in our daily lives. When a resistance
is needed, we use different resistances prepared in special ways. Sometimes we
use such resistances for some special purposes, where even their magnitudes
can be changed, these are called variable resistance or rheostat. =
S
N

Current Electricity 319
To analyze a circuit, some simple points discussed below are to be remembered:
Cell —_{}—— One way switch ——~o—— Variable resistor \ Ki
Battery —{\|}— Two way switch ___7____ or theostat
Fixed resistor —A\\\\—
AC source e) F —
use Galvanometer —©—
Cocwasd wi Bulb ©) —-
‘rossed wire —— ee ®
Connecting wi Capacitor + +
_ I Voltmeter ~—(V)—
Wire not Coil THON - petheonnectoe
connected ~
Figure11.07: Some symbols that are used in a circuit.
(a) The amount of current that comes out from the higher potential of a source
(battery cell, generator whatever may be) after flowing through the entire circuit,
just the same amount of current comes back to the lower potential.
(b) The amount of current that enters at any point of a circuit, the same amount
of current will come out from that point, that is, there is no creation or
destruction of current in a circuit.
(c) In a circuit Ohm's law is true for two points in any part, that is, if the potential
difference of those two points is divided by the resistance of that part, the current
flowing through can be determined.
A B A a B
D = Cc D G
(a) (b)
2 Figure 11.08: Two circuits with a battery cell and a resistor.
S
AQ

320 Physics
Now we are ready to analyze any circuit. We may think that we have understood
the circuit completely if we can find out the potential difference in any part of
the circuit and how much current is flowing through that part. There may be
many things in a circuit like battery cell, resistance, capacitor, diode, transistor
etc. But now we will analyze the circuit composed of only the battery cell and
resistance. In a circuit, resistances are connected with copper wires, though we
have seen that copper wire has a specific resistance. But in reality, the resistance
of the connecting wires is very small with respect to the resistances we use in a
circuit, so , we do not consider it at all. We will assume that the wire has no
resistance and the potential is the same over the whole wire.
Now let us analyze a circuit shown in figure 11.08(a), here, a resistance is
connected to the two terminals of a battery cell with two wires. Since the part
CD is connected to the earth, so we can say that the potential of the lower
terminal of the battery cell is zero. So, the upper terminal of the battery has a
potential V and there is a resistance in part BC, potential difference between two
ends of the resistance is,
V-O=V
If the resistance is R, the current I flowing through it will be,
I= 4
“R
So, current I comes out from point A of the battery and enters into point B. We
have determined the voltage and current at every point of the circuit.
Let us assume in the same circuit, if we connect AB part with the earth rather
than part DC (Figure 11.08(b)) what will happen then? As the voltage of the
battery cell is V volt, so the potential difference between A and D must be V, as
the voltage of A is zero, so the voltage of D must be -V. Therefore, the potential
difference between B and C has to be,
0-(-V)=V
Resistance is R, so electric current:
I= V
R
This is the same as the previous value, which is what it is supposed to be. See,
the magnitude of the potential has changed but the difference is the same.
2
N

Current Electricity 321
@) Example
Question: Determine the voltage at the points A, B, C and D of the circuit in
figure 11.09 (a).
Solutions: Voltage at C and D is 0, voltage at A is 3V. To calculate the voltage at
B, current I of the circuit has to be determined.
T= v = 3 A=10A
“RR 142° ~

So, the reduction in voltage from A to B is,

V=RI=10X1A=1V
So, voltage at point B, 3v-1V=2V
As the voltage (potential) at all points has been found, verify whether
Ohm's law works or not?

lw |
iH A 8 Fs
A B
R= 50 Re= 200
3V ‘) 20 6V R2= 100. oe
R3= 150
D = c D
7 -— |S,
ta) )

Figure 11.09: Two circuits composed of a battery and more than one resistor.
Question: Determine the voltages at the points A, B, C, D and E of the circuit
in figure 11.9 (b).

Solution: Voltage at D is zero
Voltage at A is 6V
Forma-41, Physics, Class 9-10

322 Physics
What may be the voltage at E, how can it be determined, many of us may be
confused about this. Actually the case is very simple. When current flows
through a resistance, the voltage changes. There is no chance of current flow in
this part BE of the circuit. It can go nowhere after reaching E starting from B.
So, the voltage at B and E (and any point between them) does not change, the
voltage at B remains the same at E.
To determine the voltages of B and E, the current has to be determined. If
current is I, then Vv 6V 1
T= -5a+i00715Q0 5"
So, voltage difference from A to B, a
So, the voltage at A is 6V and 1V less at B so, the voltage at B is,
6V-V¥,=6V-1V=5V
As the voltage of point B is 5 V, then the voltage of point E is also 5 V. Similarly,
1
Vz = Rl = 102x_ A =2V
The voltage at C is 2 V less than voltage of point B. So, voltage of point C is,
5V-2V=3V
We have said earlier that the voltage of point D is zero. This can also be verified.
The voltage of point D is less than point C by V,,.
1
Vz = Ry] = 15Qx=A=3V
So, voltage of point A B c
D=3V-3V=0, as mentioned \—> ,; ;
earlier. 2Vv | R= 30 || Ri= 60
|
: E F
Question: Determine the value of =
Tl and 12 in the circuit shown in Figure 11.10: A circuit where two
figure 11.10. resistors are connected in parallel.
Solution: Voltage at points A, B and C is 2V. x
Voltage at points D, E, F is 0 volt. So, the current through the resistor BE, Ss

Current Electricity 323
The current through resistor CF, .
iu X Be by
2" Rm 6° «#3
Total current,
fui tiem bi dni
3 3
11.2.4 Equivalent Resistance: Series Circuit
If there ig more than one resistance in a circuit, we will see how these resistances
can be considered as a single equivalent
resistance. In figure 11.11 there are two A Ri B
resistances in the circuit, as C is connected to
the ground so it’s potential is zero and
the potential of A is V. We don’t know the Re
potential of B, but we know that the same
amount of electric current I flows through R,
and R,. = c
Simply we can say, the sum of two a
Tesistances is the total resistance R and the Fi WAGs wit
a connected one after another in a
Let us assume the potential at point B is V,,, ‘
then for the first resistance R, we can write:
V—-Vz
a
Again we can write for the second resistance R,:
Ye 0_Ve
Rp OR,
Therefore,
x pa eve
" “RR

324 Physics
(V — Vg)Rz = VeRy
R
Therefore, Vp =—--V
BR, +R,
,-e__¥
“Ry Ry +Rz
We can imagine resistances R, and R, as a single resistance R, where
1a”
R
Ri Ra Rs Rn R
f {
Figure 11.12: Many successive resistances or resistors connected in
a circuit can be imagined as an equivalent resistance or resistor.
If there were more than two resistances (figure 11.12) then also we would be able
to show that these resistances can be combined as a single resistance R which
will be the sum of all those resistances. This is called the equivalent resistance.
This means when a circuit will have &,, R,, R, ... resistances successively (series
circuit) then the equivalent resistance will be:
R=R, +R, +R3-Rp
11.2.5 Equivalent resistance: Parallel circuit
Now we will place the resistances in parallel instead of one after another (Figure
11.13). In this circuit we have given different points the names A, B, C, D, E and
F. We can understand from the figure that points D, E and F are connected to the
ground and so their potentials are zero. So the potential of points A, B, and Cis |
V. 3
a

Current Electricity 325
Current J comes from the battery
cell. This current goes to point B and
splits into two parts J, and J, and A B c
flows through the resistances R, and c—?
R, respectively, then at point E the h
currents converge into / and go back _ I Ra
to the battery as J. We have already
said that the current comes from the —_
battery and flows through the circuit F : =A
and then goes back to the battery. No =
electric current can be created or
destroyed except this in a circuit. So Figure 11.13: Two parallel resistances are
shown in a circuit.
Now we can find J, and £:
7, vane _V-0_V
TR, OR, Ry
Ve-Vp V-0 V
hh = = =
Re Ry Ry
Therefore,
VV 1...
I=hth=p+_= ae,
So in this case also, we can define an equivalent resistance R, where
i= Vv 4 1 1 e 1
“RO RRR
; ~ rj ,
Figure 11.14: Many parallel resistances or resistors can be imagined as a single
= equivalent resistance or resistor.
N

326 Physics
If the resistances are more than two (Fig. 11.14) then the equivatent resistance
R will be

1 _ 1 4. 1 4 1 1

RR, Ra Rg” Rn
11.3 Electric Power
When we discussed the potential, we saw that if a charge is moved by applying
a potential then some work is done or some energy is lost. So if V potential is
applied to move a charge Q in a circuit then the amount of work done (or the
applied energy) is W =V@Q Joule
Power P is the capacity of work done per second, so if Q charge is moved in ¢
time then w va

P=—=—=VI Watt

t t

If we use this on a single resistance R, then applying Ohm’s law we can write,
since a

P=PR
or P V

“R

therefore, pe ( 2 a v2

~ 7) ~R
If electricity flows through a resistance for time t, then Pt energy is given there.
Where does this energy go? When you use a resistance in a circuit and if you
pass enough electricity through this resistance, then you will notice that it
always gets hot. That means the electrical energy is evolved as heat energy.
The use of bulbs with filaments are getting scarce, because the filament has to be
heated to create light with this. A big part of the electric energy is used to heat up
the filament, and energy is wasted. If we touch these bulbs with our hand we can
feel how much heat energy is created, and this energy is created as PR or V’/R in
every second.
This is not the only place where the electrical energy is used to create heat 3

N

Current Electricity 327
energy. It provides energy for the fan, fridge, television, computer, charger etc.,
and different types of equipment for different purposes. We can find out how
much electrical energy is spent per second in electrical appliances very easily
from VI. Every house has an electric meters. It continuously measures potential
(V) and what amount of current is flowing (J). From there it can determine how
much electrical energy (P=V7) is provided in each second in the house.
Multiplying this with the total time we can find the total electrical energy spent.
The conventional unit of electrical energy spent is kilowatt-hour (kW-h). This
unit is called Board of Trade Unit (BOT) or briefly, Unit. The electric bill we pay
is calculated in this unit.
@) Example
Question: What is the resistance of the filament of a 100 W bulb?
Answer: 100W is written on a 220V bulb, as
y2
PER
Therefore,
R= = (220) 9 = 4840
= p= G00 =
How much current is flowing here?
V 220
I= R484 0.45 A
It can be done in other ways too: P = VI
pa ae asa
~V~ 220°"
Question: If a bulb of 60 Watts is lit everyday for 5 hours for 30 days then what
would be the electric energy usage? If each unit has a price of 10 taka, then what
« Will be the total cost of this electricity?
S
aq

328 Physics
Answer: We know, spent energy= (P x t) /1000 kilowatt-hour or unit
P=60W and t= 5x 30 hour

Spent energy = 60 x (5 x 30)/1000 unit=9 unit
Total cost of electricity with 10 taka per unit = 9 x 10 taka = 90 taka
11.4 Electrical Supply
When current needs to be transmitted from one place to another in a country, it
is transformed into a very high voltage. This is done to reduce the loss of
electricity in electrical wires. You know that, the amount of energy wasted per
second as heat energy is equal to PR , so we may conclude that there would be
no dissipation of energy as heat energy if there was no resistance R in electrical
wires.
But that is not practically possible; everything has some resistance. That is why,
if current I can be reduced, the energy lost PR due to heat can also be reduced.
Since the amount of electrical energy supplied per second is VI, if the
potential is increased by 10 times, it is possible to supply the same energy using
10 times less current. If 10 times less current is supplied, 100 times less heat
energy will be dissipated. This is because the resistance R of the wire is the same
in both cases.
Now you may think that the loss of heat energy can also be written as 7/R and
in that case the heat energy loss will be 100 times due to 10 times increase of
voltage. It is to be remembered that when we found the energy loss per second
as V*/R, we then saw V was the potential difference between the two sides of the
resistance. The V which we are discussing here is not the potential difference
between the two sides of the wire. It is the value of potential of the electric wire!
The value of the potential on two sides of the electrical wire is almost equal. So
the difference is negligible.
11.4.1 System Loss of Electricity
We know that the power plants situated at different parts of the country produce
electricity. This electricity is to be transmitted to different of the country. To
distribute electricity, first it is transmitted to the substations of different areas.
The electrical energy is then distributed to consumers using electricity 3
distribution systems. “

Current Electricity 329
The conducting wires that are used to carry electricity from one place to other
have at least some minimum resistance. When current (J) flows through a
resistance (R), heat (?R) is generated and this is loss of electrical energy. This
loss is called system loss. We have already discussed that if electricity is
supplied at high voltage then for a definite electrical energy, loss is reduced
because of resistive heat energy. That is why electricity produced in the power
plants is transformed into high voltage using step up transformers. Before
distributing the electrical energy for customer use, the electrical supply is again
brought down to a suitable voltage using a step down transformer.

11.4.2 Load Shedding

Each power plant produces a definite amount of electric energy and electricity
produced in all power stations is added to the national grid. We have discussed
earlier that electricity is distributed to consumers from local substations. The
national grid supplies electricity as per the needs of different areas. If the
demand of electricity in an area is more than the electricity produced, then
naturally required electricity cannot be supplied in that area. Then the
substations are forced to keep electricity supply off in one area to supply
electricity to another area. This process is called load shedding. When the
substation gets the required electricity supply again, it distributes electricity to
that area again.

If load shedding is to be done for several hours at a stretch, to make load
shedding tolerable, the authority load sheds in a cyclic way, in different areas at
different times.

11.5 Safe Use of Electricity

We cannot think of a moment without electricity. Electricity brings light to our
house, keeps us cool in the summer by using fans. We watch television and use
computers using electricity. Electricity runs fridges that preserve food. We use
it to iron clothes. When the charge of mobiles gets low, we use electricity to
charge the battery. Rich people use AC in their houses, washing machines to
wash clothes, and electric heaters to cook. They prepare warm meals by heating
using microwave ovens.

We can go on telling all day about the uses of electricity in our houses, schools,
colleges, fields, farms, industries and hospitals etc. In our country, generally
220V (AC) electricity is supplied, which can give electric shock to people and
Forma-42, Physics, Class 9-10

330 Physics
may even cause death from those shocks. That is why all electrical appliances
are made in such a way that no one comes in direct contact with those things.

If electricity goes directly through the heart then only 10 mA of current can
cause death. The electricity we use for different purposes is AC, and AC current
is 5 times more harmful than DC current. The resistance of dry skin of human
beings is around 3,000 Q to 50,000 Q which decreases by a thousand times when
it gets wet. So from Ohm’s law we can show that the 220 V electricity of our
country can easily produce fatal current flows. A person with a wet feet standing
on a wet floor has the worst possible condition of getting an electric shock.
When a person is electrocuted, he can’t move hands and legs because of the
current flowing through his body. As a result, in spite of having the sense to
move away from the dangerous condition, he or she won’t be able to do it.

The electricity we use can be dangerous, but if we maintain some general
precautions we can safely use electricity, and millions of people around the
world are doing so. We should know the following for safe use of electricity:

(a) Electrically insulated cover: Open wire carrying electricity is dangerous,
so it is always covered with plastic or another insulator. If short circuit occurs for
any reason i.e. positive and negative wires touches without any resistance then,
according to Ohm’s law, a large amount of current flows, the wire become
heated, the plastic burns and can even spread fire. So it should be taken care that
insulating layer remains unaltered and intact.

(b) Better Connection: The electrical connections should be made correctly
where electrical equipment run using huge amount of electricity. If the
connections are not properly done, extra resistance is produced and according to
FR, it may be heated, may burn the insulating layer, and can damage the
electrical connection.

(c) Humidity: Water is conductor of electricity, so if water enters any circuit, it
may be dangerous due to short circuit. A hair drier or electric iron is very
dangerous to use near water, because if it falls suddenly in the water and anyone
touches it, an accident may occur by electrocuting the person.

(d) Circuit breaker and fuse: Major accidents of electricity occur when a
large amount of current flows suddenly due to some defects. To stop sudden
large flows, circuit breakers or fuses are used. A circuit breaker is made in such
a way that if a large amount of current flows (more than the safer level), it breaks
the circuit. A fuse is a comparatively simple method; the amount of current that FS

NQ

Current Electricity 331
flows through equipment is passed through a thin wire before entering the
equipment. The thin wire (where the resistance is more, so PR is more i.e. more
heat) of the fuse becomes heated and burnt, and stops the supply of electricity if
for any reason excess current tries to flow.
(e) Correct connection: There are always two wires in an electric supply line,
one with high potential (Live) and another is voltage less neutral (Neutral).
Z> =>
VK <<) {) \K < WY g)
roy, ayy
< live source of live source of
. <2 ay a — 3 electricity
Figure 11.15: Wrong and correct connection of switch.
When a machine is used, then starting from the live wire the electricity passes
through the machine and then returns back to the source through the neutral
wire. A voltage less neutral wire is safe, but a high voltage wire should be used
cautiously. When a switch is used to connect electricity to a machine, it can be
connected with a high voltage wire or a neutral wire. It is wise to connect the
switch with the high voltage wire (Figure 11.15). Then high voltage enters the
machine only when the switch is on. When the switch is off, there is no high
voltage inside the machine.
(f) Ground: You may have noticed that there are at least two connections in an
electric supply in school or at home, high voltage and neutral. But if an
expensive machine (e.g. computer, fridge) is connected to the current, you will
see that besides high potential and neutral, there is another third connection,
which is the ground. Generally this is connected to the body or cover of the
machine. If the machine is electrified accidentally, then current directly flows
from the cover or body to ground. A fuse burns due to this flow of electricity and
eo makes the machine safe. So, if anyone accidentally touches it, he is not
§ electrocuted.

332 Physics
P| ame “i u
W pil hal
) “bs
22 et
“a
Figure 11.16: Dangerous activities with electricity.
®) Do Yourself
Make a list of the dangerous activities done with electricity in Figure 11.16.
11.6 Design of Circuit in Residence
How a circuit should be for supplying electricity in a residence is shown in
Figure 11.17. Electricity is supplied at home from a power station through a
supply cable. Between them, one is live; another is neutral. The live line has high
voltage, the neutral has zero voltage. The live line is marked red and the neutral
line is marked blue in the figure. It first passes through an electric meter. This
meter records how much electricity is consumed. After the meter, it is supplied
through a consumer unit.
Three circuit breaker or fuse of SA, 15A and 30A is shown in Figure 11.17.
These three circuit breakers are connected to the main switch. The electric ~
supply of the whole house can be cut off using the main switch. R

Current Electricity 333
In the figure, current is supplied to the lights and fan from the 5A circuit breaker.
15A is connected with cooking burner. 30A circuit breaker is connected to the
plug points of the house. We have certainly noticed that this part is like a ring
which means flow of current can be through two different paths. In this part the
ground is shown differently (green color).
n= NEUTRAL CONSUMER UNIT
— (EVE | S———=—=—===s—_—___—J
— = le lb
pur d — Lt
oan
N fe)
ia iso
FAN CIRCUIT g Sockets =i
ra 0
Hil
Figure 11.17: Possible circuit for supplying electricity to a house.
@) Do Yourself
What steps should be taken to minimize the dissipation of electricity?
Describe these in a nice poster.
To create awareness in everybody using the posters, make arrangements to
hang them.
2
&

334 Physics
@) Do Yourself
Objective: Students will be able to analyze the electric circuit design
suitable for use in residence.
Working procedure: A probable circuit for supply of electricity in
residence is shown in Figure 11.17. Make a new circuit by doing the
following changes in this circuit.

(a) Add two more plug points since three plug points are not enough.

(b) Add a water pump with an appropriate circuit breaker which uses

electricity.

(c) Add a second light using two switches in such a way that the light can
be turned on or off by using any of the switches along with the light
and fan.

(?) Exercise

General questions

1. Is it possible to use a capacitor as a battery?

2. Why is it difficult to make an experiment to see if the filament of a filament

light bulb is following Ohm’s law or not?

3. Electric current is the flow of electrons. When electricity flows the speed of

electrons is comparatively low. But

electricity flows instantly-how?

4. For equal potential difference,

will a high resistance produce more 4 t—

heat or a low resistance produce 7 fem

more heat? — im \—

5. It is not seen that a crow or a bird

dies on an electric cable, but a big Figure 11.18: Two square resistors of 1 m?

bat often- dies why? 4

; : and 100 cm? .

6. What is electric current? to
S
XQ

Current Electricity 335
7. What are directions of the conventional current flow and electron flow?
8. What are conductor, insulator and semiconductor materials?
9. State Ohm’s law.
10. Show that, V=IR.
11. Plot a graph of J versus V on a graph paper.
12. Define specific resistance.
13. Show that, the value of the equivalent resistance of resistors connected in
series is equal to the sum of the different resistances included in the
combination.
14. What are the causes of using electrical energy that can be dangerous?
15. Acurrent of 2.5 A is flowing through the filament of the headlight of a motor
car. If the potential difference between the two ends of the filament is 12 V, what
is the resistance?
16. The electromotive force of a dry cell is 1.5 V. What is the energy spent by the
cell in driving 0.5 C of charge round the circuit?
17, What are fixed and variable resistors?
18. What do you understand by electromotive force and potential difference?
Mathematical questions
1. Make a 2 Q resistor using infinite number of 1 resistor.
2. Using nichrome sheet of 1 mm thickness, your friend has made a resistor of
10 cm x 10 cm square (Figure 11.18). You have made a resistor of lm <1m
square. What is the value of the resistance made by your friend? What is the
value of your resistance?
r R= 20 8 A Wy 7
= R= 70 & D
(a) (b)
% Figure11.19: Two circuits formed by battery cell and resistors
S
Nn

336 Physics
3. If the point D of the circuit shown in Figure 11.19 (a) is connected with the
earth, what are the voltages at the points A, B, C and D? What is the value of I?
4. If instead of point D, the point C is connected with the earth of the circuit
shown in Figure 11.19 (a), then what is the voltage? What is the magnitude of I?
5. If the point D of the circuit shown in Figure 11.19 (b) is connected with the
earth, what are the voltages at the points A, B, C and D?
OSS) Multiple choice questions
Put the tick (V ) mark on the correct answer
1. What are the materials through which electric current can flow very easily?

(a) insulator (b) bad conductor

(c) semiconductor (d) conductor
2. If three resistances of values 20 , 3Q and 4Q are connected in series, then
what will be the equivalent resistance?

(a)8Q (b)70

(c)9Q (d) 202
3. The potential difference between the two terminals of a conductor is 100 V. If
the amount of current flowing through it is 10 A, what will its resistance be?

(a) 1000 9 (b) 0.1 ©
(c) 102 (d) none of them

4. The electrical condition of a circuit is measured by-

i. Voltmeter

ii. Ammeter

iii. | Generator

Which one is correct?
(a) iand ii (b) i and iii
(c) ii and iii (d) i, ii and iii
Es]
R

Current Electricity 337
Creative questions
1. The length and cross-sectional area of nichrome wire used in an electrical
heater, is 20 cm and 2 x 107 m” respectively. The resistivity of nichrome is
100 x 10° Qm. The nichrome wire is replaced by a copper wire of identical
length and cross-sectional area. The resistivity of copper is 1.7 x 10% 9 m.

(a) What is resistance?

(b) Why does the resistance of conductor increase with increasing
temperature?

(c) Determine the resistance of the copper wire.

(d) Analyze the logic of using copper wire.

2. Alvi uses a bulb of 220V-100W during his studies for 3 hours daily. His
brother Alif uses a table lamp of 220V-40W for 4 hours daily. The cost of each
unit of electrical energy is 3.5 taka.

(a) Write down Ohm’s law.

(b) Explain, what will be the change in resistance of a conductor if the
length is increased by 5 times (provided that the temperature, material
and area of cross-section remain unchanged)?

(c) Determine the current of the lamp used by Alif.

(d) Who is more economical, Alvi or Alif (considering money)? Analyze
with mathematical arguments.

3. The potential difference of an electric supply line in our country is 220 V.
The resistance of the filament of an electric bulb is 484 9 . 220 V- 100 W is
marked on the bulb.

(a) Define ampere.

(b) What does it mean to say that the electromotive force of a dry cell is
1.5?

(c) Ifthe bulb is connected with the supply line, what will be the electric
current?

(d) Propose an experiment to verify 220 V-100 W marked on the bulb.

Forma-43, Physics, Class 9-10

Chapter Twelve
Magnetic Effects of Current
=—— ee
Lal & "i —
The Children are making electromagnet in the largest practical class of the world arranged
Kauliarchar.
All of us are astonished sometimes in our lives when observing the attraction or
repulsion of magnet. Though magnetism and electric current seems to be
completely different topics, these are two different forms of the same energy,
that will be discussed in this chapter. We will see that as electric current can
produce a magnetic field, similarly a varying magnetic field can also produce an
electric current,
In this chapter along with the magnetic effects of current, how different
instruments can be made and can be used by using magnets and electricity is
also discussed.
<
&

Magnetic Effects of Current 339
® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-
e Explain the magnetic effects of electric current.
e Explain electromagnetic induction.
e Explain induced current and induced electric power.
e Explain the main principles of motors and generators.
e Explain the main principles of transformers.
e Explain the functions of step-up and step-down transformers.
e Understand the various uses and contributions of current in our life.
=
g

340 Physics

12.1: Magnet

All of you have seen a magnet. If a magnet is brought near to iron like materials,

then it attracts the iron. There is nothing visible between the magnet and iron but

an invisible force is pulling it. When observing that for the first time, one kind

of surprise is developed in all.

Those of you who have played the magnets must have noticed (Figure 12.01)

that there are two poles of a magnet. The similar poles repel, while the dissimilar

poles attract each other.

ete ; oe
Figure 12.01: Dissimilar poles of a magnet attract, and similar poles repel.

The poles are generally named the north and south poles.

If a bar magnet is suspended freely, it always points towards the north-south

direction.

The pole which directs towards the north direction is called the north pole, and

the pole which directs towards the south is called the south pole. This occurs due

to the fact that the earth itself has a magnetic field; when a magnet is suspended;

the magnet aligns itself along that field.

We can discuss how two magnets attract one another. But first we have to know

from where the force of a magnet comes.

12.2: Magnetic Effects of Current

Those of you who have handled magnets cannot imagine that it is not different

from electricity, and a magnet can be made by electricity or flow of charges! %
S
AQ

Magnetic Effects of Current 341
When a charge is kept in a place an electric field is produced around it. Similarly,
if electric current flows through a wire, a magnetic field will be is created around
it.
Let us assume that a wire penetrates through the middle of a piece of cardboard
and some small compasses are placed on the cardboard around the wire. The
compasses will be aligned along north-south direction. Now if a current
{moderately strong) passes through the wire, you will surprisingly notice that
suddenly the compasses are arranging themselves one after another. You will get
an impression that a circular magnetic field around the wire has been generated
due to the electric current.
1=0 | i ] {
LG Oa, oo eee. BOF OO,
ae Rens © ©) te) fo) See eo” ney Oras Oy
Figure 12.02: Directions of the compasses around electric current
Now if the current is stopped, then again the compasses align along the
north-south direction. If the direction of current is changed, you will find that the
compasses will arrange themselves again, but now the direction of the
compasses in the circle will be reversed. This is because the current always
produces a magnetic field around it in a definite direction.
If current flows through a conducting wire, then the direction of the magnetic
lines of force produced due to this can be obtained from the right hand rule. If
the thumb indicates the direction of current, then the other fingers will indicate
the direction of the magnetic field ( Figure 12.03).
90
S
N

342 Physics
| Magnetic field |
i H
IN
Flow of current | Peary ea
i me NY ; Flow of current
Vv
Figure 12.03: The magnetic field around the electric
current. Magnetic field has no beginning or ending.
«) Example:
Question: Figure 12.04
shows that current is flowing
upwards from inside the
book. Which of the magnetic
fields is correct? (o) | (0) |
Answer: The left figure is
correct.
12.2.1: Solenoid
If a wire is straight and Figure:12.04: Magnetic field around the
current passes through it, then Current carrying Wire
the nature of the magnetic lines of force was shown in Figure 12.03. How will it
be the magnetic lines of force if the wire is circular instead of being straight?
This is shown in Figure 12.05. You are able to understand that the more the
current, the stronger the magnetic field is. There is a limit to how much current
can be pass through a wire, since the wire is heated as PR. Moreover, the
maximum amount of current that can pass through a wire depends on the source
of electricity. Therefore if we want to produce a strong magnetic field, then _
instead of making a single loop, a coil is made by a insulated wire, winding it S$

Magnetic Effects of Current 343

several times. This coil is called a solenoid. A strong magnetic field can be

generated by that coil. Every loop of the coil will create a magnetic field due to

the electric current flowing through it. So the combined magnetic field is

stronger.

Current.
S
ZS,
= —
eo
4 CH ~ Magnetic field
“|
Figure 12.05: Magnetic field produced Figure 12.06: Direction of the magnetic
due to current flowing through a loop. field (applying right hand rule) due to
the current through a loop.

If current flows through a circular coil, then the direction of its magnetic field

can also be found with the help of the right hand rule. The thumb indicates the

direction of the magnetic field, while the other fingers show the direction of the

current (Figure 12.06). A coil of wire or a solenoid behaves like a bar magnet,

and the direction of the thumb will be the north pole of this magnet.

12.2.2: Electromagnet

A more powerful magnetic field can be created if a piece of iron is inserted

inside a solenoid than the magnetic field that can be produced by using current

only. The three metals iron, cobalt and nickel have special magnetic properties.

These metallic pieces can be considered as an accumulation of individual tiny

magnets, which generally don’t act as a magnet as they are aligned in different

directions. These substances consist of an enormous number of small

magnets that are randomly oriented. Since the small magnets are randomly

oriented, the piece of iron does not act as a magnet.

But when this piece is kept inside a solenoid or a coil, and if current is passed
x through the solenoid, then the magnetic field produced by that current aligns the
$ individual tiny magnets.

344 Physics
Therefore the magnetic field produced by
the current and the magnetic field

PZ “an snve produced by the iron piece itself combine
=o DP ane’ oie to produce a strong magnetic field (Figure
Le) 12.07). The interesting matter is, as the
current is stopped, the small magnets
5 af present within the iron piece become
= = = tt randomly oriented again, and the entire
== == magnetic field will disappear.
iY o. A magnet prepared by this process
yy is called an electromagnet. Uses of
: ] electromagnets are endless, Such as in the
i , | | | sound we hear in speakers and earphones
(Figure 12.08).
Here, according to the vibration and
Figure12.07: Strong magnetic field intensity of sound, current is sent. That
is produced when randomly oriented current produces an _ electromagnet
small magnets get aligned due to according to the vibration and intensity of
flow of current. the sound. This electromagnet vibrates a
diaphragm and produce the sound.

12.2.3: Effect of Magnet on a Current Carrying Wire

We know that the opposite poles of two magnets attract each other and the

similar poles repel. We also know

that a current carrying wire

generates a magnetic field around it. diaphragm Seen

If we place a wire in a magnetic field \ electromagnet

and current is allowed to flow \ /

through this wire, then due to the WALA)

creation of magnetic field by the \=

current, it will experience a force. In AY

Figure 12.09, magnetic lines of

force from the north pole of a

magnet to the south pole, and a

current carrying wire placed

between the poles is shown. The Fig:12.08: Electromagnet is used in

wire comes out perpendicularly speaker

from inside the paper. 8

N

Magnetic Effects of Current 345
If current flows through the wire (from down to up) that current will create a
circular magnetic field around it and thus rearrange the magnetic lines of force,
by combining with the magnetic field that goes from the north pole to the south
pole. At the bottom of the wire the lines of forces will be more and at the top of
the wire the lines of forces will be less, which will push the wire in upward
direction.
If the direction of current through the wire is reversed, then the direction of the
circular magnetic field will also be reversed. Then the density of the lines of
force at the top of the wire will be more and hence push the wire downward.
Current ie
a Z7 == Oo
Sy N S N s

Figure 12.09: A current carrying wire placed in a magnetic field experiences a

force.
12.2.4 D.C Motor
You know that a magnet can be used to apply force on another magnet. In other
words, we can say a magnetic field can be used to apply force on another
magnetic field. Since a wire cannot carry very much current, it cannot produce a
strong magnetic field. That is why with the help of another magnetic field a
strong force cannot be applied on it. You have seen that if a coil of wire is made
winding many times and a piece of iron or armature is inserted into it, then by
passing a little amount of current through the wire, the coil becomes a strong
electromagnet that can create a very strong magnetic field. If we imagine the coil
is to be a bar magnet, and keep it in another magnetic field, then we can analyze
what kind of attractive or repulsive force it feels and also the direction of motion
due to it. In Figure 12.10, an electromagnet of this type is placed in another
magnetic field, and how it changes its position due to the repulsive force is
shown. If the electromagnet is allowed to rotate about an axis, passing through
its center, then it will try to go to a position like in the next figure.
Forma-44, Physics, Class 9-10

346 Physics
If we can make such a condition that as soon as the electromagnet reaches the
next position, the current passing through the electromagnet is changed, then
just after reaching there, the bar magnet made of coil alternates its polarities,
Bell FS 2 122
Figure 12.10: In an electric motor current is passed through an electromagnet
in such a way that it can rotate always.
i.e. its north pole becomes the south pole and the south pole becomes north pole.
So due to repulsion, it will try to move again, i.e. it will experience a rotational
force. It will try to reach the next stable position, but just after reaching there if
the direction of the current is again changed, it will not stop there. Rather, it will
continue its rotation. That’s why, when it reaches one stable position, if current
in it flows in such a way that it
experiences a rotational force due to >
tepulsion, then it will continue to
rotate. .
In order to change the direction of >
current, we have to use a mechanical NI | S
technique with the help of a simple re
device called a commutator. The two Ks
wires of the electromagnet are placed
on two sides of the rotating axis
around which the main coil rotates in
such a way that it touches two
terminals of the main electric current
at the commutator. When the
terminals touch it, then it will flow the
Renceco st sunk ot eeay HHSEIE intea ‘fe Figure 12.11: An electric motor.
move away the electromagnet always
by repulsion. When it moves away from the terminals of the main current, no
current flows in the electromagnet, then it continues its rotation due to inertia of
motion. 29
Rg

Magnetic Effects of Current 347
For your understanding, it is presented in a easy way (Figure 12.11). In a
practical motor, there may be many coils around the armature and each coil gets
current from the commutator and the armature continues its rotation.
12.3 Electromagnetic Induction
We see a lot of machines that rotates around us, it may seem to us that this is the
magnet and the biggest contribution of the magnetic field! Actually the biggest
contribution of magnets and magnetic fields is electromagnetic induction, that
is, the production of electricity with the help of magnetic fields.
Scientist Oersted first showed that if the magnetic field is changed through a
conducting loop, then an electromotive force is developed within the loop,
which can flow current through the loop. This property is used to build an
electric generator, where by changing the magnetic field through a conducting
loop, generates eleetricity.
If the two ends of a coil are connected
with an ammeter and a bar magnet is \
inserted in it, then at the time of a Kd
inserting the magnet we will see a i oD
sudden flow of current in the ammeter Ca
(Figure 12.11). When we will pull it
out, again we will see a sudden flow
of current in the ammeter, but now in
the opposite direction. If we change
the pole of the magnet, then we will
see the change of direction of current
in the ammeter also! During the time
of changing the magnetic field in a _- Figure 12.12: When a magnet enters
coil of wire, the generation of voltage into a solenoid current is produced in it.
and current in the coil is called elec-
tromagnetic induction. This voltage is called induced voltage, and the current is
called induced current.

=

8

348 Physics
During this experiment, to change the magnetic field in the coil, we brought the
magnet towards the coil away from it. If we could change the magnetic field in
an other way, then we would observe the same thing.
Another way of changing the magnetic field in the coil is to bring another coil
near it (instead of bringing the magnet) and producing magnetic field in the
second coil by flowing current through it. Ifa battery and a switch are connected
with the second coil to produce magnetic field in it, then by turning the switch
‘on’, a magnetic field can be produced in the coil, again turning the switch ‘off’,
the magnetic field can be removed. Keeping the second coil near the first coil,
if a magnetic field is produced once in it and the magnetic field is removed
again, then the magnetic field will be changed in the first coil and due to this we
will see current in the ammeter! When current is produced by turning on the
switch, then the ammeter will show the presence of the current by deflecting its
needle in one direction. When the switch is turned off, the needle will deflect in
another direction, and show the current flowing in the opposite direction.
One thing we have to remember: when the magnetic field changes, only then
does the current flow. If a strong magnet is kept inside a coil, no current will
flow through the coil. Only by moving the coil, the magnetic field is changed,
then a current will flow through it.
12.3.1 Generator
When we were trying to understand how a motor works, we saw that a current
passes through an electromagnet in a magnetic field, due to which it rotates. Let
us see the matter in another way. If instead of giving connection of a battery cell
with two terminals of an electromagnet of a motor, we connect an ammeter there
and rotate the electromagnet. What will happen then?
Of course, the magnetic field within the coil will change, so a current will flow
through the coil. That is, the electromagnet of the motor that we have rotated by
passing current through it, if we rotate that electromagnet or coil, the reverse
thing happens, electricity is generated. In this way a generator is built.
Therefore, if we rotate the armature of a DC motor, we get DC electric current,
if AC motor is rotated it gives AC current.

5

Magnetic Effects of Current 349
12.3.2 Transformer
Changing a magnetic field creates
current— this property is used to ee
prepare transformer. In Figure ' > el
12.13 a rectangular iron core is Of Bo
shown to understand how a p d—5
transformer works. Conducting | L_§_ 34
wires have been winding on the
two sides of the core— of course Figure 12.13: If AC potential is applied
there are insulating covers on the in primary coil of a transformer, it
conducting wires, so that if it produces potential in the secondary coil
touches anything metallic a short
circuit doesn’t occur. In the figure, we see that on the left side of the core an AC
voltage source is connected. Since the wire is connected by winding the iron
core, so when current will flow the core will be magnetized and the magnetic
lines of force will pass through the rectangular iron core.
Since we have connected AC voltage source, the magnetic strength inside the
core will increase or decrease and will change direction, i.e. magnetic field will
change continuously. On the other side of the iron core, there is wire winding
also (definitely covered with insulator). The magnetic field will change
continuously in that coil through the iron core, and this change will produce an
electromotive force (emf) in the coil of the right side. If we desire, we can see it
in a voltmeter. The transfer of electricity from one coil to another coil in this
process (directly, without any electrical connection) is called transformer.
We can do some amazing things with this transformer. If the number of turns of
both the coils is the same, then for a definite AC voltage applied in the left side
coil, we will get the same AC voltage in the right side coil. If the number of turns
on right side is ten times of that of the left side, then the voltage becomes ten
times. If the number of turns on the right side is ten times less, then the voltage
will be ten times less. The coil on the left side where AC voltage is applied is
called the primary coil and the right side coil (from where voltage is returned
back) is called the secondary coil. You may think that if it is possible to be
happened, then why don’t we arrange an enormous amount of electrical energy
by giving small numbers of turns and applying small voltage in the primary coil
and by giving much more turns in the secondary coil, and thus obtaining a much
a higher voltage? We have to remember one thing: the amount of electrical energy
S applied per second is measured by the formula VI (voltage = current). The

350 Physics
amount of VI that is applied in the primary coil is just equal to the amount of the
VI that we get back from the secondary coil. Therefore, if the voltage is
increased by ten times in the secondary coil, then the current in the secondary
coil will be reduced by ten times.
For your understanding, a rectangular core is shown. Practical transformers are
constructed a bit differently, the secondary coil is winded on the primary coil
and the core is also slightly different.
If the number of turns in the primary coil is n, and that of the secondary coil is
n,, if AC voltage V, is applied in the primary coil, then the AC voltage V, that
will be found in the secondary coil will be:
Np
lft, current flows through the primary coil, then the current J, flowing in the
secondary coil will be,
— (Ye), _ (™
= (F)e= (Ga)
The transformer has a greater number of turns in the secondary coil than the
primary coil and due to this, the AC voltage applied in the primary coil increases
in the secondary coil is called a step-up transformer. For transmission of
electricity, a step up transformer is used to increase the voltage by many times.
The transformer which has less turns in the secondary coil than the primary coil
and due to this, the AC voltage applied in the primary coil decreases in the
secondary coil. This is called a step down transformer.
@) Example
Question: The number of turns in the primary coil of a transformer is 100 and
the number of turns in the secondary coil is 1000. 10 V DC is applied in the
primary coil. What is the voltage in the secondary coil?
Answer: Zero. Transformer does not work with DC voltage.
Question: The number of turns in the primary coil of a transformer is 100 and
the number of turns in the secondary coil is 1000. 12 V AC is applied in the |
primary coil. What is the voltage in the secondary coil? s

Magnetic Effects of Current 351
n. ‘1000
Answer: Vs = ("!) Vp = (Sar) x 12V = 120V AC
Example: In the above transformer, if 1A current flows through the primary
coil, what is the maximum current that will flow through the secondary coil?
. — {V _ {12 _
Answer: Is = (7*) Ip = (5) x1A=0.1A
(?) Exercise
63) General questions
1. If you send an electron beam from one end to the
other end of your room and see that it is going
upward, what explanation will you give?
2. While making an electromagnet, an insulated
wire is wrapped around an iron bar. Is it better to
give a single turn with a thick wire or many turns Cc >
with a thin wire? Why?
3. Between two iron bars, one is a magnet and the Figure 12.14: Change of
other is not. Without hanging or without using any position of a magnet
instrument, can you identify which one is iron and inside a loop.
which one is magnet?
4. Earth is a huge magnet. Is the north pole of the earth the north pole or the
south pole of that magnet?
5. Electricity is produced by moving the magnet, it always tends to oppose the
change. Remembering this, if the magnet shown in Figure 12.14 is raised
Ss upward, then in which direction will current flow in the loop?
8

352 Physics
6. What is magnetic effect of electric current?
7. What is an electromagnet?
8. What is a generator? What are the functions of generator?
9. What is the difference between a generator and electric motor?
10. What are the functions or activities of step up and step down transformers?
11. How can the intensity of electromagnet be increased?
12. A transformer is connected with a 240 V AC source. The number of turns of
its primary and secondary coil are 1000 and S50 respectively. What is the voltage
of its secondary coil?
Mathematical questions
1. Due to the flow of I amount of current through a coil having 10 turns made of
an insulated wire, a magnetic field B is produced. What will be the magnetic
field if the number of turns is 100?
2. In the above case, to increase the number of turns by 50 more, if due to a
mistake 50 turns are given in the reverse direction, what will be the magnetic
field?

Figure 12.15: Magnetic field around a current carrying wire
3. By observing the Figure 12.15, in which direction is the current flowing in
each wire?
4. The number of turns in the primary coil of a transformer is 100, here by
applying 15 V AC in the primary, 150 V AC is obtained in the secondary coil.
What is the number of turns in the secondary coil? &

Magnetic Effects of Current 353
OX) Multiple choice questions
Put a tick mark W) beside the correct answer
1. What will happen to the magnetic field if electric current flows through a
solenoid made by insulated wire wound over a cylinder?
a) Will be condensed and weak
b) Will be condensed and strong
c) Will be less condensed and weak
d) Will be less condensed but strong
2. In which functions is, electromagnetic induction used?
(a) Transistor
(b) Motor
(c) Amplifier
(d) Transformer
3. In which process is, electromotive force produced-
i) If any magnet is kept motionless in a wire coil
ii) If any wire coil is rotated in a magnetic field
iii) If any magnet is rotated around a motionless wire coil
Which one is correct of the following?
(a)i (b) ii (c) i and ii (d) ii and iii
A bar magnet is moving to and fro through a coil of wire. As a result, voltage is
induced in the coil. The induced voltage depends on some factors. Now,
answer questions number 4 and 5.
4. In case of electromagnetic induction, the induced voltage depends on which
of the following?
(i) Intensity of the magnetic field associated with the coil
(ii) Resistance of the coil moving in the magnetic field
(iii) Speed of the coil moving in the magnetic field.
Which one of the following is correct?
(a)i (b) ii. (c) i and ii (d) ii and iii
Forma-45, Physics, Class 9-10

354 Physics
5. What will happen to the induced electric current, if the number of turns of
the coil is increased?

a) The electric current will be reduced

b) The electric current will be increased

c) The magnitude of electric current will be zero

d) The magnitude of electric current will be negative

Creative questions
1. Answer the following question
seeing the picture: A

(a) What is the name object

marked A? a .,

(b) Explain the principle on — d
which this machine has Oe BO
been made. a—p q

(c) Calculate the electric Mp =50 = | Oo4
current in the primary coil
of this device.

(d) Explain the function of
this device mathematically
on the basis of data.

2. A straight long wire is passed through a large piece of paper perpendicularly
and connecting a 1.5 Volt pencil battery with it, current is flown through the
wire and some iron dust is spread on the paper.

(a) What is the magnetic effect of current?

(b) How will the iron dust get arranged on the paper?

(c) What changes are to be done to the structure of the wire to increase
the intensity of the induced magnetic field? Elaborate.

(d) Analyse the phenomenon that will happen if the wire is wrapped
around an iron nail and if one end of the iron nail is taken near to the
iron dust?

2
8

Chapter Thirteen
Modern Physics and Electronics

Radioactivity is one of the new topics that have flourished after the emergence
of modern physics at the beginning of twentieth century. Radio activity is
described in this chapter.

Electronics is the main drive of our present civilization- this statement is not
exaggerated at all. The contribution of physics behind the present electronics has
been discussed in this chapter, and the instruments that have changed our lives
completely have been introduced .

s

356 Physics
® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-
e —_ Explain Radioactivity.
e —_ Explain the characteristics of alpha, beta and gamma rays.
e —_ Describe the sequential development of electrons.
e Differentiate between analogue and digital electrons.
e — Explain semiconductors and integrated circuits.
e Explain the function of microphones and speakers.
e Explain the principles of the function of selected communication
technology devices.
e Explain the communication process with the help of internet and
e-mail.
e Investigate how information and communication technology
devices influence our life.
e Be conscious about how to make proper and effective use of
information and communication technology devices and raise
consciousness among others.
=<
S

Modern Physics and Electronics 357
13.1 Radioactivity
We all know, there is a nucleus at the center of an atom, and there are protons and
neutrons in the nucleus. The number of revolving electrons around the nucleus
is equal to the number of protons in it. The radius of the nucleus is about one
lakh times smaller than the radius of the atom. But the actual mass of the atom is
the mass of its nucleus even though its size is small, because the mass of the
electron is 1800 times less than that of the proton or neutron.
A proton is positively charged, so the nucleus cannot be formed only with
protons because the protons will be thrown off due to strong repulsion force. So
there is charge less neutrons with protons in the nucleus, and nuclei become
stable due to very strong nuclear force between neutrons and protons. Though
there is only one proton at the center of a normal hydrogen atom, there are also
hydrogen nuclei with one or two neutrons.
With the increase of the number of protons, to keep this nucleus stable, the
number of neutrons is also increases. But when the proton number exceeds 82,
the nucleus starts to become unstable. These unstable nuclei try to become stable
by emitting a kind of radiation. We call this process radioactivity. The radiation
that comes out from the nucleus is called a radioactive ray.
It is not that when proton number exceeds 82 (atomic number more than 82)
only then the nucleus becomes radioactive. Any nucleus of other atoms may be
radioactive too. We have classified atoms on the basis of their electron number
which is equal to the number of protons. External properties, nature, chemical
properties; every feature of an element depends on the classification of
electrons. So the number of neutrons of an atom can be different even if the
number of electrons and protons is equal. These types of elements, with different
numbers of neutrons, are called isotopes of that element. So, an isotope of an
element may be stable, but another isotope of that element may be unstable or
radioactive. For example, we can say that element carbon in whose nucleus there

are six protons and its three isotopes are:

N

358 Physics

Cy: 6 protons and 6 neutrons

Cy3: 6 protons and 7 neutrons

Cy: 6 protons and 8 neutrons
Among these three isotopes, C,, is unstable or radioactive.
In 1896, Henry Becquerel discovered the existence of radioactive rays from
Uranium for the first time. Later on, Ernest Rutherford, Pierre Curie, Marie
Curie and other scientists discovered radioactivity of other elements. Since
radioactivity it is not influenced by external pressure, heat, electric or magnetic
field, and cannot be controlled, it is accepted as a nuclear phenomenon. Due to
radioactivity, radioactive rays emerge and this changes the structure of the
nucleus and turn it into a different element, this is also observed.
The main three radioactive rays that emit from the nucleus are alpha, beta and
gamma rays (Figure 13.01).
13.1.1 Alpha ray
Alpha ray or alpha particle is actually a helium nucleus. A helium nucleus
contains two protons and two neutrons, so it is a charged particle. So its path of
motion can be influenced by electric and magnetic field. When an alpha particle
emits from a nucleus, it possesses some MeV of energy, so when it passes
through air and collides with the molecule -atoms it can ionize them intensively.
In air, the path of motion of an alpha particle is straight. Since an alpha particle
is a helium nucleus, it cannot travel far through air. It loses its energy by
ionizing air molecule-atoms ans travels approximately 6 cm through air before
stopping. An alpha particle can be stopped by using a sheet of paper. It creates
phosphorescence on zinc sulfide screen. An alpha particle creates many free
electrons by ionizing molecule-atoms of air in its path of motion. Its presence
can be detected or its energy can be measured easily by collecting these free
electrons.
When a alpha particle comes out from a larger radioactive nucleus then this
nucleus’s atomic number will be reduced by two and its nucleon number will be «
reduced by four, because an alpha particle consists of two protons and two $

Modern Physics and Electronics 359
neutrons. For example: an isotope of uranium turns into thorium by emitting an
alpha particle.
pm P Unsg —> Thos, + Hey”
The atomic number of uranium is 92 and thorium is 90. It is notable that number
of electrons of an atom is not considerable. Radioactive nuclei of atoms can
easily give up or receive extra electrons to and from its surroundings.
alpha ray 4
—_———
beta ray
————y ——p
gamma ray
WA YW
aluminium lead
paper (3-5 mm) (3-5 cm)

Figure 13.01; It is possible to stop an alpha particle by a single sheet of paper,
because it can lose its energy by too much ionizing. It is necessary to stop beta ray or
electrons using an aluminum sheet of a few millimeter thick. A thick lead sheet is
needed to stop gamma ray.

13.1.2 Beta Ray

A Beta particle is actually an electron (it is of courise a matter of wonder that a

nucleus is consists of neutrons and protons only, so how does an electron come

out from a nucleus?) For this, inside the nucleus a neutron has to dissociate into

a proton and an electron.

no -> ptte +7

That is, a charge less neutron is converted into a positively charged proton and a

negatively charged electron, so the total amount of charge remains unchanged.

In the right side of the equation, ( 7) indicates the anti particle of a neutrino
w (anti-neutrino), a mysterious particle of the world of physics, which is
Ss chargeless and its mass is very small.

360 Physics
When an alpha particle is emitted from a nucleus, it comes out with a definite
amount of energy. But in the case of a beta particle, this is not true. The energy
of the beta particle depends on the part of the total energy radiation received by
the anti-neutrino.
Since a beta particle is negatively charged electron, it can be influenced by
electric and magnetic field. When it passes through matter, it can ionize the
molecule-atoms of the matter due to collision with them. Since the size of a beta
particle is much smaller than that of an alpha particle (helium nucleus), its
penetrating capability is more than the alpha particle and it can penetrate deeper
into matter. It is possible to stop a normal beta particle by a few millimeter thick
aluminum sheet.
When radiation of beta particles occurs, a proton is increased in the nucleus by
decreasing of a neutron. So the number of nucleons remains the same. As the
atomic number depends on the number of protons, the atomic number of the
nucleus increases, and hence a different nucleus of a different element is formed.
For example: radioactive C,, is converted into N,, due to beta radiation:

Cy. Ny +e+ v (anti-neutrino)
An interesting matter is that, not only the emission of electrons is beta radiation
from inside the nucleus; the emission of an anti-particle of electron (positron) is
also called beta radiation. For this reason, a proton has to be converted into
the neutron inside the nucleus:

pt > n° + é++ > v (neutrino)
(This reaction cannot take place outside the nucleus. This is because the mass of
a neutron is more than that of a proton.)
In this process, the number of protons decreases by one and hence the atomic
number also decreases by one, and a nucleus of different element is formed.
Though neutrinos or anti-neutrinos are emitted during beta radiation, they are
not considered to be radioactive rays. This is because they are charge less and
they are so inert (or nonreactive) that even a few light years thick lead sheet
cannot stop a neutrino particle.
13.1.3 Gamma ray
A gamma ray is actually an energetic electromagnetic wave. It has no charge, but
as it is strong, its wavelength is very low (frequency is very high). Regardless of,
the energy of the gamma ray, its velocity is equal to that of light. When a nucleus S$

Modern Physics and Electronics 361
becomes excited by radiating alpha or beta particle then extra energy comes out
as gamma ray and the nucleus de-excites. A gamma ray is charge less and mass
less, so the atomic number or nucleon number of a nucleus does not change due
to this radiation.

Since gamma ray doesn’t have any charge, so it cannot be influenced by an
electric or magnetic field. Because it is charge less, it cannot directly ionize
atoms or molecules, but the electrons can ionize atoms or molecules in different
processes and from that we can understand the presence of gamma ray. To stop
gamma rays with energy equal to that of alpha and beta particles, a thick layer of
lead of several centimeters is needed.

13.1.4 Half Life

It is not possible to say the exact moment when a definite radioactive nucleus
will emit radioactive rays. Physics can only predict the probability of its
tadiation. So the concept of Half Life is used to determine the amount of
radioactivity. The time in which half of the nucleus disintegrates (or radiates) is
known as half life. Therefore, the more the radioactivity of an element, the less
its half life is. The half life of a stable nucleus having no radioactivity can be
considered to be “infinity”.

It is necessary to know that radioactivity is a nuclear phenomenon, so a nucleus
is transformed into another through radioactive emission. A different nucleus
can accept or donate one or two electrons from the surroundings to become a
charge less atom. This is because the energy of the electrons of an atom is much
smaller than the nuclear energy of a nucleus.

@) Example

Question: The half life of a radioactive element of 1 kg is 100 years. What will
its mass be after 200 years?

Answer: Mass does not change directly due to radioactivity. Only three fourth
of the nuclei of the radioactive element will emit radioactive particles in 200
years.

Forma-46, Physics, Class 9-10

362 Physica
13.1.5 Uses of Radioactivity

There are many different uses of Radioactivity. If a small amount of
radioactive sample is inserted into the body, information about the body
can be detected by observing the movement of the radioactive sample from
outside the body. Generally those radioactivity samples have a very low
half life, it may a few minutes, thus the radioactivity of the samples will be
finished within an hour.

Another important use of radioactivity is the determination of the age of
ancient fossils. In our body there is huge amount of carbon in which a
definite amount of C,, is present. When an animal dies, no more C,, can
enter the body further. The amount of carbon deposited before gets less due
to the half life. Thus knowing the amount of C,, that would have normally
been present initially, and by calculating the amount which is decayed, age
can be determined accurately.

A radioactive element can cause harm to the cells of the body, so different
types of caution are taken. Radioactivity is used to destroy harmful cells
within the body. This is why, for the treatment of cancer radioactive
elements are used to destroy cancer cells.

Radioactivity is also used to make the equipment germ free, detecting the
presence of smoke and determining the amount of different metals in
minerals.

13.1.6 Awareness about Radioactivity

A high radioactive dose can cause many DANGER
problems in our body. When research started

about radioactivity, the scientists did not

know the bad effects of radioactivity well. As

a result, scientists were attacked with many ©&

diseases in contact with radioactivity. Due to

working for a long time with radioactive y N
elements Marie Curie suffered from

mn gg ws Aen RADIOACTIVE
immunity against disease, preventing

capability of human and even physical MATERIAL
disable children are born inherently. Figure 13.02: Radioactive materials
We do not usually face tadioactivity very are used very carefully because they ~
much in our daily life. Due to new are very dangerous. 3

Modern Physics and Electronics 363
technology in the world, many people have started to face the bad effects of
radioactivity. The nuclear reactions in a nuclear power plant produce serious
radioactivity. Many radioactive wastes have high half life and can remain
radioactive for lakh of years. There are even incidents of radioactive wastes
being spread into the surroundings due to accidents in nuclear power plants.
Many people faced radioactivity in the accident of a submarine run by nuclear
energy. The most devastating event took place in Hiroshima and
Nagasaki due to nuclear bombs. Many people were exposed to radioactivity.
So, many researchers have been started becoming concerned about radioactivity
and the determination of the safe limit of radioactivity is also started. General
people are now being warned about the effects of radioactivity (figure 13.02).
13.2 Development of Electronics
Electronics has a greatest contribution in the development of the modern
civilization and it is not an exaggeration by any means. The gradual
development of electronics can be divided into three parts, the vacuum tube,
transistor and integrated circuit.
13.2.1 Vacuum Tube
In 1883 Edison observed that in a light bulb, a current can flow through a
vacuum space from the filament to a metal plate. This process is known as the
Edison Effect. In 1904, John Flemming (on the basis of the Edison effect) first
created a vacuum tube with two electrodes, which worked as a rectifier i.e., it
converted an alternating current into a direct current. This vacuum tube is
considered as the introduction to electronics. At that time the exchange of
information was started by radio waves. Guglielmo Marconi needed such type of
vacuum tube to control of the radio waves. (It is noted that Marconi was
mentioned as the inventor of radio, but in recent times the contribution of
Bengali scientist Jagadish Chandra Bose is also acknowledged.)
In 1906 Lee De Forest invented another vacuum tube by adding a third
electrode, which is known by the name triode. This triode can control the flow
of electricity and worked as an amplifier.

20

S The development of vacuum tubes take place first through telegraph

364 Physics
. is *»& =)

Figure 13.03 : Types of vacuum tube
communication using Morse code and then through the use of vocal
communication by telephone (Figure 13.03). During the first and second world
war, different types of specialized vacuum tubes were used in controlling weap-
ons, radar, navigation etc. In 1946 the first computer ENIAC was invented using
1800 vacuum tubes.
13.2.2 Transistor
In 1947 the Transistor was first invented in Bell Laboratory and for this
invention John Bardeen, Walter Brattain and William Shockley were awarded
the Nobel Prize. No one could imagine at that time how fast and widely the
transistor would change the whole world.
A transistor can work just like a vacuum tube, but compared with a vacuum tube
it is very small in size, light in weight, and a very small amount of electricity is
needed to operate it, it is very reliable and most of all, it can be made at a very
low cost. Thus it rapidly secured its place, replacing the vacuum tube and the
people of the world began to get many electrical appliances by using this
transistor at very cheap.
13.2.3 Integrated Circuit
Although the discussion about an integrated circuit was started in 1952, a real
integrated circuit was started to be made in the sixth decade. In the fifth decade
many transistors were made on a thin silicon plate (Wafer) and eventually the
transistors were separated by cutting them from the plate. This process was =
improved to a small extent while preparing an integrated circuit. Not only &

Modern Physics and Electronics 365
a transistor but also creating a diode, resistor and a capacitor on a wafer, a
complete circuit was started to be made. This circuit was named an integrated
circuit (IC). With the development of technology many transistors were
assembled in a small area, and first it was named Large Scale Integration (LSD,
and then it is called Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI). These circuits were
made into a ready-made package so that they could be directly used in a circuit
board. Modern equipment such as the Micro-computer, clinical appliances,
video camera, communication satellite would never be possible without the use
of integrated circuits.
13.2.4 Electronics in Future
The technology of electronics is still on going ahead, and in the future we will
experience electronic circuits using optics or light in an information
communicative integrated circuit. At the same time we will observe the use of
programmable IC (FPGA: Field Programmable Gate Array) in different fields in
accordance to our own needs.
13.3 Analog and Digital Electronics
Things that are happening around us every moment, like sound, light, pressure,
temperature are expressed as information or data. Their values can be changed
continuously. We might need these values in our different works, so we preserve
and analyze these values and send them from one place to another. To process
the data we might use electronics. This continuously changing data can be
converted into electrical signals and these types of signals are called analog
signals. If we process these signals with a type of electronics, it is called analog
electronics.
Continuously changing information or data signals can be processed in a
different way. To do this, we have to find the value for a definite interval of time
and express this in a type of number. Then we have to preserve this value
successively. Then we will be able to process these numbers using electronics.
c When it is needed to convert this into the main analog signal again, then electric
S signals of equal to serially preserved values have to be created. We use decimal

366 Physics
numbers in our daily life. But in electronics numbers are expressed by binary
numbers, because they can be easily processed (voltage as 1 and zero voltage as
0). This is called digital electronics (Figure. 13.04) because the values of signals
are expressed in numbers or digits.
The greatest contribution of electronics is the computer. The exchange of all data
or processing of all data in a computer is processed by digital electronics. Digital
electronics is also used in internet and computer networks to exchange data.
Sound, image or video etc. start as analog signals (and is used as analog signal
too) but they are stored, processed and sent as digital signal. Noise can spoil the
quantity of analog signals very easily by entering the signals. Once it is
converted into digital signals, noise cannot enter it very easily. So, the quality of
digital signals remains unchanged.
‘| Ni\ fn A
f Vf ] |
| | av ee
hy 1
Figure 13.04: (a) Analog and (b) Digital signals
A special type of IC is made to process digital signals. These IC’s have become
efficient gradually. That is, they can process a large number of signals at a very
short time accurately. Therefore, as time goes by, the process of digitizing is
becoming easier and it is needless to say that everything around us is being
converted into digital world. S

Modern Physics and Electronics 367
13.4 Semiconductor
The modern world and modern civilization have been built on the basis of
electronics. If we want to express our gratefulness to any substance, that
substance will be the semiconductor. We have discussed about the conductor,
insulator and semiconductor. Now we can go deeper to a small extent of this
subject.

L ‘ SY ‘ Ve - re s Be »

Nicoll nad tice tare Sead

ava ova ¥ « ¥

doce pe eet

* ry e ri J ry * *. é

OE OF Se Ow,

iN a ai aii ales

§ @ Fw Fw Fw F w@ 3B

ee ter tee ee ee

LESS ON NGS

§ #@ Fw Bw Fw ew eB

ee ree,

Figure 13.05 : Silicon crystal. Three dimentional silicon crystal (right)
In Figure 13.05 many atoms of a semiconductor have been shown side by side.
Due to the structure of the atom if there are eight electrons in their outer most
shells, in one sense they are fulfilled and become very stable. Atoms always try
to have eight electrons in their outer most shells. Silicon is the most used
semiconductor among the semiconductors. The number of electrons is four in its
outer most shell. But when we observe a silicon crystal, we find surprisingly that
there are eight electrons in the outer most shell of every atom! It has happened
because every atom attaches to four different atoms around it, and they are all
using their electrons sharing with the neighboring atoms. (We have drawn the
figure on a plane. The real arrangement of silicon atoms is three dimensional, as
shown at the right side of the Figure 13.05. Actually, every atom touches other
20
S four atoms.)

368 Physics
Usually the electrons are bound to the atoms in semiconductors. With the
increase of temperature, one or two electrons may become free. There are free
electrons in conductors so the semiconductors may act as a conductor to an
extent. From to the view point of physics it is an interesting phenomenon, but
not very suitable for practical use. An interesting thing is done to make it more
useful. Atoms with five electrons in its outer most shell. e.g, phosphorous mixed
with silicon crystal.Then we suddenly discover that since every atom is in a
stable state by sharing electrons with the other atoms and the fifth electron of
phosphorus is an extra electron, no atom needs it, so it can move freely among
all the atoms of silicon. It is not necessary for the electron to be bound to the
atoms of phosphorus. This electron behaves like a free electron by making the
phosphorus atom a positive ion. It can be said that such phosphorus adding
semiconductors act as conductors to a large extent, because there are some free
electrons here to carry charges. The semiconductors made by mixing atoms
having five electrons in the outer most shell like phosphorus are called n type
semiconductors.

Now be ready to hear something a more interesting. Instead of adding
pentavalent impurity atoms, if we add atoms having three electrons (e.g. boron)
in their outer most shells, to silicon, what will happen? Certainly, it is
understood that there is an empty place in the orbit of a boron atom and this
empty place can be occupied by a neighboring electron. Then an empty place
will be created in the neighboring atom, this place again can be occupied by an
electron of its neighboring atom, then an empty place also will be created there.
Another way to see it is that an empty place with the lack of an electron is
moving from atom to atom. It seems that it is one type of particle and its charge
is positive. It is called a hole. That is, we can say that keeping a boron atom as a
negative ion, this hole can move through the whole silicon crystal. That is, this
semiconductor almost acts as a conductor and positively charged holes conduct
electricity through it! When a semiconductor becomes a conductor by adding
atoms having three electrons in their outer most shells, it is called a p-type
semiconductor.

There were not so many uses of n type and p type semiconductors individually
but when n type and p type semiconductors are connected with each other then ©
the greatest discovery of science and technology started. 8

Modern Physics and Electronics 369
13.4.1 Diode
In Figure 13.06 it is shown that a p type semiconductor is connected with an type
semiconductor and a battery is connected in such a way that its positive terminal
is connected with n type and negative terminal with p type. We have known that
n type semiconductors have electrons to conduct electricity, so the positive
terminal of the battery cell will pull these electrons quickly towards itself. So
there will be no electrons to conduct electricity in the n type semiconductor. This
will become an insulator. In the same way electrons will come to the p type
semiconductor from the negative terminal of the battery and all the holes will be
filled up with electrons, so within a very short time that there will be no holes
remaining to conduct electricity. That is, this p type semiconductor will also
become an insulator. So if this np semiconductor is connected to the battery then
there will be no current flow through it.
£0 Pen =lio fe) <=
SO ee « electron 2s os [e) : °
Ee Li © hole ° oo © ef
p n ° Pp n °
e
@izo MV @)
e e
e e i
e e e e e e e e
> >
Figure 13.06: A diode made by connecting n type and p type semiconductors.
No current flows in one kind of connection of the battery cell and current
flows in another connection.
Now what will happen if the np semiconductor is connected in the reverse way
to the battery cell? That is, the positive terminal is connected with p type and the
negative terminal is connected with n type.
Now electrons enter the n type semiconductor from the negative terminal of the
battery and the electrons will be pushed towards the np junction.
Forma-47, Physics, Class 9-10

370 Physics
Likewise, the positive terminal of the battery will pull the electrons from the p
type semiconductor, and new holes will be created. Those holes will rush
towards the pn junction. There the electrons will fill up the holes. This will
continue and if someone looks at the wires of the battery, then they will see that
the electrons travel from the negative terminal to the n type and electrons exit
from p type and return to the positive terminal of the battery. This will keep
going and we will see that electric current is flowing through the junction
amazingly. The semiconductor device produced by p type and n type
semiconductors is called a diode. A diode is such an electronic device where
current flows in one type of connection of battery but no current flows in the
reverse connection.
AAA | OAn
| diode Output
Input (V)

Figure 13.07:The negative part of AC signal can be removed by using a diode.
There is no limit of the usages of diodes which includes general diodes. You
often see small lights of red, blue, green and yellow: all those are LED or Light
Emitting Diodes. Another interesting use of a diode is to convert AC to DC. The
negative part of the AC signal can be removed by using a diode. According to
Figure 13.07, if we apply AC voltage within the diode, then on the other side, the
negative part will be removed and only the positive part will come out.

13.4.2 Transistor

Those who know about the history of science, if asked about the greatest
invention of technology, will probably say the transistor. A transistor is a kind of
device which is made of p type and n type semiconductors, and it can control the
flow of current through it. There are two types of transistors, npn and pnp. In the
Figure, npn transistor is shown. g

Modern Physics and Electronics 371
This can be compared to a tap of water. When the tap is opened, the flow of
water starts, and stops when the tap is closed. Current enters an npn transistor
through a collector and exits through an ammeter. In the middle there is a base
which is similar to a tap. A small amount of current in the base acts like the
opening of the tap, and a large amount of current flows. If this small base current
is stopped, current stops flowing through the collector and emitter (Figure
13.08).
Cc Cc
-
BP] B B a
Ln =
E E
(a) (b)
Figure 13.08: (a) Structure, symbol and flow of current of a npn transistor (b) Transistor
can be compared with water tap. If a tap is opened a little, plenty of water comes out.
Likewise, for a small amount of base current, a large amount of collector-emitter current
is obtained.
Many electronic devices are made using transistors. Transistor are used to
convert small signals into larger ones, which are called amplifiers. A transistor is
also used to process different kinds of signals.
Many important circuits are made using transistor resistor, capacitor, diode etc.
With gradual development of technology, a whole circuit has been made by
using these various things called an integrated circuit. An integrated circuit is
equal to a finger nail in size. First circuits were made by putting thousands of
transistors inside it, and gradually it has become possible to put billions of
transistors inside an IC. Already you have known that the process of putting a
billion transistors inside a chip is called VLSI or Very Large Scale Integration.
- This process is still improving and more complicated circuits are being made by
$ putting more and more transistors inside a chip.

372 Physics

We are using computers, laptops, calculators, mobile phones and many new

electronic devices by means of creating complex circuits with a billion

transistors in a chip. A task of electronics which once needed several rooms or

an entire building, is now possible to be done inside a small chip and we carry

various devices made by them in our pockets.

13.5 Information and Communications Technology

Information and communications technology is a very well known subject.

We can do many important things easily by using information and

communications technology, starting from daily life to professional life. The

development of the telephone and telegraph in the nineteenth century created a

new dimension in the field of development and communication.

In the twentieth century, radio, television, cell phone or fax have brought

revolutionary change in the field of communication. Recently the computer and

internet have the greatest contribution in the field of communication.

13.5.1 Microphone

The electronic device which people use to deliver their speeches in various

programs or seminars is called a microphone. A microphone converts the voice

of the speakers into electronic signals. This signal is amplified by an amplifier

and sent to a speaker. The speaker converts it into sound and an audience can

hear it loudly in loud speaker. While you are using mobile phone, you use

microphone to speak and listen, even though you cannot see the

microphone from outside.

Working Procedure of Microphone

There are various kinds of microphones for regular or special purposes. The

construction of an ordinary microphone is shown in the figure. A thin metal plate

or a diaphragm is in front of this microphone. A moving coil is connected to the

diaphragm which can move inside a magnetic field as shown in Figure 13.09. %
S
N

Modern Physics and Electronics 373

When someone speaks in front of this microphone, the diaphragm vibrates along

with the sound wave.

The moving coil connected with the diaphragm also moves back and forth in the

magnetic field. When a coil moves in the magnetic field, an induction of

electricity occurs there. So the microphone converts sound energy into electrical

energy and transmits an electrical signal.

Although the electrical signal of sound is an accurate representation of the

sound, the signal is very small. So an amplifier is used to amplify it. Afterwards

it can be used not only in speakers but also in telephone lines, radio broadcasting

or recording.

diaphragm
—
= | magnet .
; a i coil
i 7)
& Beee |
I
electric
electric” _/ Y/Y signal
wire
(a) (b)
Figure 13.09: (a) Microphone and its (b) construction

13.5.2 Speaker

A speaker does the exact opposite job of a microphone, that is it, converts

electrical energy into sound.The construction of a speaker is shown in Figure
% 13.10. The moving coil in a speaker is connected to a cone made of paper or light
a

374 Physics
metal instead of the diaphragm in a microphone. When an electrical signal
created from sound is amplified by an amplifier and sent to the speaker, the cone
of paper or light metal creates sound by vibrating back and forth.
ee
Ls J
v = Het —s coil
: electric magnet
wire
A B
Figure 13.04: {a) Speaker and its (b) Construction

13.5.3 Radio
The Radio is an important
medium of communication and ill
entertainment (Figure 13.11). We ——————
can enjoy and songs and music, 4 : —  j
and even advertisement of Gelade ated
products. The army and police 5
department use their own radio to ER CESS
exchange information. Radio i
technology is also used in
mobile or cellular telephone Figure 13.11: Radio Set
communication.
When someone speaks on the microphone in the studio of a radio broadcast
station, the sound is converted into electrical wave signals. We can hear the
sound of frequency from 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz. So, electrical wave signals =
obtained from the sound signals will be the frequency of this range. These S$

Modern Physics and Electronics 375
signals are merged with high frequency waves for transmission. Such high
frequency waves are called carrier waves.
modulated wave
is amplified ———____——
modulated //|¥ith the help
wave of amplifier/
) Aah = that wave broadcast
_ XY astadio wave
sound §}———>|] ~——]] /—- y (
wave =>
audio amplifier transmeter see, SOuN
i)
awe
radio demodulated the 2
wave into electric wave and sound wave a
then transmit into speaker out from speaker

Figure 13.12: The process of radio broadcasting.
The process of merging with carrier waves is called modulation. The modulated
wave is amplified by an amplifier, and with the help of an antenna it is
transmitted around. These electromagnetic waves or radio waves travel a long
distance either as ground waves or reflected waves from the ionosphere of the
atmosphere. The antenna at the receiver converts the radio waves into electrical
waves. With the help of necessary electrical instruments, the desired waves are
separated from the carrier wave. This process is called demodulation. This
demodulated electrical signal is amplified by an amplifier and sent to the
speakers for listening (Figure 13.12).
Radio Broadcasting Stations use individual frequency to transmit their radio
waves. The receiver device needs to be tuned at a certain frequency to listen to a
specific station. So the different radio stations can broadcast their own programs
and the listeners can hear the programs of a specific station according to their
choice.

=
&

376 Physics
The process of increasing or decreasing the amplitude of the receiver wave
merged with a carrier wave, is called AM (Amplitude Modulation). If the
amplitude is kept unchanged, and the frequency the modulation is changed, this
process is called FM (Frequency Modulation) radio.
13.5.4 Television
All of you have seen a television. It is a device where we can see videos or
moving pictures along with sounds, which are broadcasted from a far distant
television broadcast station (Figure 13.13). In 1926 John Logie Baird was the
first person who sent videos or moving pictures through a television. His process
was a mechanical process. Later on, the process of sending pictures by using
electronics became more developed .

Figure 13.13: Old and present television set
If you understood how the radio transmitter and receiver works, then you will
easily understand how a television works.
In television, the sound and pictures are sent as separate signals, We have
already discussed the process of transmitting sound and receiving it at the
receiver. Here, we will discuss the picture transmission process.
To send moving pictures or videos, 25 still pictures are sent per second. In our
eyes, these pictures are not seemed to be separate pictures; rather they look like
motion pictures. To send colored images, the television camera captures three
different images of every picture by dividing it into three fundamental colors
namely red, green, blue (RGB). Light is converted into electrical signals by
using CCD (Charge Coupled Device) in television cameras. This electrical
signal is sent using high frequency carrier waves through an antenna (Figure 2
13.14). R

Modern Physics and Electronics 377
The receiving device or the television set receives the high frequency carrier
wave with the help of the antenna, separates the carrier wave, and obtains the
main picture signal from by a rectifier. Previously, three images of the three
colors from this signal was projected on the screen of picture tubes known as
cathode ray tubes through an electron gun.
. modulated wave is
studio Garner amplified with the | ;
help-of amplifier § | EA
7 receiver antenna
A |
™ receiver set
ee
Figure 13.14: Television broadcasting process.
But now-a-days, picture tubes are hardly used, and LED televisions (Light
emitting diode) are used instead. Electron guns are no longer used to create
pictures on the screen. Instead, pictures are produced by passing current through
small LEDs of red, green and blue colors. The brightness of pictures in LED
television is more, and its qualitative value is also better.
The signals of television can also be sent through coaxial cables as well as
antenna. This type of TV broadcasting is called cable TV. Besides this, one type
of TV program called satellite TV is broadcast. These programs are
transmitted to the earth directly from the satellites placed in space.
13.5.5 Telephone and Fax
The telephone is the greatest and the most used medium of communication in the
world. With the help of this telephone, (Figure 13.15) we can now contact any
person in any corner of the world.
Forma-48, Physics, Class 9-10

378 Physics
Land Phone
The telephone was invented by ff z Wie
Alexander Graham Bell in 7 4 —
1875. It has taken the form of y o>, -
modem telephone in many / / ee),
ways, but its main functioning ge sec 2e068
process still remains the same. @ Li ie eence
All of you have seen and used a
telephone. A telephone has five Figure 13.15: Land phone and mobile phone.
components: These are,
(a) Switch: which connects or disconnects with the main telephone network.
(b) Ringer: which alerts a telephone subscriber to an incoming telephone call by
making sound.
(c) Key pad: through which one can dial.
(d) Microphone: which converts our voice into electrical signals.
(e) Speaker: which enables us to listen by converting electrical signals into
sound signals.
Every telephone is connected to regional offices by a copper wire. When we dial
a number to talk to anyone, at first this information passes to the regional office.
There is a switch board in the office which connects the dialer to the telephone
number of the receiver. If we wish to contact someone in distant places or
abroad, the switch board connects us with a certain network in the same process.
Before the progress of technology, using a telephone, a conversation between
two persons of two corners of the world was very expensive, because the
telephones had to be connected by copper wire to send voices. In modern
communication system the whole thing become much easier, now it’s actually
possible to transfer millions of people’s conversation through an optical fiber at
the same time. So, telephone conversations have become very easier.
Mobile Telephone
As land phones are connected by copper wires, it has to be kept in a definite
place and to use it we have to be near to it. The mobile phone has freed us from
this obligation and we can carry it with us. As long as we remain within the
network, we can call, talk to or exchange SMS with anyone. That’s why mobile
phone is now the most used and the most popular medium of communication.
oD
ss
S
N

Modern Physics and Electronics 379
You have seen that a mobile phone is not connected by any wire, which means it
communicates through wireless or radio waves. Therefore, every mobile phone
actually acts as a radio transmitter and a radio receiver at the same time.

= » - A urban area
» BN BTS tower. iN _
wv BTS tower KS i.
BSC. a
mA Q\((«'
@ A
\
SA BTS tower
a)
Figure 13.16; Mobile telephone network.
The mechanical components that are needed for a land phone are also necessary
for a mobile telephone phone. Along with this, mobile phone has some extra
parts too. These are:
(a) Battery: Electric energy is supplied to the mobile phone by the battery.
(b) Screen: Information for communication is displayed on the screen.
(c) SIM card (SIM: Subscriber Identity Module): Stores the information of the
user.
(d) Radio transmitter and receiver: Mobile phone connects with its network using
these instruments.
(e) Electronic circuit: Helps to carry out the complicated functions of the mobile
phone properly.
The whole area is divided into many cells in order to perform the communication
functions via mobile phones (Figure 13.16). Hence, mobile phones are often
called cell phones. These cells can have 1 to 20 kilometers range according to
their need. Every cell has a base station (BTS: Base Transceiver Station).
[oy
iS
AQ

380 Physics
Many base stations of an area connect with one Mobile Switching Centre (MSC)
with the help of a Base Station Controller (BSC). The mobile switching centre is
the most important part of a network. Here the sender is connected with the
receiver. When anyone (sender) dials another number (receiver), the sender’s
mobile phone is connected with the base station (BTS) of his cell.
Then the call is forwarded through the base station controller (BSC) to the
mobile switching centre (MSC). The mobile switching centre then finds out
(from its stored information) the cell of the receiver’s mobile phone at this
moment. Then it connects the sender’s call to the receiver’s cell’s base station,
and then a ring is given to the receiver’s mobile phone from the base station of
the receiver.
To make the mobile network active many technological innovations have been
made. Using very low energy signal from our mobile telephone, connection is
made to a nearby base station. If we move from one cell to another, this network
can identify it, and transfers the connection from one base station to another base
station. If there are many mobile phone users in a densely populated city, then
they are given the opportunity to make calls by creating many small cells.
Whereas in a village, that has a very small population, the whole area is
connected to the network using a huge cell.
It is noteworthy that first, the telephone was invented only for
conversations among the people. Exchanging SMS is a new feature that was
added to the mobile phone. The new phones (called smart phones) that are
available now-a-days can transfer all kinds of data in addition to voice. That’s
why they can be directly connected to the internet. Activities that were thought
to be impossible without a computer or laptop before are now easily done with
the help of smart phones. That’s not all; the addition of many apps (application)
for smart phones has enabled us to do various types of functions too.
Smart phones have brought a revolutionary change to our lifestyle. At the same
time, the new generation is wasting time unnecessarily on due to the
opportunity to access the internet easily through smart phones things like social
networf . At this time this is a great problem not only in our country but all over
the globe.

=

ES

Modern Physics and Electronics 381
Fax
The word “fax” is the short form of the word “facsimile”. By sending fax we
mean the direct transmission of a copy of any document using telephone line
instantly. Fax technology is far behind the computer, network, and internet of
the present age but almost all organizations are still using this old but reliable
technology. You will be astonished that though fax is sent through telephone
line, the concept of fax was first patented thirty years before the invention of
telephone.
—_ Sn fax is scanned
oo | and encoded fax is
j ws . fax is decoded
ae fax machine and printed by
receiving fax
machine
Figure 13.17: Fax machine and its functioning.
A fax machine can send a copy of any document and can print a document that
is sent to this machine (Figure 13.17) at the same time. When a document is kept
in the fax machine, a bright light is focused on it. The white area of the document
reflects more light whereas black area reflects a little. Storing this information,
the copy of the document is transformed into electrical signals and sent through
the line of telephone.
The fax machine at the receiving end of the telephone line prints the copy of the
document sent to it using a printer. The fax machine is still a reliable technology;
it sends a copy of any document only as black and white; though it is suitable for
written documents it is not appropriate for photographs or colorful ones. Besides
this, thermal papers are used in most of the fax machines, so the document may
S fade very quickly.

382 Physics
13.6 Internet and E-mail
13.6.1 Internet:
You have read many times what a computer is and how it works. Generally the
computers of an organization are interconnected using a network, so that one
computer can access other computers and can use the resources of another
computer if necessary. Such type of network is called LAN (Local Area
Network). Now-a-days in order to make a LAN, many computers are connected
to a switch and the switches are then mutually connected. When a computer has
to communicate with another, at first, it searches for the desired computer
connected to its own switch and if it finds it, it connects with that computer
directly. Otherwise, it searches in other switches.
router
©
router
oo o8§F LAN
LAN LJ CJC
Figure 13.18: Several LAN connected to a network.
A router is used to join a LAN of an organization to the LAN of another
organization (Figure 13.18). The internet is a network of the inter connection of
different networks. At present, almost nine billion computers or other
devices of the world are connected with the internet and the number is increasing
every day. Therefore, the internet is the network of all networks where all types
of networks such as private, public, educational institutions, business,
government, non-government, local or global are included. In order to develop
this giant network, various kinds of electronics, wireless and fiber optic network x
XQ

Modern Physics and Electronics 383
technologies are used.
By using the internet, various types of information can be exchanged and
different types of services can be provided. For instance, it can be said that there
are different types of websites, electronic mail, telephone and video
communication, exchange of information, social network, recreation, education
and research tools and different types of internet based services in the internet.
Now, people all over the world are dependent on internet and a revolutionary
change has occurred in our lifestyle.
People around the world have equal opportunity to communicate on the
internet, as a result there is a scope of use and misuse in different types of
publicity and stander. Beside, damaging the network by making different types
of harmful software, spreading adversity and envy, presenting objectionable
information, etc. criminals also use internet secretly in their activities!
In spite of having some demerits, the internet is the greatest contribution of this
civilization and this is the first time, people around the globe have an equal
opportunities to participate in technology. People all over the world are eagerly
waiting to see the effect of this network in the world of future.
13.6.2 E-mail
E-mail is the short form of electronic mail. By e-mail we mean the exchange of
digital information with one or many persons using the network, with the help of
digital devices such as computers, tablets, smart phones etc. E-mail was first
sent in 1971 and within only 25 years, the number of e-mails was greater than
the number of letters sent by using post office. Now we cannot imagine a day
without using e-mail.
The e-mail address of both the receiver and the sender are needed in order to
send an e-mail. All of you are familiar with an email address and you have
noticed that the email address is divided by the letter @. If an email address is
abc@def.com, the part after @ is domain name, which means the organization
in which the user is involved. The first part is some type of identity of the user.
An e-mail server is always needed to send an e-mail using computers, laptops,
= tablets or any other digital devices. This e-mail server preserves the e-mails of
“the users and exchanges e-mail with other users through the network. Another

384 Physics
way of exchanging e-mails (and at present a very popular way) is the email
service provided by the internet. The e-mail services of Gmail, Yahoo, Hotmail
etc. are not only free of cost, they take the responsibility of storing e-mails of the
users also.
The email addresses of the sender and the receiver always have to be written to
send an e-mail. An e-mail can be sent to more than one person as a “Carbon
Copy (CC)”, if necessary. At the beginning of the e-mail, a headline of the text
of the e-mail can be written as the subject. Along with writing the content, any
document, pictures etc. can also be sent by attaching with the mail.
E-mail, internet or different types of internet based social networks have opened
the door to many new possibilities. At the same time, the misuse of these
technologies can bring great disasters in our life.
So, we have to use these very powerful technologies with responsibility. This is
applicable not only for information technology but also for all other
technologies.
13.7 Effective Use of ICT
13.7.1 Health Problem
Different kinds of health problems may arise due to the uncontrolled usage of
information and technology. Those who work on computers for a very long time
feel excess stress or pressure in their veins, nerves, wrists, arms, shoulders and
neck due to prolonged use of keyboards or mouses. That is why, different types
of problems may be created if enough rest is not taken in between work.
Different types of problems are also created in the eyes when working for a long
time without rest, which is called computer vision syndrome. This syndrome
includes eyes irritation, dryness of eyes, eyes itching, becoming eyes red and the
drying of tear.
a
8

Modern Physics and Electronics 385
It is wiser to prevent these types of health problems than to treat the problems
caused by the use of computers. We have to be cautious so that these health
problems are not created. If we abide by some easy rules, we can prevent these
problems. e.g.

(a) We have to sit properly and look straight while working on computers.

(b) We have to take rest at least for 5 minutes after every half an hour and

relax the neck and shoulders.
(c) The screen of the computer should be 50 - 60 cm away from eyes.
(d) We have to look at something far away for a while,(after every 10 minutes)
so that eyes feel comfortable.
13.7.2 Mental Problem
Mental problems can be more severe than physical problems due to the use of
computers. Now-a-days, everyone can use the internet due to its availability. The
realm of information and knowledge is opened in internet; on the other hand, it
can also cause problems for users through social network services.
Psychologists have started to show through research that people may become
addicted to excess use of computers, the internet, or social networks (similar to
the addiction to narcotics). There are even examples of death due to excessive
playing of computer games. Therefore, we always have to remember that
modern technology is not always good. As there are many unnecessary and
harmful technologies in the world, likewise, the misuse of good technologies
can also become a curse in our lives.
®) Do Yourself
responsible one.

Forma-49, Physics, Class 9-10

386 Physics
(?) Exercise
@) General questions
1. If a neutron can turn into a proton emitting a beta particle, then why are
not all neutrons inside a nucleus gradually converted into protons?
2. The resistance of a resistor increases with an increase in temperature,
but why does the resistance of a semiconductor decrease with an
increase in temperature?
3. What is radioactivity? Explain.
4. Explain the difference between alpha and beta particles.
5. What is an integrated circuit?
6. What is the internet? What can you do through it?
7. How does fax work? Explain.
Mathematical questions
1. The amount of C,, in a fossil is 16 times less than expected. How old is
the fossil?
OS) Multiple choice questions
Put the tick mark (V) on correct answer
1. What do mean by an alpha particle emitting from a radioactive element?
(a) a hydrogen nucleus
(b) a helium nucleus
(c) a neutrally charged particle
(d) a negative particle fo
Ss
rx

Modern Physics and Electronics 387
2. What is a beta ray emitted due to the radioactive decay?
(a) the flow of negative electrons
(b) a charge neutral particle
(c) a positive nucleus
(d) flow of positive protons
3. What is a silicon chip called if millions of circuits is added to it?
(a) parallel circuit
(b) semiconductor transistor
(c) integrated circuit
(d) semiconductor diode
4. What is the function of a camera in broadcasting television?
(a) to transform picture into electrical signal
(b) to transform picture into sound wave
(c) to transform electrical signal into picture
(d) to transform sound wave into picture
Creative questions
1. The world is getting smaller. We live in a global village. Information and
communication technology have connected all the people of the world
effectively and efficiently. The major media of communication are television,
tadio and telephone.
(a) What is a communication machine?
(b) How does a telephone work? Explain.
(c) How does a radio station transmit a signal of definite frequency and
how does it reach the people? Explain with a diagram.
(d) Analyze and compare the effectiveness of television and radio as com
munication machines.
ha)
Ss
N

388 Physics
2. The cricket match between Bangladesh and India is being telecast on BTV
from the Premadisha stadium of Srilanka. As a result, we can enjoy the cricket
match on television from home.
(a) What is an analogue signal?
(b) Explain a digital signal with a picture.
(c) Explain the telecast-technique of the cricket match.
(d) How does the communication technology improve the standard of
life? Explain.
3. Shovon finds a broken radio in his house. He seperates the different parts of
the radio. Among them he finds a machine which is wound up with wire and a
magnet which is attached to a screen. Asking his father, he came to know this
part of the radio produces sound. He starts to think about how these parts make
sound.
(a) What is IC?
(b) Why are analog and digital signals different?
(c) Draw a flow chart of the process of how the machinc found by Shovon
makes sound.
(d) Ifthe machinc which is found by Shovon is not used now, then analyse
the main problem could be happen.
=
ES

Chapter Fourteen
Physics to Save Life

Physics, combined with other subjects, has given birth to different new
disciplines of science. Biophysics is one of them. We have already started to
enjoy the benefits directly provided by this new field of science in medical
science. Could we ever imagine that we would be able to see all our internal
organs without dissecting the human body? But now we are being able to do
that impossible task by using the newest inventions of physics. In this Chapter,
many instruments that are used in medical science have been discussed.
Diagnosing diseases is no longer based on assumptions only. In most cases it is
absolutely specific. Physics is not only used for diagnosing diseases, but also
for the treatment and remedy of diseases. Many such examples are discussed in
this chapter.

x

R

390 Physics
® By the end of this chapter we will be able to-
e Explain the basis of biophysics.
e Explain the contributions of Jagdishchandra Bose in biophysics.
e Explain that the human body runs following the rules of physics.
e Explain the applications of ideas and theories of physics in the
instruments for diagnosis of diseases in medical science.
e Explain the hazards of using modern technology and devices, and
mechanisms of prevention.
e Become conscious about the necessity of diagnosis of diseases for proper
treatment, and raise consciousness among others.
e Appreciate the contributions of science and technology for the diagnosis
of diseases.
%
8

Physics to Save Life 391
14.1 Background of Biophysics
Biology tries to understand the diversity of the living world and the process
through which living things lead their lives. How do the animals acquire food,
develop relations among one another, perceive the environment and reproduce —
all these are the subject matter of biology.
On the other hand, the laws followed by the physical world of nature and the
simple mathematical explanations of those laws are the subject matter of
physics. It may seem that there is no relation between the simplicity of physics
and the complexity of biology.
But with the advancement of science, and depending on its different branches, a
relation has been established between biology and physics. This new field has
been named biophysics. Biophysics employs the simple and mathematical laws
of physics in the complex processes of biology and thus investigates
various mysteries of life. Biophysics is the bridge between biology and physics.
Bio-physics in one way can identify the arrangement of atoms and molecules in
DNA or protein; similarly it can invent cancer treatments or artificial kidneys
using technology. There is no doubt that biophysics can also play significant
roles in controlling environmental pollution and thus save the biodiversity of the
future world.
14.2 Contributions of Jagadish Chandra Bose
Acharya Sir Jagadish Chandra Bose (Fig: 14.01) was a renowned physicist, as
well as a successful biologist. He was the first internationally recognized
scientist of this subcontinent. The forefathers of Jagadishchandra Bose lived at
the village of Rarikhal of Bikrampur in Dhaka district. He was born in 1858 in
Mymensingh. His father, Bhagaban Chandra Bose, was a deputy
magistrate of Faridpur district.
His education started in a rural school of Faridpur. Later he completed his studies
from Hare School and Saint Xavier school and college in Kolkata. After passing
x his B.A. in 1880, he went to England, and from 1880-1884 he completed his
& honors with BA in Physics from Cambridge University, and then acquired B.Sc.

392 Physics
degree from London University. Returning to his motherland in 1885, he became
a professor of physics in Presidency College. In that time there was not enough
possibilities for research in that college, but he continued his research anyway.
He was always busy during the day. So, he carried on his research at night.
He conducted a lot of research on how to
send radio signals without electric wires. In re
1895, for the first time he sent a wireless Cae)
radio signal to distant places and on t
demonstrated this publicly. He has great € ae) ~
contributions in microwave research; he iv ASS
was the first to reduce the wavelength of the i | ’— |
electromagnetic wave to the order of { =
millimeter (nearly 5 mm). Acharya \
Jagadish Chandra Bose used semiconductor y / | 4
junctions to detect radio signals. Instead of / r | -
patenting this invention and obtaining me
commercial benefits from it, he opened it .
for all. Figure 14. 01 Acharya Sir Jagadish
In later years, Jagadish Chandra Bose Chandra Bose
discovered many important aspects of plant
physiology. Among those, the invention of the Cresco graph to record the growth
of plants, detecting very minor movements, and matters of responding to various
stimuli are worth mentioning. Earlier it was assumed that response to stimuli
was a chemical process. He showed that it was actually electrical in nature.
In 1917 he established the Bose Biggan Mandir in Kolkata for research on plant
physiology. The writings of Jagadish Chandra Bose in bengali were compiled in
a book named ‘Obyakto’. A significant book of his is ‘Response in the living and
nonliving’. On 23 November 1937, scholar Jagadish Chandra Bose breathed his
last.
=
§

Physics to Save Life 393
14.3 Human Bodies and Machines

In our daily lives we use many different types of devices. To travel we use cars,
to preserve food we keep them in the refrigerator, for comfort on hot days we
turn on the electric fan, to learn news we watch the television etc. This list is very
long and for that reason we can understand what a machine or device means. We
know that the human body cannot be called a machine A complete human being
is created from just a single cell. There is no machine in this world that starts
from a small unit and then transforms into a complete machine on its own. If any
malfunction arises within the body, an automatic repair mechanism gets
initiated, but no machine can do such a thing. But, still, to compare with the
known world or to describe the functions of the different organs of the body, we
often compare the human body with machines.

For example, it can be said that our heart is an automatic pump that circulates
blood spontaneously without any external stimulation. Our kidney is a filter that
removes nitrogenous waste from the blood and thus purifies it. The bones and
muscles of the body work as mechanical levers and our eyes are in many ways
like a camera. Not only this, but the human body is made up of small parts or
organs just like a complex machine, and each organ performs a definite task. If
any organ suffers a malfunction then the whole body’s work faces obstruction.
So, it can be said that the human body is like an organic machine.

We need energy to do work with the help of machines. In different engines
petrol, diesel, gas etc. are used as fuel to transform chemical energy into
mechanical energy. Similarly, eating food and through respiration we obtain
energy for our body from the nutrition of food.

In this way, we can find many similarities of the human body to machines, but
we have to remember that the human body is far more amazing, far more
surprising and far more mysterious than the most complex machine of the world.
We have not been able to solve completely even a small fraction of that mystery.
14.4 Diagnostic Instruments

In 1950, the average life expectancy of humans was nearly 50 years, but within
sixty years, the lifespan has increased by 20 years. The development of lifestyle
of the people of the world, the use of disease remedies, the increase of health
consciousness and the development of treatment around the world are the
Forma-50, Physics, Class 9-10

394 Physics
reasons behind the increase of life expectancy.

You can certainly assume that there is a relationship between the increase of the
lifespan and the development of medical science. And behind the development
of medical science lie modern machines that have enabled us to correctly
diagnose the diseases. There was a time when doctors used to identify diseases
just by analyzing different symptoms. Back then many things of the body had to
be assumed. Diseases could not be identified properly. Due to the advent of
modern machines, not only can different diseases can be identified accurately
but also treatment can be done effectively.

In this chapter, some machines that are used to diagnose diseases and for
treatment purposes are discussed. You will see that in each of these instruments,
one or another invention of physics has been applied directly.

14.4.1 X-Ray

In 1885, Wilhelm Roentgen discovered a type of high energy ray that can
penetrate through muscles of the body and can create an image on a
photographic plate. The nature of this ray was not known then and hence the ray
was named X-ray. Now we know that X-ray is an electromagnetic waves (like
light) but its wavelength is many thousands times smaller than that of visible
light, and thus its energy is many thousand times more than that of ordinary
light. As the wavelength is very small, we cannot see X-ray with our naked eyes.
How X-ray is produced is shown in Figure 14.02. On the two sides of a glass
sphere are two electrodes- a

cathode and an anode. The High voltage

cathode tungsten is heated i

by passing electricity

through it. Due to heat, Cathode co

electrons get freed from the Siegen —

filament and because of the = e= >"

positive voltage of the —— i oe

anode, the electrons rush filament “~ <_/ /

towards the anode. The more » yoy

the voltage is between the Xray y

cathode and anode, the more

the kinetic energy of the Figure 14.2; Working mechanism of X-ray
electrons moving towards tube co
the anode. S

Physics to Save Life 395
In the X-ray tube the voltage is nearly 100 thousand volts. The high energy
electrons coming from the cathode hit the anode.
Due to these energetic
electrons the electrons of
the inner shells of the atoms
of the anode comes out of the « a -
orbit. Then, an electron from al oe
the outer shell occupies this ( A
empty space. Thus the ey . yy. |
residual energy of the Mi\\) |) /| 4 = f
electron is released as Yel 4 hy
an energetic X-ray. The ESD PAA
wavelength of the emitted > oe {.
X-ray depends on the metal 4 > | \
used in the anode.
Generally, copper is used as Figure 14.03: X-ray of palm and feet
an anode. In Figure 14.03, X-ray images of the palm and feet are shown. X-ray
can be used in many ways; some of the uses of them are listed below.
1. Dislocated bones, crack in bones, fractured bones can easily be identified
using X-ray.
2. To diagnose cavities of teeth and other decay, X-ray is used.
3. By doing X-ray of the abdomen, intestinal obstruction can be detected.
4. Existence of gall bladder stone and kidney stone can be detected by X-ray.
5, Taking X-ray image of the chest, tuberculosis, pneumonia, lung cancer can
be detected.

6. X-ray can kill cancer cells, so it is used in radiotherapy for treatment.
Necessary precautions should be adopted so that unnecessary radiation of X-ray
cannot cause any harm to the body. For this reason, the patient’s body is covered
with lead apron except the parts that will be imaged by the X-ray. Other than
for absolutely urgent reasons, the lower abdomen of pregnant ladies should not
be exposed to X-rays.

3

&

396 Physics
14.4.2 Ultrasonography
Images of the internal organs, and muscles of the body are captured using
ultrasonography. To do this, a very high frequency sound is produced and its
echo is used. As the frequency of the sound lies between 1-10 mega Hertz, this
is called ultrasonography. In Figure 14.04, general 2D and recently invented 3D,
ultrasonography images are shown.
In an ultrasonography machine, a crystal called a transducer is stimulated with
electrical energy to produce a high frequency ultrasonic wave. In the ultrasonic
machine, this wave is transformed into a narrow beam. The transducer is
touched upon that part of the body, needs to be imaged. The beam enters the
body, and thus the patient does not feel any pain or discomfort. The beam is
reflected, absorbed or transmitted depending on the organ towards which the
beam is directed.
When the beam incident on a muscle or on an interface of the blood of different
densities,
Pi \. =
‘« . 4 . ie _ ~} -
SSS 3 _ >
SS .
— ae JI
Figure 14.04: Normal 2D and 3D ultrasonography image
part of the beam is reflected back to the transducer as an echo. The reflected
echoes are then transformed into an electrical signal,and combined, and then a
complete image is formed.
Ultrasonography is used to do the following :
a) The most important use of ultrasonography is in gynecology and obstetrics.
With the help of this, the size and position of fetus can be known. In obstetrics it
is a fast, safe and dependable technique. S
AQ

Physics to Save Life 397

b) Uterine tumor and presence of other pelvic masses can also be detected
using ultrasonography.

c) Bile stones, defects in the heart and tumors can be detected with
ultrasonography. When ultrasound is used for examination of the heart, then this
test is called echocardiograph.

Ultrasonography is much safer than X-ray, but still instead of being using
excessively, it is used for a very limited time. During the process of ultrasound
the transducer is continuously moved so that it cannot send the beam to a
specific region for a long period.

14.4.3 CT Scan

CT scan is the abbreviation of the word Computed Tomography Scan.

Tomography means to create an image of a slice (or two-dimensional part) of a

three-dimensional object. In medical

science, X-ray is used in this machine. In

an ordinary X-ray, a two-dimensional

image of a three-dimensional internal ee 4 =

organ is taken once. In a CT scan machine, Ps) SO

an X-ray tube rotates around the patient’s / 4 AN,

body in a circular way emitting X-rays. YZ WS

From the other side, a detector records the ei of Bp Wa

image. To make the image clear, often a WY ‘le ety

special contrast material is injected into the Oxy ee Di)

patient’s body. . ee we

After getting the X-ray image of the Xe oy?

surroundings, they are analyzed by a Ae

computer and then coordinated, and thus :

the internal structure of a complete slice is... - ,

obtained. After revording the image ofa Figure 14.05: CT scan of the heart

slice, the CT scan machine moves the patient a bit forward and again records

another X-ray image circularly; analyzing them creates a complete image of the

internal structure of a second slice (Figure 14.05). In this way, moving the

patient forward gradually, the image of many slices of an organ of his body is

tecorded. As we get a complete loaf of bread by arranging the many slices one

after another, similarly we can form a three dimensional image of the internal
s% organ of the body by accumulating the images of many slices of that organ. You
& can tell that the CT scan machine is a costly, complex and large machine by

398 Physics
knowing about its working procedure. But as this machine can build a flawless,
three-dimensional image of any internal organ without going inside the body, it
is an essential machine for modern medical science (Figure 14.06).
The following can be done using CT scan:

a) Complete image of the soft tissues, blood carrying arteries and veins, lungs,
brain etc. can be found by CT scan.

b) To diagnose cancer of liver, lungs and pancreas, CT scan is used.

c) CT scan image can detect a a .
tumor. It can also tell about the size A 13 \
and position of the tumor and tell { a ¥. \
how much the tumor has affected | i
the adjacent tissues. ee a |

d) CT scan of the head can detect Se —
whether there is any hemorrhage in “6 = d
the brain, dilation of veins or if Ps
there is a tumor. -

e) CT scan can also detect Figure 14.06 : CT scan machine

whether there is any problem in
blood circulation of the body.
Caution: As X-ray is used in CT scan, CT scan test is not done for pregnant
women. The dye that is used to increase the contrast of image may create allergic
reactions in some people, so it must be used with caution.
14.4.4 MRI: Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Almost 70% of the human body is water, which means water is present in almost
all organs of the body (each molecule of water contains hydrogen and the
nucleus of hydrogen is the proton). When a strong magnetic field is applied, the
protons is aligned in the direction of the magnetic field. Then if an
electromagnetic wave of definite frequency is sent, then these protons receive
energy from that wave and change their direction. This process is called Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR). Based on this remarkable event of physics,
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (or in brief, MRI) has been made (Figure 14.07).
The MRI machine looks like the CT scan machine but its working process is
completely different. In a CT scan machine, X-ray is sent to record images, but &

Physics to Save Life 399
in an MRI machine, the patient is kept in a very strong magnetic field and a radio
frequency electromagnetic wave is applied to his body. Analyzing the signals
returning from the hydrogen protons inside the water molecules present in the
body with a computer, the MRI machine make images of the internal organs.
The things that can be done using CT scan, are also possible using MRI. But, the
differences within the soft tissues in the body can be understood better with the
help of a MRI. A CT scan procedure does not require more than five to ten
minutes. Compared to that MRI takes
more time. X-ray is used in CT scan, i ™
so however small the radioactivity is, a »
tisk remains. In MRI there are no such
risks. | 3
MRI cannot be done if there is any es /
metallic instrument (e.g. Pacemaker) — a y
inside the body, because the radio 5
frequency (RF) wave can create j
dangerous situations by heating up the
metal. Figure 14.07: MRI machine
14.4.5 Angiography
Angiography is used to see the blood vessels of the body using X-ray. As blood
vessels cannot be seen properly by doing normal X-ray a special contrast
material (called dye) is entered into the vessels at the time of angiography. A
narrow and flexible tube is entered into the body through an artery to inject dye
at the part of the vessel that needs to be examined. This narrow and flexible tube
is called a catheter. After injecting dye to the specific part of the blood vessel by
the catheter, an X-ray image of that part is taken. Due to the presence of the dye,
the blood vessels can be seen clearly in an X-ray. The dye is later filtered by the

« Kidney and passes out of the body with urine.

S

N

400 Physics
Doctors suggest an angiogram to detect the following problems:
a) Blockage of arteries outside the heart (Figure 14.08). If the arteries get
blocked, then blood cannot flow normally, and the heart cannot function
properly if adequate blood supply is not maintained in the heart. Thus, the risk
of heart attack increases.
b) Ifarteries get dilated.
c) To detect the condition of the renal arteries of kidney.
d) If there is any problem in the veins. - ;
Blockage es ed eae é .
Figure 14.08: In the left, angiography shows the blockage in the blood vessel
and in the right picture normal blood circulation is shown after angioplasty.
During CT scan and MRI, everything is done from the outside of the body. As a
catheter is inserted into the arteries during angiography, treatment of blocked
arteries can be done without any surgery. The process by which the blocked
arteries are opened during an angiogram is called angioplasty.
A balloon is sent through the catheter during angioplasty, which is blown up in
size to open the narrowed artery. Sometimes a ring is inserted at the spot so that
the artery remains wide and adequate blood flow is ensured. S
N

Physics to Save Life 401
14.4.6 Endoscopy
The process of seeing any internal organ or cavity directly from outside is called
endoscopy. An endoscopy machine can be used to investigate the interior of
hollow organs within the body (Figure 14.09).
| A
Figure 14.09: Process of seeing the inside of stomach by endoscopy
There are two transparent tubes in an endoscope. Bright light is projected into
the patient’s internal organ through a tube from the outside, it is done with the
help of optical fibers. Light undergoes total internal reflection inside the fiber
and so the tube does not need to remain straight, and can be twisted and turned.
After the damaged or diseased organ of the body is lit up, an image of that area
can be seen through the second tube. To see anything, the body needs to remain
in a straight line, but it is not possible to look at the interior part of the organ
inside the body in a straight line. That is why, optical fibers are used (where total
internal reflection of light takes place) and thus the light can go through curved
paths. To see a specific region inside the body precisely, a very narrow bundle of
5 to 10 thousand optical fibers is used. As each of the fibers carries the image of
a point, a perfect and complete image can be seen. As the optical fibers are very
narrow, the cross-section of the bundle formed by 5 to 10 thousand fibers is not
more than a few millimeters.
At present, due to very small CCD camera technology, a small camera is placed
at the tip of the endoscope tube, which can be inserted into the body directly and
a video signal can be seen. Using endoscopy, doctors can examine any kind of
Forma-51, Physics, Class 9-10

402 Physics
irritation, injury, inflammation or abnormal cell growth. The organs which are
investigated using an endoscope are —

a) Central partition of the lung and chest

b) Stomach, small and large intestine or colon

c) Female reproductive organ

d) Abdomen and pelvis

e) Internal part of the urethra

f) Nasal cavity, paranasal sinuses and ear.
During endoscopy, as a narrow tube is directly entered into the injured organ, a
sample of that injured area can be collected by it, and it is possible to do some
surgeries using endoscope.
14.4.7 ECG
ECG is the abbreviation of the word Electro Cardiogram. The electrical and
muscular functions of the human heart can be observed by doing ECG. We know
that, without any external stimuli, the human heart can generate small electrical
signals and these signals the spreads through the heart muscle, and thus the heart
beat occurs. We can detect
this electrical signal using aA
ECG machine (Figure 14.10). La soe >.
The beat rate and rhythmicity Ee oe 2.
of the heart can be measured : = estes
using this. ECG signals give me. o% “esses ,
indirect evidence of blood , a 1 BR
flow in the heart. ome
Electrodes are attached to the a
Ce eel aageate eee Figure 14.10: ECG machine
examination. Two electrodes
are placed on the two hands, two on the two legs, and six on the heart adjacent
area of the chest. Electrical signals are collected from each of the electrodes.
When these signals are printed, it is called an electrocardiogram (Figure: 14.11).
The electrical signals obtained from each of the electrodes of a healthy person
have a normal pattern. If an abnormality develops in the heart of someone, then
the signals obtained from the electrodes will be different from the normal
pattern. S

Physics to Save Life 403
Generally a ECG is done to detect the cause of disease when a person
experiences palpitation, irregular or rapid heart rate, or chest pain. Besides, ECG
is also done as a regular checkup or before a major surgery.
ie fe et 1 | |
| | I Well ¥ V
Figure 14.11: Electrical signal obtained from ECG machine

ECG is done for the following abnormal conditions of the heart

1. Irregular heart beat i.e. fast or slow heart beats

2. If a heart attack occurs

3. If the heart gets dilated
Though an ECG machine is a very simple machine, it is extensively used for
treatment purposes, since by using this we can get important information about
the heart condition.
14.4.8 ETT
The abbreviation of Exercise Tolerance Test is ETT. Doing ECG during exercise
is called ETT.
The electrical signals obtained from the heart during rest do not always depict
the actual condition of the heart. If the patient undergoes excess physical work
or exercise, the heart faces excess pressure. Then, analyzing the electrical
activity, beat rate and rhythmicity, the partial blockage of the coronary artery of
the heart can be detected through ETT. While doing ETT, to subject the patient
to excess physical work, he or she has to walk on a treadmill or paddle a
stationary cycle. During the test, the speed of the cycle is increased gradually or
the slope of the treadmill is increased and to see the reaction of the patient’s
heart to this excess work. ECG is then recorded. Generally, a doctor constantly
monitors the patient’s condition.
A doctor can decide about the treatment of the patient by analyzing the changes
that occur in the heart, and identifying them in ECG recordings while exercise is

% done during the ETT test.
aq

404 Physics

14.5 Physics in Treatment

14.5.1 Radio Therapy

The word radiotherapy is an abbreviation of the word ‘Radiation Therapy’.

Radiotherapy is the use of radioactive radiation in the treatment of some

diseases. It is used in the treatment of cancer. Generally, high energy X-ray is

used to destroy cancer cells in radiotherapy. This X-ray is used to destroy the

DNA of the cancer cells and thus destroy their ability to multiply. Radiotherapy

is used to reduce the size of a tumor before surgery or to destroy the remaining

part of the tumor after surgery.

To administer treatment from outside using radiotherapy, a linear accelerator is

used to create high energy X-ray. The ;

radioactive beam is sent targeting the =

area of the body with the tumor (Figure CES

14,12). The beam not only destroys the ; SRB

cancer cells but also destroys their )-

ability to divide. Some adjacent healthy ° CR e

cells also get destroyed as the beam lev Le

cannot be solely directed towards the QU ‘

cancer affected area, but once \ K iN "

radiotherapy is stopped, the healthy Na KA

cells become active again. :

14.5.2 Isotopes and Their Uses

You know that if the number of neutrons Figure 14.12: Radiotherapy Machine

in a nucleus of an element is different, : ;

then this is called an isotope of that element. In nature, the different isotopes of

many elements are found to be radioactive. Again, radioactive isotopes can also

be made by nuclear reactions. Very often, radioactive isotopes are used in

treatment. These isotopes can be used to diagnose diseases as well as in the

treatment of diseases.

Sometimes, in some organs of the human body, some special compounds

becomes attached. Important information about the organ can be found out by »
S
N

Physics to Save Life 405
analyzing the amount of the compound. To determine the amount of the
compound, a certain atom of that compound is replaced by its radioactive
isotope, and thus from the radiation of the radioactive isotope, the amount of that
compound in that organ can be determined. Generally, this isotope radiates
gamma ray and this gamma ray can be detected from the outside.
An amazing example of the use of radioactive isotopes is PET or Positron
Emission Tomography, where the radioactive isotope radiates positrons. You
know that a positron is the antiparticle of an electron and, combining with
electrons, it transforms into energy. This energy is radiated as two gamma rays
and goes in two opposite directions. Thus detecting these two oppositely
directed gamma rays, the place from where the positron was emitted can be
determined. In this way we can not only determine the existence of the positron
making but can also find out where and how much of the positron is present. By
emitting a positron inside glucose and by attaching its isotope, we can determine
how much glucose is present, and where, inside the brain. From this
information, at a particular time, we can also determine which region of the
brain becomes more active and uses more glucose (Figure 14.13). PET process
has played a revolutionary role in discovering the functioning processes of the
brain.
* =
°
¢ : . . ; 3
| - 3
> Se & a =
g
Figure 14.13: Image of the active regions of a normal and a cocaine
addicted person’s brain by PET scan
Ss

406 Physics
Besides diagnosing diseases or detecting the functioning processes of organs,
radioactive isotopes are also used for treatment of diseases. Cobalt-60 (°Co) is
a gamma fray radiating isotope. Using this isotope, cancer affected cells are
destroyed using gamma rays. Jodine-131 (I) is used in the treatment of the
thyroid gland; it is so effective in the treatment of the thyroid, that now-a-days,
thyroid surgeries are no longer essential.
Besides these, phosphate with radioactive isotope Phosphorus-32 (7P) is used in
the treatment of blood cancer (Leukemia).
(?) Exercise
@) General questions
1. Do the physical and biological worlds follow different rules?
2. How was Bio-physics originated?
3. Why can the laws of physics be applied to the living world?
4. Describe the contributions of Jagdishchandra Bose to physics.
5. What are his contributions in Bio-physics?
6. The human body sometimes behaves as a machine. Explain
7. Human body is an organic machine- give arguments in its favour.
8. How can instruments invented by physics be used for treatment purposes?
9. Name some instruments used for diagnosis of diseases.
10.What is X-ray? Write down its applications in diagnosis of diseases and their
treatments.
11. How does ultrasonography identify diseases?
12. Describe the images found by MRI.
13. Which diseases can be identified by ECG?
14. For what purposes is an endoscopy machine is used? S
XQ

Physics to Save Life 407
15. Why is radiotherapy used in the field of treatment?
16. ETT is a kind of ECG- describe.
17. In which cases is an angiogram done?
18. What is an isotope? For what purposes is it used in treatment?
Multiple choice questions
Put tick mark (V) on correct answer
1. Which of the following is related to scientist Jagadishchandra Bose?
i. establishment of Bose Mandir
ii. uses of radioactive isotope
iii. invention of crescograph
Which of the following is true?
(a)i (b) i and ii
(c) i and iii (d) i, ii and iti
2. The reason behind the clear image of bones in X-ray film-
(a) bone is non-penetrable by X-ray _(b) muscles are non-penetrable by X-ray
(c) wavelength is very large (d) high penetrating capacity
3. The technology used to examine blockage in a fine blood vessel-
(a) angiogram (b) angioplasty
(c) ETT (d) ECG
4. How is the rate of heart beat and rhythm measured?
(a) identifying electrical signals
(b) using X-ray
(c) by nuclear magnetic resonance
(d) using sound wave
5

408 Physics
Creative questions
1. Binu’s aunt is going to be a mother. She goes to doctors regularly for
check-up. The doctor advised her to have a test to know the exact position and
size of the fetus. She did the test using ultrasonography, and the doctor has got
a clear concept about the fetus through it.

(a) What is the elaborated form of MRI?

(b) Why are isotopes variants of a definite element?

(c) Discuss the role of ultrasonography to get a clear idea about the fetus.

(d) Is it possible to perform this test with the help of other medical

technology? State logic in favour of your answer.

2. Examining the X-ray report of a patient suffering from cough for a long time,
the doctor advised him to do a CT scan. The doctor also prescribed some
medicine to be taken regularly and recommended a follow up after seven days.

(a) What is X-ray?

(b) Why is ultrasonography not done instead of X-ray?

(c) For the patient, how will a CT scan be helpful? Explain.

(d) Evaluate the possibility of doing MRI instead of CT scan for the patient.

The End S
N

Academic Year
9-10 Physics
_ a ;
:
‘ Aal ¢ fe Fetters Soar Sort afSars 6 afSratcea GT TPMT RST OPO
| sod Fra-4 (Corer fF, Q8 Wt ASH) cw ST
: ENS Hy -

